                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




MONOPSONY AND EMPLOYER MIS-OPTIMIZATION EXPLAIN WHY WAGES BUNCH
                      AT ROUND NUMBERS

                                         Arindrajit Dube
                                         Alan Manning
                                          Suresh Naidu

                                       Working Paper 24991
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24991


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2018, Revised January 2020




We thank Sandra Baquie, Doruk Cengiz, Len Goff, Jeff Jacobs, and Jon Zytnick for excellent
research assistance. We are grateful for helpful comments from Matt Backus, Ellora
Derenoncourt, David Green, Ilyana Kuziemko, Ioana Marinescu, Jim Rebitzer and from seminar
participants at Microsoft Research, Columbia University, Boston University, Harvard University,
IIES, University of Toronto, MIT Sloan, and the 2018 Society of Labor Economists conference.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Arindrajit Dube, Alan Manning, and Suresh Naidu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monopsony and Employer Mis-optimization Explain Why Wages Bunch at Round Numbers
Arindrajit Dube, Alan Manning, and Suresh Naidu
NBER Working Paper No. 24991
September 2018, Revised January 2020
JEL No. D03,D22,J3,J42

                                           ABSTRACT

We show that administrative hourly wage data exhibits considerable bunching at round numbers
that cannot be explained by rounding of survey respondents. We consider two explanations—
worker left-digit bias and employer optimization frictions. We experimentally rule out left-
bunching by randomizing wages for an identical task on Amazon Mechanical Turk, and fail to
find evidence of any discontinuity in the labor supply function as predicted by workers’ left-digit
bias despite a considerable degree of monopsony. We replicate the absence of round number
discontinuities in firm labor supply in matched worker-firm hourly wage data from Oregon as
well as in an online stated preference experiment conducted with Wal-Mart workers. Further, the
shape of the missing mass that accounts for the bunching at a round number exhibits none of the
asymmetry predicted by worker left-digit bias. Symmetry of the missing mass distribution around
the round number suggests that employer optimization frictions are more important. We show
that a more monopsonistic market requires less employer mis-optimization to rationalize the
bunching in the data. The extent of monopsony power implied by our estimated labor supply
elasticities, which are in line with other recent studies, are consistent with a sizable amount of
non-optimal bunching, with only modest losses in profits. Overall, the extent and form of round-
number bunching suggests that “behavioral firms” can systematically misprice labor without
being driven out of the market in the presence of monopsony power.

Arindrajit Dube                                   Suresh Naidu
Department of Economics                           Columbia University
University of Massachusetts                       420 West 118th Street
Crotty Hall                                       New York, NY 10027
412 N. Pleasant Street                            and NBER
Amherst, MA 01002                                 sn2430@columbia.edu
and NBER
adube@econs.umass.edu

Alan Manning
Economics Department
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
a.manning@lse.ac.uk


A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1349
1     Introduction

Behavioral economics has documented a wide variety of deviations from perfect rationality
among consumers and workers. For example, in the product market, prices are more
frequently observed to end in 99 cents than can be explained by chance, and a sizable
literature has confirmed that this reflects firms taking advantage of customers’ left digit
bias (e.g Levy et al. 2011; Strulov-Shlain 2019). However, it is typically assumed that
deviations from firm optimization are unlikely to survive, as competition among firms
drives firms that fail to maximize profits out of business. Therefore, explanations for
pricing and wage anomalies typically rely on human behavioral biases. In this paper, we
show that when it comes to a quantitatively important anomaly in wage setting–bunching
at round numbers—it is driven by mis-optimization by firms and not workers. We also
show that round number bunching survives because of monopsony power in the labor
market, which blunts the cost of mispricing. A moderate amount of monopsony power,
well within the range obtained in both our data and other recent high-quality US evidence,
is sufficient to explain the substantial bunching we document in this paper.
    We begin by documenting bunching in the hourly wage distribution at “round” num-
bers. We use data from both administrative sources and an online labor market to confirm
that there is true bunching of wages at round numbers, and it is not simply an artifact of
survey reporting. We begin by providing the first (to our knowledge) credible evidence on
the extent to which wages are bunched at round numbers in high quality, representative
data on hourly wages from Unemployment Insurance records from the three largest U.S.
states (Minnesota, Washington, and Oregon) that collect information on hours.1 We further
assess the extent of bunching in online labor markets, using a near universe of posted
rewards on the online platform Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk).
    We compare the size of the bunches in the administrative data to those in the Current
    1 We were able to use individual-level matched worker-firm data from Oregon, and micro-aggregated
data of job counts by detailed wage bins in Minnesota and Washington.



                                                 2
Population Survey (CPS), where round number bunching is prevalent. For example, in
the CPS data for 2016, a wage of $10.00 is about 50 times more likely to be observed than
either $9.90 or $10.10. Figure 1 shows that the hourly wage distribution from the CPS
outgoing rotation group (ORG) data between 2010 and 2016 has a visually striking modal
spike at $10.00 (top panel). The middle panel of the figure shows that the share of wages
ending in round numbers is remarkably stable over the past 35 years, between 30-40%
of observations. The bottom panel of the figure also shows that since 2002, the modal
wage has been exactly $10.00 in at least 30 states, reaching a peak of 48 in 2008. Of course,
survey data is likely to overstate the degree of round-number bunching. We also use a
unique CPS supplement, which matches respondents’ wage information with those from
the employers to correct for reporting error in the CPS, and show that the measurement
error-corrected CPS replicates the degree of bunching found in administrative data in the
states where we observe both. It seems highly unlikely that such bunching at $10.00 is
present in the distribution of underlying marginal products of workers.
   We first attempt to account for bunching by building and experimentally testing an
imperfectly competitive model with workers’ left-digit bias, paralleling product price
studies from the marketing literature that have documented pervasive “left-digit bias”
where agents ignore lower-order digits in price. First, we design and implement an
experiment (N=5,017) on an online platform (MTurk). We randomly vary rewards above
and below 10 cents for the same task to estimate the labor supply function facing an online
employer. Like the administrative data, the task reward distribution on MTurk exhibits
considerable bunching. However, our experimentally estimated labor supply function
shows no evidence of a discontinuity as would be predicted by worker left-digit bias. We
further use observational job posting data from MTurk and show there is no discontinuity
in the duration of vacant tasks posted at $1.00.
   Next, we use administrative matched worker-firm data on hourly wages from Oregon
to show that there is no discontinuity in the separation elasticity at $10.00 conditional


                                             3
on past worker wage history and other characteristics. These results suggest that our
experimental findings on lack of left-digit bias are likely to have external validity beyond
on-line labor markets. In addition, our analysis using the matched worker-firm produces
observational residual labor supply elasticities in the 3 to 5 range, which is very similar to
those estimated in similar contexts in other recent work (Sokolova and Sorensen (2018);
Caldwell and Oehlsen (2018)), and suggests a moderate degree of monopsony power in the
U.S. low-wage labor market. Finally, we provide evidence on lack of worker left-digit bias
using stated-preference conjoint experiments where workers at a large retailer (Wal-Mart)
were asked whether they would choose to quit their current job for another, where the
hypothetical wage was randomized. While a higher offered wage makes it more likely that
the workers leave their current position, we found no discontinuity at round numbers.
    We then extend the model to allow imperfect firm optimization in the form of employer
preferences for round wages, parameterized by the fraction of profits foregone in order to
pay a round number. We recover estimates of monopsony, employer misoptimization, and
left-digit bias from the distribution of missing mass around $10.00 relative to a smooth
latent density and conclude that employer mis-optimization accounts for much of the
observed bunching.2
    In the administrative data from Oregon, we further show that small, low-wage employ-
ers in sectors such as construction are most likely to pay round numbers, consistent with
bunching being a result of small, potentially unsophisticated, employer pay-setting. Using
our estimates of monopsony power, we calculate that employer misoptimization in US
labor markets costs mis-optimizing employers between 2% and 8% of profits, but is an
order of magnitude smaller in online labor markets. The reason is that the monopsony
power on Amazon Mechanical Turk is so high that even very substantial mispricing (as
   2 While  other configurations are logically possible, they do not easily explain why wages are bunched at
round numbers. For example, if employers had a left-digit bias, any heaping would likely occur at $9.99 and
not at $10.00, which is not true in reality. Similarly, if workers tended to round off wages to the nearest dollar,
this would not encourage employers to set pay exactly at $10.00. In contrast, both workers’ left-digit bias
and employers’ tendency to round off wages provide possible explanations for a bunching at $10.00/hour.



                                                        4
indicated by a high degree of bunching) does not lead employers to lose very much in
profits.
    Our paper is related to a small but growing literature on behavioral firms, which
documents a number of ways firms fail to maximize profits (DellaVigna and Gentzkow
2017; Goldfarb and Xiao 2011; Hortacsu and Puller 2008; Bloom and Van Reenen 2007;
Cho and Rust 2010). A large literature has discussed cognitive biases in processing price
information, but little of this has discussed applications to wage determination. Behavioral
labor economics has extensively documented other deviations from the standard model
(e.g. time-inconsistency and fairness, see Babcock et al. (2012) for an overview) for worker
behavior. Worker behavioral phenomena have been replicated even in online spot labor
markets (Chen and Horton (2016); Della Vigna and Pope (2016)). Our paper is the first to
document the absence of left-digit bias among workers, and to the best of our knowledge,
the first to systematically quantify the extent of firm mis-optimization in the labor market.
    In our account of wage-bunching, it is important to assume that firms have some labor
market power. In this, we follow work in behavioral industrial organization that explores
how firms choose prices when facing behavioral consumers in imperfectly competitive
markets.3 A recent and fast-growing literature has argued that monopsony is pervasive
in modern, unregulated, labor markets (Manning 2011). Monopsony does not require
explicit collusion or restrictive legal contracts (Starr, Bishara and Prescott 2016; Krueger
and Ashenfelter 2017) nor is labor market power confined to particularly repressive
institutional environments (e.g. Naidu 2010, Naidu, Nyarko and Wang 2016). While some
of the recent literature on monopsony has focused on identifying effects of labor market
concentration on wages (Berger et al. (2019); Azar et al. (2017)), more relevant for our paper
is the literature that tries to directly estimate residual labor supply elasticities, either from
identifying firm-specific rent-sharing estimates (Lamadon et al. (2018); Kline et al. (2017);
   3 See Heidhues and Kőszegi (2018) for a survey and Gabaix and Laibson 2006 for an early example.
Theoretical models to explain bunching in prices also assume firms have some market power: e.g., Basu
(1997) has a single monopolist supplying each good, Basu (2006) has oligopolistic competition, and Heidhues
and Kőszegi (2008) use a Salop differentiated products model.


                                                    5
Cho (2018)) or from direct experimental manipulation of wages (Caldwell and Oehlsen
(2018); Dube et al. (2018)). We show that moderate amounts of monopsony in the labor
market can provide a parsimonious explanation of anomalies in the wage distribution,
such as patterns of wage-bunching at arbitrary numbers.4
     The plan of the paper is as follows. In section 2, we provide evidence on bunching
at round numbers using administrative data as well as data from the CPS corrected
for measurement error, and benchmark these against the raw CPS results. We recover
the source of the bunched observations by comparing the observed distribution to an
estimated smooth latent wage distribution. In section 3, we develop a model of bunching
that nests worker left-digit bias and firm optimization frictions as special cases. Section 4
presents findings from the online experiment, administrative data, and stated-preference
experiment–recovering both estimates of the degree of monopsony as well as the extent of
worker-left digit bias. Section 5 extends the model to account for firm misoptimization.
Section 6 recovers the degree of mis-optimization and monopsony from the bunching
estimates under a variety of assumptions about the degree of heterogeneity in both, and
documents the characteristics of firms that mis-optimize. Section 7 concludes.



2      Bunching of wages at round numbers

There is little existing evidence on bunching of wages. One possible reason is that hourly
wage data in the Current Population Survey comes from self-reported wage data, where it
is impossible to distinguish the rounding of wages by respondents from true bunching of
wages at round numbers. Documenting the existence of wage-bunching requires the use
    4 Hall
         and Krueger (2012) show that wage posting is much more frequent in low wage labor markets than
bargaining. Their data shows that more than 75% of jobs paying an hourly wage of around $10 were ones
where employers made take-it-or-leave-it offers without any scope for bargaining. We also find that the
bunching at the $10/hour wage in the Hall and Krueger data is almost entirely driven by jobs with such
take-it-or-leave-it offers. Appendix Figure E.4 shows, in the Wal-Mart experiment, that stated propensity
to ask for a raise also exhibits no discontinuity at a round number. Along with our evidence from MTurk,
where there is no scope for bargaining, this makes it unlikely that employers offer round number wages as a
signal for willingness to bargain as in the EBay prices reported by Backus, Blake and Tadelis (2015). .


                                                    6
of other higher-quality data.



2.1   Administrative hourly wage data from selected states

Earnings data from administrative sources such as the Social Security Administration or
Unemployment Insurance (UI) payroll tax records are of high quality, but most do not
contain information about hours. However, 4 states (Minnesota, Washington, Oregon, and
Rhode Island) have UI systems that collect detailed information on hours, allowing the
measurement of hourly wages. We have obtained individual-level matched employer-
employee data from Oregon, as well as micro-aggregated hourly wage data from Min-
nesota and Washington. The UI payroll records cover over 95% of all wage and salary
civilian employment. Hourly wages are constructed by dividing quarterly earnings by
total hours worked in the quarter. The micro-aggregated data are state-wide counts of
employment (and hours) by nominal $0.05 bins between $0.05 and $35.00, along with a
count of employment (and hours) above $35.00. The counts exclude NAICS 6241 and 814,
home-health and household sectors, which were identified by the state data administrators
as having substantial reporting errors.
   Figure 2 shows the distribution of hourly wages in MN, OR and WA (we report the
distributions separately in the Appendix). The histogram reports normalized counts in
$0.10 (nominal) wage bins, averaged over 2003q1 to 2007q4. We focus on this period
because in later years the nominal minimum wages often reach close to $10.00, making it
difficult to reliably estimate a latent wage density in this range as we do in our analysis
later in this paper. The counts in each bin are normalized by dividing by total employment.
The wages are clearly bunched at round numbers, with the modal wage at the $10.00 bin
representing more than 1.5 percent of overall employment. This suggests that observed
wage bunching is not solely an artifact of measurement error, and is a feature of the “true”
wage distribution. Further, the histogram reveals spikes at the MN, OR, and WA minimum
wages in this period, suggesting that the hourly wage measure is accurate.

                                             7
    In Online Appendix C, we show very similar degree of bunching in a measurement-
error corrected CPS, using the 1977 CPS Supplement that recorded wages from firms as
well as workers. While the degree of bunching in the raw CPS falls with the measurement
error correction, it remains substantial, and indeed comparable to the administrative data.



2.2    Task rewards in an online market: Amazon Mechanical Turk

Amazon MTurk is an online task market, where “requesters” (employers) post small online
Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs) to be completed by “Turkers” (workers).5 Psychologists,
political scientists, and economists have used MTurk to implement surveys and survey
experiments (e.g. Kuziemko et al. (2015)). Labor economists have used MTurk and other
online labor markets to test theories of labor markets, and have managed to reproduce
many behavioral properties in lab experiments on MTurk (Shaw et al. 2011).
    We obtained the universe of MTurk requesters from Panos Ipeirotis at NYU. We then
used the Application Programming Interface developed by Ipeirotis to download the near
universe of HITs from MTurk from May 2014 to February 2016, resulting in a sample of
over 350,000 HIT batches. We have data on reward, time allotted, description, requester
ID, first time seen and last time seen (which we use to estimate duration of the HIT request
before it is taken by a worker). The data are described more fully in Online Appendix E
and in Dube et al. (2018).
    Figure 3 shows that there is considerable bunching at round numbers in the MTurk
reward distribution. The modal wage is 30 cents, with the next modes at 5 cents, 50 cents,
10 cents, 40 cents, and at $1.00. This is remarkable, as this is a spot labor market that has
almost no regulations, suggesting the analogous bunching in real world labor markets is
not driven by unobserved institutional constraints, including long-term implicit or explicit
contracts. Nor is there an opportunity for bargaining, so the rewards posted are generally
   5 The
       sub header of MTurk is “Artificial Artificial Intelligence", and it owes its name to a 19th century
“automated" chess playing machine that actually contained a “Turk” person in it.



                                                    8
the rewards paid, although there may be unobserved bonus payments.



3     A model of round-number bunching in the labor market

As a first pass for explaining the bunching at round numbers, this section presents a
model of the labor market where workers exhibit a left-digit bias, mirroring features in the
price-bunching literature (e.g. Basu 1997, Basu 2006) .
    Suppose there is a mass 1 of workers differing in their marginal product p, assumed to
have density k(p) and CDF K(p)—assume labor is supplied inelastically to the market as a
whole. We assume there is only one “round number” wage in the vicinity of the part of
the productivity distribution we consider—denote this by w0 . We do not here attempt to
micro-found w0 . There are various functions of w j that could deliver w0 . For example we
could set w0 = w j − mod (w j , 10h ), where mod (w, 10h ) denotes the remainder when w
is divided by 10h and h is the highest digit of w. Or we could impose the formulation in
Basu (1997), where agents form expectations about the non-leftmost digits. In contrast to
Basu (1997), which delivers a strict step function, the discrete choice formulation allows
supply to be increasing even at non-round numbers, as well as relaxing the assumption
that each good is provided by a single monopolist (Basu (2006) considers a Bertrand variant
of a similar model, showing that .99 cents can be supported as a Bertrand equilibrium
with a number of homogeneous firms). We also extend the formulation of digit bias from
Lacetera, Pope and Sydnor (2012) by allowing utility to depend on the true wage w as well
as the leading digit.6 We consider two reasons why w0 might be chosen—left-digit bias on
the part of workers, and mis-optimization on the part of employers in the form of paying
round numbered wages.
    We model the left-digit bias of workers in the following way. Starting from a discrete
choice model of the labor market, a workers i0 s utility at a job j is:
    6 However we do not parameterize the extent of “left-digitness” as Lacetera, Pope and Sydnor (2012) do.
We are implicitly assuming “full inattention” to non-leading digits.


                                                    9
                                 uij = η · ln(w j ) + γ · 1w j ≥w0 + a j + eij

    Here a j is a commonly valued amenity at job j while eij captures idiosyncratic valuation
of the job that are independently drawn from a type I extreme value distribution. Impor-
tantly, here there can be a discontinuous jump in the utility at a round number w0 due to
left digit bias among workers. Left digit bias has been documented in a wide variety of
markets, used to explain prevalence of product prices that end in 9 or 99, and is a natural
candidate explanation for bunching in the wage distribution.7 Note that γ represents the
utility value of crossing the round number, while γ/η approximates the percentage change
in wages that is utility equivalent to crossing the round number.
    This setup implies that workers have logit choice probabilities

                                            h                                i
                                       exp η ln(w j ) + γ · 1w j ≥w0 + a j
                               pj =
                                      ∑k exp [η ln(wk ) + γ · 1wk ≥w0 + ak ]

    When number of jobs J is large, the logit probabilities can be approximated by expo-
nential probabilities

                                           h                                i
                              p j ≈ C · exp η ln(w j ) + γ · 1w j ≥w0 + a j

    This produces approximate firm-labor supply functions:
   7 For example, Levy et al. (2011) show that 65% of prices in their sample of supermarket prices end in 9
(33.4% of internet prices), and prices ending in 9 are 24% less likely to change than prices ending in other
numbers. Snir et al. (2012) also document asymmetries in price increases vs. price decreases in supermarket
scanner data, consistent with consumer left-digit bias. A number of field and lab experiments document that
randomizing prices ending in 9 results in higher product demand (Anderson and Simester 2003; Thomas
and Morwitz 2005; Manning and Sprott 2009; Pope, Pope and Sydnor 2015). Pope, Pope and Sydnor (2015)
show that final negotiated housing prices exhibit significant bunching at numbers divisible by $50,000,
suggesting that round number focal points can matter even in high stakes environments. Lacetera, Pope and
Sydnor (2012) show that car prices discontinuously fall when odometers go through round numbers such
as 10,000. Allen et al. (2016) document bunching at round numbers in marathon times, and interpret this
as reference-dependent utility. Backus, Blake and Tadelis (2015) show that posted prices ending in round
numbers on eBay are also a signal of willingness to bargain down.




                                                      10
                           ln(l j ) = ln(C) + η ln(w j ) + γ · 1w j ≥w0 + a j                  (1)

   Our baseline model assumes some imperfect competition in the labor market but
perfect competition is a special case as η → ∞.
   When worker productivities p vary across firms, wages are dispersed and depend on
p. Define ρ (w, p) = (p − w)l ∗ (w, p). Here ρ (w, p) is, in the language of Chetty (2012), the
“nominal model” that parameterizes profits in the absence of left-digit bias. Optimizing
wages in the nominal model would yield a smooth “primitive” profit function of produc-
                          p
tivity given by π(p j ) = ( 1+ηj )1+η , but the presence of worker biases induces discontinuities
in true profits at round numbers. In deciding on the optimal wage for employers one
simply needs to compare the profits to be made by maximizing the nominal model and
paying the round number. Consider the wage that maximizes the nominal model. Given
the isoelastic form of the labor supply curve to the individual firm, this can simply be
shown to be:

                                                                  
                                             ∗                η
                                           w (p) =                     p                       (2)
                                                             1+η

   where the size of the mark-down on the marginal product is determined by the extent
of competition in the labor market. If the labor market is perfectly competitive, η → ∞,
and wages are equal to the marginal product. We will refer to the wage that maximizes the
nominal model as the latent wage. The firm with job productivity p will pay the round
number wage as opposed to the latent wage if:


                                        γ1w∗( p)<w           ρ (w∗ ( p) , p)
                                    e                0   >                                     (3)
                                                               ρ ( w0 , p )
                                                                                  h                i
                                                                                           (1+η)
   Taking logs, we obtain that a firm will pay the round number if p ∈                p ∗ , η w0       ,
where p∗ solves
                              γ = ln ρ (w∗ ( p∗ ) , p∗ ) − ln ρ (w0 , p∗ )                     (4)

                                                         11
    This implies that all firms with latent wages between w0 and w∗ (p∗ ) will pay w0 , and
bunching will be larger the greater is γ . For the marginal bunching firm, the propor-
tionate increase in profits from paying a round number wage is γ. We now turn towards
identifying estimates of η and γ from experimental and observational data.



4     Experimental and Observational Evidence on Worker Left-

Digit Bias

4.1   Experimental Evidence From MTurk

We begin with providing direct evidence on the parameters of interest based on an exper-
iment on an online labor market. The advantage of this approach is the high degree of
internal validity, though a disadvantage is that one is inevitably unsure about the external
validity of the estimates. For example, one might expect that these “gig economy” labor
markets are very competitive because they are lightly regulated and there are large num-
bers of workers and employers with little informational frictions or long-term contracting.
However, in a companion paper, Dube, Jacobs, Naidu and Suri (2018) compile labor supply
elasticities implicit in the results from a number of crowdsourcing compensation exper-
iments on MTurk, finding a precision-weighted elasticity of 0.14 across 5 experiments
(including the one in this paper). This low estimate implies considerable market power
in these types of “crowdsourcing” labor markets, which are finding increased use by
large employers (for example Google, AOL, Netflix, and Unilever all subcontract with
crowdsourcing platforms akin to MTurk) around the world (Kingsley, Gray and Suri 2015).
    In their original paper on labor economics on Amazon Turk, Horton, Rand and Zeck-
hauser (2011) implement a variant of the experiment we conduct below, making take it
or leave it offers to workers with random wages in order to trace out the labor supply
curve. However, while they label this an estimate of labor supply to the market, it is in fact


                                             12
a labor supply to the requester that they are tracing out, as the MTurk worker has the full
list of alternative MTurk jobs to choose from. We extend the Horton, Rand and Zeckhauser
(2011) design to experimentally test for worker left-digit bias.8 We randomize wages for a
census image classification task to estimate discontinuous labor supply elasticities at round
numbers (in particular at 10 cents, to test for left-digit bias). We choose 10 cents because
it is the lowest round number, allowing us to maximize the power of the experiment to
detect left-digit bias. We also aim to replicate the upward sloping labor supply functions to
a given task estimated in Horton, Rand and Zeckhauser (2011). We posted a total of 5,500
unique HITS on MTurk tasks for $0.10 that includes a brief survey and a screening task,
where respondents view a digital image of a historical slave census schedule from 1850 or
1860, and answer whether they see markings in the “fugitives” column (for details on the
1850 slave census, see Dittmar and Naidu (2016)). This is close to the maximum number of
unique respondents obtainable on MTurk within a month-long experiment. Respondents
are offered a choice of completing an additional set of classification tasks for a specific
wage. Appendix Figure E.1 shows the screens as seen by participants with (1) the consent
form, (2) the initial screening questions and demographic information sheet, and (3) the
coding task content.
   We refer to the initial screening part as stage-1. Those who complete stage-1 and indicate
that the primary reason for participation is "money" or "skills" (as opposed to "fun") are
then offered an additional task of completing either 6 or 12 such image classifications
(chosen randomly) for a specific (randomized) wage, w, which we refer to as the stage-2
offer. If they accept the stage-2 offer, they are provided either 6 images (task type A) or 12
images (task type B) to classify, and are paid the wage w. These 5,500 HITs will remain
posted until completed, or for 3 months, which ever is shorter. Any single individual on
MTurk (identified by their MTurk ID) will be allowed to only do one of the HITs. We aim
to assess the left-digit bias in wage perceptions experimentally by randomizing the offered
  8 Pre-registered   as AEA RCT ID AEARCTR-0001349.



                                                13
wages for HITs on MTurk to vary between $0.05 and $0.15, and assessing whether there is
a jump in the acceptance probability between $0.09 and $0.10 as would be predicted by a
left-digit bias.9



4.2    Specifications

While our model entails a sharp discontinuity in the level of labor supplied at a round
number (a “notch”) we do not impose this in all our empirical specifications, and allow for
either a kink or a notch, and also control for the overall shape of the labor supply curve in
a variety of ways. We estimate the following 3 specifications, all of which were included
in the pre-analysis plan. We deviate slightly from our pre-analysis plan by including
controls and using logit rather than linear probability to better match our model, and we
will estimate analogous specifications in the observational Oregon data, as well as the
worker stated preference experiment below. We show the exact specifications from the
pre-analysis plan in Online Appendix E.
    First, we estimate a linear-probability model regressing an indicator for accepting a
task on log wages, closely following the specification entailed by our model:


                             Accepti = β 0 + η1 log(wi ) + β 1 Ti + β 2 Xi + ei                          (5)

    Here T is a dummy indicating the size of the task. We add individual covariates Xi
for precision; point estimates remain unchanged when controls are excluded (shown in
   9 There  are a few anomalies in the data relative to our design. The first was that a small number (17) of
individuals were able to get around our javascript mechanism for preventing the same person from doing
multiple HITs. In the worst cases, one worker was able to do 118 HITs, while 3 others were able to do more
than 10. The second is that 9 individuals were entering responses to images they had not been assigned. We
drop these HITs from the sample, which costs us 316 observations. None of the substantive results change,
although the nominal labor supply effect is slightly more precise when those observations are included.
We also drop 3 observations where participants were below the age of 16 or did not give the number of
hours they spent on MTurk. Finally, we underestimated the time it would take for all of our HITs to be
completed, and thus some (roughly 11%) of our observations occur after the pre-registration plan specified
data collection would be complete. We construct an indicator variable for these observations and include
it in all specifications discussed in the text (the additional specifications in Online Appendix E omit this
variable).


                                                    14
Online Appendix E). Our main test from this specification is that the slope (semi-elasticity)
η1 > 0: labor supply curves (to the requester) are upward sloping. We will also report the
                    η1
elasticity η =   E[Accept]   in every specification where we estimate it.
   Our first test for left-digit bias is based on an augmented regression allowing for a jump
in the labor supply at $0.10, but constraining the slope to the the same on both sides:


             Accepti = β0A + η1A log(wi ) + γ1A 1 {wi ≥ 0.1}i + β 1A Ti + β 2 Xi + ei                   (6)

   Here left-digit bias is rejected if γ A1 = 0. This specification corresponds closely to the
                                                                        η1A                         γ1A
theoretical model with constant labor supply elasticity η =           E[Accept] ,and   with γ =   E[Accept]

measuring the extent of left-digit bias.
   Our second specification allows for heterogeneous slopes in labor supply above and
below $0.10 using a knotted spline, where the knots are at $0.09 and $0.10:




       Accepti = β 0B + η1B log(wi ) + γ2B × (log(wi ) − log(0.09)) × 1 {wi ≥ 0.09}i

                    +γ3B × (log(wi ) − log(0.10)) × 1 {wi ≥ 0.1}i + β 2B Ti + β 2 Xi + ei               (7)


   Our main test here is that the slope between $0.09 and $0.10 (i.e., η1B + γ2B ) is greater
                                                                                            
than the average of the slopes below $0.09 and above $0.10 12 × η1B + 12 × (η1B + γ2B + γ3B ) ;
or equivalently to test: γ2B − γ3B > 0. Note that (γ2B − γ3B ) is analogous to γ1A in the
spline specification, and measures the jump at $0.10.
   Finally, our most flexible specification estimates:


                             Accepti =   ∑ δk 1 {wi = k}i + γβ3B T + β2 Xi + ei                         (8)
                                         k∈S

   And then calculates the following statistics:




                                                     15
                                       δjump = (δ0.1 − δ0.09 )


                                                                                       
                                                        ∑0.12
                                                         k=.08,k 6=0.1 δk   − δk−0.01
                      β local = (δ0.1 − δ0.09 ) −
                                                                     4


                                                             1
                           β global = (δ0.1 − δ0.09 ) −        (δ0.15 − δ0.05 )
                                                            10

   The β local estimate provides us with a comparison of the jump between $0.09 and $0.10
to other localized changes in acceptance probability from $0.01 increases. In contrast,
β global provides us with a comparison of the jump with the full global (linear) average
labor supply response from varying the wage between $0.05 and $0.15.
   A left-digit bias might not only affect willingness to accept a task, but also may affect
a worker’s performance. For example, if workers are driven by reputational concerns
or exhibit reciprocity, and they perceive $0.10 to be discontinuously more attractive than
$0.09, we may expect a jump in performance at that threshold. To assess this, we will also
estimate the same statistics, but with the error rate for the two known images (i.e., equal to
0, 0.5, or 1) as the outcome instead of Accepti .



4.3   Experimental results from MTurk

Our distribution of wages was chosen to generate power for detecting a discontinuity at
10 cents, as can be seen in the wage distribution in Figure 4. The binned scatterplot in
Figure 4 shows the basic pattern of a shallow slope (in levels) with no discontinuity at 10.
Table 1 below shows the key experimental results from the specifications above, which
uses log wages as the main independent variable. Column 1 reports the estimates using a
log wage term only; the elasticity, η, is 0.083. The elasticity is statistically distinguishable
from zero at the 1 percent level, consistent with an upward sloping labor supply function



                                                    16
facing requesters on MTurk. However, the magnitude is quite small, suggesting a sizable
amount of monopsony power in online labor markets. When we restrict attention only to
“sophisticated” MTurkers (column 5), the elasticity is only somewhat larger at 0.132, still
surprisingly small.
   While we find a considerable degree of wage-setting power in online labor markets,
we do not find any evidence of left-digit bias for workers. Column 2 estimates equation 6
and tests for a jump at $0.10 assuming common slopes above and below $0.10. Column
3 corresponds to equation 7 and allows for slopes to vary on both sides of $0.10. Finally,
column 4, following the flexible specification in equation 8, estimates coefficients for each
1-cent dummy in the regression and compares the change between $0.09 and $0.10 to
either local or global changes. In all of these cases, the estimates are often negative, always
close to zero in magnitude, and never statistically significant. We can rule out even small
differences in the probability of acceptance between $0.09 and $0.10. When we limit our
sample to sophisticated MTurkers, we do not find any left-digit bias either. None of
the estimates for discontinuity in the labor supply function are statistically significant or
sizable in columns 6, 7 or 8.
   Column 2’s specification corresponds closely to the theoretical model, where we can
recover γ (or the percentage jump in supply at $0.10) by dividing the coefficient on the
dummy for a reward greater than or equal to $0.10 by the mean outcome. The point
estimate for γ is of the “wrong sign” at -0.010, while the 95 percent confidence interval of
(0.026, -0.048) is concentrated around zero.
   We also estimate parallel regressions using task quality as the outcome, which is defined
as the probability of getting at least 1 out of two pre-tagged images correct. In Appendix
Table E.3, we find that no evidence that task performance rises discontinuously at the $0.10
threshold. We also find little impact of the reward on task performance for the range of
rewards offered; the most localized comparison yields estimates very close to zero.
   We interpret the evidence as strongly pointing away from any left-digit bias on the


                                               17
workers’ side. Moreover, it also suggests that locally, there is not very much impact
of rewards on task performance: therefore, the primary benefit of providing a slightly
higher reward is occurring through increased labor supply and not through performance.
Summarizing to this point, while there is considerable bunching at round numbers in
the MTurk reward distribution, including at $0.10, there is no indication of worker-side
left-digit bias in labor supply or in performance quality. This finding is counter to the
analogous explanation for the product market, where a number of experiments have found
that demand for products increases when prices ending in 9 are posted (e.g. Anderson
and Simester 2003). At the same time, we find considerable amount of wage-setting power
in this online labor market: labor is fairly inelastically supplied to online employers, with
an estimated elasticity η generally between 0.1 and 0.2.
   In Online Appendix D, we present complementary evidence from scraped MTurk
data to show that similar patterns are obtained at the even more salient round number
of $1.00. By estimating how long a job stays posted before being filled as a function of
the reward posted (and controlling for a data driven set of task features using the double-
machine-learning estimator proposed by Chernozhukov et al. (2017)), we can recover
another estimate of the labor supply curve facing an employer. We find a similar labor
supply elasticity as our experimental estimate (around 0.07); we also find that tasks with
rewards greater than $1.00 do not discontinuously fall in the time to fulfillment, consistent
with our experimental findings at $0.10. Together, the observational and experimental
evidence suggest that, at least on Amazon Turk, there is plenty of monopsony, and little
left-digit bias, at both the $0.10 and $1.00 thresholds.



4.4   Observational Evidence From Oregon Administrative Data

While the experimental evidence strongly points away from worker left-digit bias in the
online labor markets, here we additionally use observational evidence from “real world”
labor market to assess whether workers’ labor supply exhibits sharp breaks (notch or

                                              18
kink).
   Using matched employer-employee data from Oregon, we estimate the responsiveness
of separations to hourly wages, and for a discontinuity at $10.00/hour wage. The separa-
tion elasticity is widely used in the monopsony literature to measure the responsiveness of
the supply of labor to a firm to the firm’s posted wage (see Manning (2011)). A key concern
in estimating this elasticity in observational data is that workers earning different wages
may differ in other dimensions. In order to approximate our ideal experiment–where a
group of workers randomly get raises that set wages exactly at 10.00 and another compara-
ble group gets raises at other nearby numbers–we control for a variety of job history and
firm characteristics. Using the 2003-2007 period, we consider all workers who were hired
within this period, and had at least 2 quarters of tenure. These restrictions remove workers
who are very marginally attached to the workforce, and we note that the spike at $10.00
remains in this sample. We then compare how the separation rate at time t varies by wage
wit among workers who were hired at the same starting hourly wage. In least saturated
specification, the control vector Xit only includes (1) indicators for calendar quarter and (2)
indicators for starting hourly wage (in 10 cents intervals). The second version includes fully
saturated interactions between (1) calendar time in quarter, (2) quarter of hire, (3) previous
quarter’s weekly hours category10 (we call these “standard controls”). In a third version,
we further interact all of these with 2-digit industry indicators and a 6-categories of firm
size indicators.11 In yet a fourth version, we instead interact the standard controls with
the firm fixed effect. This fourth (most saturated) version compares very similar workers
hired within the same firm at the same time and at the same original wage working similar
hours, but who happen to be earning somewhat different wages at the present time.
   We estimate analogues of our experimental specifications above, regressing separations
Sit on log wages, and an indicator for earning more than $10.00.
  10 The   break points for last quarter’s weekly hours were 10, 20, 35, 45 and 55
  11 The   break points for firm size are 50, 100, 500, 1000, 5000




                                                       19
                     Sit = β 0 + η1 log(wit ) + γ1A 1 {wi ≥ 10.00}i + ΛXit + eit                 (9)

   This specification tests for a jump in the labor supply at $10, but constraining the slope
to be the same on both sides. So left-digit bias is rejected if γ1A = 0. Similar to the case
of MTurk experimental data, a second specification allows for heterogeneous slopes in
labor supply above and below $10 using a knotted spline, where the knots are at $9.90 and
$10.00:




          Sit = β 0B + η1B log(wit ) + γ2B × (log(wit ) − log(9.90)) × 1 {wit ≥ 9.90}i          (10)

                    +γ3B × (log(wit ) − log(10.00)) × 1 {wit ≥ 10.00}i + ΛXit + eit


   Here we test whether the slope between $9.90 and $10.00 (i.e., η1B + γ2B ) is greater than
                                                                                           
                                                        1           1
the average of the slopes below $9.90 and above $10.10 2 × η1B + 2 × (η1B + γ2B + γ3B ) ;
or equivalently to test β spline = γ2B − γ3B > 0.
   Finally, our most flexible specification including 10-cent dummies spanning $9.50 to
$10.40 (where the 9.50 dummy includes wages between $9.50 and $9.59):


                                Sit =   ∑ δk 1 {wi = k}i + ΛXit + eit                           (11)
                                        k∈S

   And then calculates the following statistics:


                                        δjump = (δ10.00 − δ9.90 )


                                                                                           
                                                         ∑10.20
                                                          k=9.80,k 6=10.00 δk   − δk−0.10
                     β local = (δ10.00 − δ9.90 ) −
                                                                        4




                                                     20
                                                               1
                             β global = (δ10.00 − δ9.90 ) −      (δ10.40 − δ9.50 )
                                                              10

    The β local estimate provides us with a comparison of the jump between $9.90 and $10.00
to other localized (10 cent) changes in separation probability from $0.10 increases. In
contrast, β global provides us with a comparison of the jump with the full global (log-linear)
average separation response from varying the wage between $9.50 and $10.40.
    Columns 1, 2, 4, and 6 of Table 2 report the semi-elasticity for separations without any
jumps with increasingly saturated controls. The semi-elasticities range between -0.192
and -0.277. Dividing these by the mean separation rates in the respective estimation
samples, the implied separation elasticities are between -1.3 and -1.9. In turn, if we use the
dynamic monopsony steady state assumption, where firm labor supply elasticity is twice
the negative of the separation elasticity, the labor supply elasticities, η, range between 2.6
and 3.7 and all are statistically significant at the 5 percent level. These are consistent with
a moderate amount of monopsony power in the low-wage labor market in Oregon over
this period. Columns 3, 5, and 7 of Table 2 show estimates using the jump specification
of equation 9, with the standard controls, additional firm size and sector controls, and
additional firm FE controls.12
    Next, when we add an indicator for $10/hour or more as a regressor, we do not see
any indication that the separation rate changes discontinuously at $10. The coefficients
are positive, when we would expect separations to decline at a round number, in addition
to being small and not statistically distinguishable from zero. In columns 8 and 9 we
   12 One can imagine that even conditional on these individual level covariates (such as starting wage, hours

of work, firm), wage differences across workers can reflect other forms of heterogeneity such as learning
about match quality or other time varying productivity differences. Bassier et al. (2019) uses the data from
Oregon but uses a different strategy that focuses on wage policy differences across firms: namely it regresses
the separation rate on firm effect to isolate the part of wage differences that are more plausibly due to
differences in firm-level wages after accounting for individual fixed effects. Their estimates of the labor
supply elasticity (using a broader set of Oregon workers) for the 2003-2007 period is around 3.6, which
is very similar to what we find here. Here, however, our key interest is in detecting left-digit bias among
workers, by testing for discontinuities in the worker-level separation elasticity around $10.00, as opposed to
the causal interpretation of the firm-level slopes around $10.00, and this exercise requries using individual
and not firm-level wage variation.


                                                     21
report the results from equations (10) and (11); specifically we report β spline , β local ,and
β global and associated standard errors. Neither the spline, local or global comparisons
indicate any discontinuous decrease in the separation rate around $10. Finally, in Figure
5, we plot the coefficient on each 10 cent dummies between $9.50 and $10.40 associated
with equation (11). Consistent with the findings in the table, there is a general negative
relationship between wages and separation, with a similar implied separations elasticity
as the baseline specification above. However, there is no indication of a discontinuous
drop in the separation rate going from $9.90 to $10.00. Again, we can use column (7) as the
estimate most closely related to our theoretical model. Dividing (negative one times) the
“Jump at 10.00” coefficient by the mean separation rate in the estimation sample (0.13), the
95 percent confidence interval for the estimate of γ is (-0.116, 0.090), and similarly to the
online labor market, it is centered around zero.



4.5    Stated Preference Experiments on Worker Mobility

A final piece of evidence on worker left-digit bias comes from stated preference experiments
we conducted to see how responsive job mobility is to the outside offered wage. To leverage
firm-level wage variation, we focus on workers at a single large retailer: using Facebook we
reached a sample of current or recent employees at Wal-Mart, the largest private employer
in the U.S. After asking about their current wage and working conditions, we presented
them with 3 possible jobs, where we randomly varied wages (and job amenities) around
their current job values, and asked them if they would leave their current employment if
offered such a job 13 The randomized wage offer allows us to estimate a recruit elasticity
among workers in a specific firm (Wal-Mart) and allows us to test whether the willingness
to leave or bargain at the current job falls discontinuously when the offered wage crosses a
round number (integer). In our sample of 3057 workers, the 10th percentile was $11, which
  13 The work conditions included commute time, assessment of co-workers and supervisors, scheduling, and

other characteristics, shown in the survey excerpt in Appendix FigureE.2.Further details on the larger project
of which this analysis is a part is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5224


                                                     22
is Wal-Mart’s voluntary minimum wage while the 90th percentile was $16.63 dollars. The
gap between the randomized offered wages and current wages was $0.04 with a standard
deviation of $1.57. Histograms of offered and current wages are shown in Appendix Figure
E.3.
   We estimated an analogous set of regressions as in our MTurk and Oregon samples.
Since this sample has multiple round number wage thresholds, here we construct a running
variable dit which is the distance from the nearest round number, w R . However, to estimate
comparable regressions to the MTurk and Oregon samples (and obtain a recruitment
elasticity), we need to pool across multiple round numbers ; we create a (recentered) wage
variable w̃ that centers dit around the sample median round wage, $12: w˜it = dit + 12. We
also include fixed effects for each $1 intervals such as $9.50 to $10.49, $10.50 to $11.49,
etc., to ensure the identifying variation is only coming from within the interval around
the round number. Finally, because each respondent was given up to 3 randomized
wage offers, and because randomization was around the respondent’s current wage, we
also include a fixed effect for each respondent, to ensure all wage variation is from the
randomization.
   In the baseline specification, we regress an indicator for remaining on the job, Rit on
log wages, and an indicator for earning more than the nearest round number.


                 Rit = β 0 + η1 log(wit ) + γ1A 1 {w̃it ≥ w R }i + δ[wi ]=wR + δr + eit     (12)

   Here, the controls include the $1 interval and respondent fixed effects, δ[wi ]=wR and δr ,
respectively. We run analogous regressions to equations (10) and (11) above, and estimate
analogous test statistics (i.e., jump, spline, local and global changes). Note that in the
equivalent of equation (11), we estimate the remaining probabilities by $0.10 intervals as
before.
   Column 1 of Table 3 first reports the elasticity of remaining with respect to the log of
the randomized offered wage, log(wit ). The coefficient of -0.618 is statistically significant at

                                                  23
the 1 percent level and has an economically meaningful magnitude. At the same time, the
elasticity of remaining at Wal-Mart with respect to the outside offered wage is -0.618/0.39
= -1.58, which suggests only a modest impact of a higher wage on the ability to entice
a current worker to move–consistent with the importance of other job-based amenities
and/or mobility cost. In column 2, we report the estimate but including interval fixed
effects. The coefficient of -0.625 is quite close in magnitude but of lower precision due to
using only within interval variation. Column (3) estimates the jump model, and while
the coefficient is the expected sign, we still find no evidence of a significant jump in the
remain probability at the round number. Dividing the negative of the coefficient by the
sample mean stay probability (0..39) produces an estimate of γ of 0.024 (SE=0.034) which
can rule out values greater than 0.9 at 95% confidence. None of the other tests (spline, local
or global) in columns 4 and 5 suggest any discontinuities, though the estimates from the
spline specification are imprecise. However, the local and global jump estimates are more
precise, and the corresponding Figure 6 visually confirms that while the probability of
staying at the current job is declining with the offered outside wage, there is no indication
of any discontinuity at the round number.



4.6   Comparison with product market estimates

A natural question is whether our experiments allow us to reject levels of left-digit bias
estimated in the product market literature. In our model, the degree of left-digit bias is
parameterized by γ, which is the percentage change in labor supply when the wage crosses
a round number. Strulov-Shlain (2019) provides estimates of left digit bias among retail
customers, and estimates the demand drop at round numbers along with product demand
elasticities. The estimated mean percentage drop of product demand at round numbers in
Strulov-Shlain is 8.89%, which is much larger than the equivalent estimates (of γ) from the
jump specifications in our three designs. (For comparability, here the “drops” are positive
if they are of the expected sign based on left digit bias.) For example, in the Wal-Mart

                                             24
data the percentage drop is 2.4% (s.e. = 3.4%), while in the Oregon data it is -1.3% (s.e.
= 5.3%), and finally in the MTurk experimental data the percentage jump at 10 cents is
-1.1% (s.e.=1.9%). In other words, the point estimates for the drops are much smaller in all
three of our designs, and often of the wrong sign, as compared to those in Strulov-Shlain.
Moreover, the confidence intervals from the Wal-Mart, Oregon and the MTurk data can
rule out the 8.89% drop at least at the 90% confidence level.
   Another way to compare the implied left digit bias in product and labor markets is
by calculating the implied percentage change in price (or wage) from crossing a round
number. In particular, this rescales the size of the discontinuity in demand or supply at the
round number (the “drop”) by the relevant demand or supply elasticities at non-round
numbers. Strulov-Shlain (2019) parameterizes left-digit bias in demand with θ, where
his specification of left-digit bias is somewhat different from ours; namely, he specifies
the demand function to be log(Q) = eD log((1 − θ)p + θ b pc), and recovers θ. At a round
                                           (log(Q(d))−log(Q(d−.01)))
number d, he approximates θ(d) ≈ −d                   eD               which can be recovered by
dividing the discontinuity in demand at a round number by the demand elasticity times
the price d. θ captures the price change that induces a change in demand equal to that
induced by the one penny at the round number d, and captures the degree of inattention
                                                                                     θ
to non-leading digits of a price change. For the purposes of comparison,             d   is a more
attractive measure as it is price-independent, and represents the percentage change in price
at non-round numbers that is utility-equivalent to crossing a round number price. This is
readily comparable to our estimates of γη , which encodes the same information. In product
by product estimates, Strulov-Shlain (2019) finds a θ from 0.226 to 0.239 (Table 2 rows 5 and
6 of the November 2019 version of his paper), with a mean price of 3.50, resulting in a point
              θ(d)
estimate of    d     between 0.064 and 0.068. The comparable numbers across our Wal-Mart,
Oregon, and MTurk datasets are all much lower, and again often of the wrong sign 0.021
(s.e.=0.04), -0.005 (s.e.=0.032), and -0.115 (s.e.=0.159), respectively. Our two experimental
labor-supply elasticities are somewhat imprecise, so only the Oregon estimates are able


                                              25
to reject the product market point estimates at 95% significance, although if we use the
more precise and larger global elasticity instead of the recentered wage elasticity η from
the Wal-Mart estimates we can rule out 0.064 at the 90% significance level. Unsurprisingly,
the extraordinarily low MTurk labor supply elasticity makes it difficult to rule out any
left digit bias by this elasticity-rescaled measure, even as the upper 95% MTurk value
of θ(0.1) itself is 0.02, an order of magnitude lower than the product market estimates
reported by Strulov-Shlain (2019). On the whole, percentage change in labor supply at
round numbers is sufficiently small relative to comparable drops in demand in the product
market, that even when rescaled by the larger labor supply elasticities we are still able
to reject comparable levels of left-digit bias found in the product market.An interesting
direction for future research is exploring why left digit bias is so much larger in product
prices than hourly wages; we conjecture it is because any given product is a small share of
expenditure, while hourly wages are a large share of income for most wage workers, and
so rational inattention could account for the differences.14



5      Incorporating employer optimization frictions

Given the lack of evidence for worker left-digit bias, we now consider the other possible
explanation for bunching: employer mis-optimization. We extend the model to allow
employers to “benefit” by paying a round number, despite lowered profits.15 While con-
sistent with employers preferring to pay round numbers, it could reflect internal fairness
constraints or administrative costs internal to the firm. These could be transactions costs
involved in dealing with round numbers, cognitive costs of managers, or administrative
costs facing a bureaucracy. δ is a simple way to capture satisficing behavior by firms willing
to use a simple heuristic (choose nearest round number) instead of bearing the costs of
    14 Matejka
             and McKay (2015) provide foundations for discrete choice that incorporates inattention, and see
Gabaix (2017) for applications of inattention to a wide variety of behavioral phenomena, including left-digit
bias.
  15 It would be equivalent to assume that firms suffer an effective loss from not paying a round number.




                                                     26
locating at the exact profit-maximizing wage. These costs may be substantial, as evidenced
by the prevalence of pay-setting consultancies16 and pervasive use of round-numbers in
publicly stated wage-policies of large firms.17
    The presence of δ modifies the profit function to be:


                                   π(w, p) = (p − w)l(w, p)eδ1w=w0                                    (13)


where δ is the percentage “gain” in profits from paying the round number.18 This specifi-
cation parallels that in Chetty (2012), who restricts optimization frictions to be constant
fractions of optimal consumer expenditure (in the nominal model), except applied to the
employer’s choice of wage for a job rather than a consumer’s choice of a consumption-
leisure bundle. In the taxable income model, optimization frictions parameterize the lack
of responsiveness to tax incentives, while in our model they parameterize the willingness
to forgo profits in order to pay a round number.
    Given (1) and (13), profits from paying a wage w to a workers with marginal product p
can be written as:

                                wη γ1w≥w δ1w=w                     ∗        γ1w≥w0 δ1w=w0
            π(w, p) = (p − w)     e     0e     0 k ( p ) = (p − w)l (w, p)e       e                   (14)
                                C

    which can be written in terms of the nominal model ρ as:


                                        γ1w∗ ( p)<w              ρ (w∗ ( p) , p)
                                    e                 0   eδ >                                        (15)
                                                                   ρ ( w0 , p )
  16 Companies and consortia such as ADP, The Survey Group, The Mayflower Group, Paychex, and Payscale

all sell consultancy services for pay setting, informed by the shared payroll data of client companies.
   17 For example, Wal-Mart pays a voluntary minimum wage of $11.00, Target pays $13, and Amazon pays

$15. Additionally McDonald’s, T.J. Maxx, The Gap, and many other firms have company minimum wage
policies that mandate round numbers.
   18 While we do not microfound why employers may have preferences for paying a particular round

number, this may reflect inattention among wage-setters. For example, Matějka (2015) shows that rationally
inattentive monopoly sellers will choose a discrete number of prices even when the profit-maximizing price
is continuous.




                                                            27
    Taking logs, we obtain that a firm will pay the round number if


                          δ + γ1w∗ ( p)<w0 > ln ρ (w∗ ( p) , p) − ln ρ (w0 , p)                          (16)


    This shows that bunching is more likely the greater is the left-digit bias of workers
and the optimization cost for employers. The optimization bias is symmetric whether the
latent wage is above or below the round number. But left-digit bias is asymmetric because
it only has an impact if the latent wage is below the round number. The right-hand side
of (16) can be approximated using the following second-order Taylor series expansion of
ρ (w0 , p) about w∗ ( p)19 :

                                      ∂ ln ρ (w∗ , p)                1 ∂2 ln ρ (w∗ , p)
    ln ρ (w0 , p) ' ln ρ (w∗ , p) +                   [ w0 − w ∗ ] +                    [ w0 − w ∗ ] 2   (17)
                                            ∂w                       2       ∂w2

    The first-order term is zero by the definition of the latent wage (Akerlof and Yellen
(1985) use this idea to explain price and wage rigidity). Using the definition of the nominal
model, the second derivative can be written as:

                                   ∂2 ln ρ (w, p)         1       η
                                            2
                                                  =−          2
                                                                − 2                                      (18)
                                        ∂w           ( p − w)    w

    Using (2) this can be written as:

                                      ∂2 ln ρ (w∗ , p)    η (1 + η )
                                                       =−                                                (19)
                                            ∂w 2             w ∗2

    where it is convenient to invert (2) and express in terms of the latent wage because
wages are observed but marginal products are not. Substituting (19) into (17) and then
into (16) leads to the following expression for whether a firm pays the round number:
  19 One can use the actual profit function, instead of the approximation, but the difference is small for the

parameters we use, and the approximation has a clearer intuition.




                                                     28
                            1 w0 − w ∗ 2   ω2   δ + γ 1 w ∗ < w0
                                     
                                         ≡    ≤                                                      (20)
                            2   w∗         2      η (1 + η )

   The left-hand side of (20) implies that the size of the loss in nominal profits from
bunching is increasing in the square of the proportional distance of the latent wage from
the round number (ω). The right-hand side tells us that, for a given latent wage, whether a
firm will bunch depends on the extent of left-digit bias as measured by γ (only relevant
for wages below the round number), the extent of optimization frictions as measured by δ
and the degree of competition in the labor market as measured by η. The extent of labor
market competition matters because the loss in profits from a sub-optimal wage are greater
the more competitive is the labor market. Define:

                                         δ+γ                 δ
                                z0 =              , z1 =                                             (21)
                                       η (1 + η )        η (1 + η )

   Assume, for the moment, that there is some potential variation in (δ, γ, η ) across firms
which is independent of the latent wage and leads to a CDF for z0 of Λ0z (z) and a CDF
for z1 of Λ1z (z). From (21) it must be the case that Λ0z (z) ≤ Λ1z (z) with equality if there
is no left-digit bias. The way in which we use this is the following—suppose the fraction
                                                                  ∗
                                                                  w H − w0
                                                                           
of firms who bunch from above w0 is denoted by φ (ω ) = φ ∗                  , where ω ∗ is the
                                                                    w∗              H

proportionate gap between the latent optimal wage under the nominal model,w∗ , the
round number w0 , w∗H as the optimal wage under the nominal model for the marginal
                                                                     w0 −w∗L
buncher from above. Similarly, φ(ω∗ ) is defined as φ(                 w∗L ).   Then (20) implies that we
will have, for ω < 0, :
                                                              ω∗2
                                                                   
                                   φ ( ω∗ ) =   1 − Λ0z                                              (22)
                                                              2

   and for ω > 0 :
                                                              ω ∗2
                                                                    
                                         ∗
                                   φ (ω ) =     1 − Λ1z                                              (23)
                                                               2

   In the next section, we empirical recover estimates of the left-hand sides of (22) and


                                                 29
(23). The results in this section imply that these estimates of the source of the missing mass
in the wage distribution can be used to nonparametrically identify the distributions of z0
and z1 , Λ0 and Λ1 . However, these estimates alone do not allow us to nonparametrically
identify the distribution of (δ, γ, η ), the underlying economic parameters of interest, and
below we estimate the degree of monopsony and employer misoptimization under a
variety of parametric assumptions.



5.1    Estimating the origin of the missing mass

The excess mass in the wage distribution at a bunch that has been documented in the
previous sections must come from somewhere in the latent wage distribution that would
result from the “nominal model” without any bunching (in the terminology of Chetty
(2012)).20 This section describes how we estimate the origin of this “missing mass.” To do
so, we follow the now standard approach in the bunching literature of fitting a flexible
polynomial to the observed distribution, excluding a range around the threshold, and
using the fitted values to form the counterfactual at the threshold (see Kleven 2016 for a
discussion).
    We focus on the bunching at the most round number ($10.00 in the wage data, $1.00
in the MTurk rewards data). We ignore the secondary bunches; this will attenuate our
estimate of the extent of bunching, as we will ignore the attraction that other round
numbers exert on the distribution.
  20 Following  the literature, our procedure assumes that the missing mass is originating entirely from the
surrounding bunching interval. In principle, it is possible that the missing mass is originating from latent
non-employment—i.e., jobs that would not exist under the nominal model in the absence of bunching.
However, the extent to which some of the excess jobs at $10 is coming from latent non-employment, one
would need to assume either that (1) these jobs have latent productivity exactly at $10.00 so that employers
are indifferent between entering and not entering, or (2) they have productivity greater than $10 but have a
fixed cost of not paying exactly $10 that is independent of the size of the profits from paying different wages
under the nominal model. Both of these assumptions strike us as implausible. As an empirical matter, if some
of the excess mass at $10 are originating from latent non-employment, the estimated missing mass around
$10 would be smaller in magnitude than the excess mass at $10. However, our estimated missing mass from
the surrounding interval is, indeed, able to account for the size of the excess mass—which suggests that
latent non-employment is unlikely to be an important contributor to the excess mass in our case.




                                                     30
                                                                                                  cw
   We use bin-level counts of wages cw in, say, $0.10 bins, and define pw =                      ∑∞
                                                                                                            as the
                                                                                                  j=0 c j

normalized count or probability mass for each bin. We then estimate:

                                     w0 +∆w              K
                             pw =     ∑        β j 1w=j + ∑ αi wi + ew                                        (24)
                                    j=w0 −∆w            i=0

   In this expression j sums over 10 cent wage bins (we use 1 cent bins in the MTurk
                       K
data), and the g(w) ≡ ∑i=0 αi wi terms are a K th order polynomial, while β j terms are
coefficients on dummies for bins in the excluded range around w0 , between w L = w0 − ∆w
                                                                            0 −10
and w H = w0 + ∆w. β w0 is the excess bunching (EB) at w0 . In addition, ∑w
                                                                          j=w0 −∆w β j is the

missing mass strictly below w0 (MMB), while ∑w 0 +∆w
                                             j=w0 +10 β j is the missing mass strictly above

w0 (MMA). However, it might be likely that the the number of workers is increasing in w;
                                                 0 −10
so our test for left-digit bias tests whether ∑w                    = ∑w 0 +∆w
                                                              βj                   βj
                                               j=w0 −∆w      g(j)      j=w0 +10   g(j) .   In other words, we
test whether the share of workers would have been paid the latent wage j but are instead
paying w0 is different when considering bunchers from above versus below.
   Since ∆w is unknown, we use an iterative procedure similar to Kleven and Waseem
(2013). Starting with ∆w = 10, we estimate equation (24) and calculate the excess bunching
EB and compare it with the missing mass MM = MMA + MMB. If the missing mass is
smaller in magnitude than the excess mass, we increase ∆w and re-estimate equation (24).
We do this until we find a ∆w such that the excess and missing masses are equalized. Since
∆w is itself estimated, we estimate its standard error using a bootstrapping procedure
suggested by Chetty (2012) and Kleven (2016). In particular, we resample (with replace-
ment) the errors êw from equation (24) and add these back to the fitted p̂w to form a new
distribution p̃w , and estimate regression (24) using this new outcome. We repeat this 500
times to derive the standard error for ∆w. The estimate of ∆w and its standard error will
be useful later for the estimation of other parameters of interest.
   In Figure 7 we show the estimates for the administrative data from MN, OR, and WA,
using polynomial order K = 6. For visual ease, we plot the kernel-smoothed β̂ j for the
missing mass. Even leaving out the prominent spike at $10.00, the wage distribution

                                                 31
is not smooth, and has relatively more mass at multiples of 5, 10 and 25 cents. For
this reason, it is easier to detect the shape of the missing mass by looking at the kernel-
smoothed β̂ j . Moreover, we show the excess and missing mass relative to the counterfactual
 C = 6 α wi . There is clear bunching at $10.00 in the administrative data, consistent with
pc
 w  ∑i=0 i
evidence from the histogram above. We find that the excess bunching can be accounted
for by missing mass spanning ∆w = $0.80; we can also divide ∆w by w0 and normalize the
                w H − w0
radius as ω =      w0      = 0.08. Visually, the missing mass is coming from both below and
above $10.00, which is relevant when considering alternative explanations.
   These estimates are also reported in Table 4, column 1. The bunch at $10.00 is statistically
significant, with a coefficient of 0.010 and standard error of 0.002. In addition, the size of
the missing mass from above and below w0 are quantitatively very close, at -0.006 and
-0.007 respectively. The t-statistic for the null hypothesis that the missing mass (relative
to latent) are equal for bunchers from above and below is 0.338. This provides strong
evidence against worker left-digit bias, which would have implied an asymmetry in the
missing masses. The radius of the missing mass interval is ω = 0.08, with a standard error
of 0.027. In other words, employers who are bunching appear to be paying as much as 8%
above or below the wage that maximizes profits under the nominal model.
   In column 2, we use the CPS data limited to MN, OR, and WA only. We find a
substantially larger estimate for the excess mass, around 0.043, consistent with rounding
of wages by survey respondents. In column 3, we report estimates using the re-weighted
CPS counts for MN, OR, and WA adjusted for rounding due to reporting error using the
1977 supplement (CPS-MEC). The CPS estimate of bunching adjusted for measurement
error is much closer to the administrative data, with an estimated magnitude of 0.014;
while it is still somewhat larger, we note that the estimate from the administrative data is
within the 95 percent confidence interval of the CPS-MEC estimate. The use of the CPS
supplement substantially reduces the discrepancy, which is re-assuring. At the same time,
we note that the estimates for ω using the CPS (0.07) are remarkably close to those using


                                               32
the administrative data (0.08). The graphical analogue of column 3 is in Figure 8.
   Since the counterfactual involves fitting a smooth distribution using a polynomial in
the estimation range, in Table 5 we assess the robustness of our estimates to alternative
polynomial orders between 4 and 7. Both the size of the bunch, and the radius of the
interval with missing mass, ω, are highly robust to the choice of polynomials. For example,
using the pooled administrative data, the bunching β 0 is always 0.01, and ω is always 0.08
for all polynomial orders K.
   One concern with bunching methods in cross sectional data is that the estimation of
missing mass requires parametric extrapolation of the wage distribution around $10. In
our case, however, the bunching is at a nominal number ($10) that sits on a different part
of the real wage distribution in each of the 20 quarters of our sample. As an alternative,
instead of collapsing the data into a single cross section, we use quarterly cross sectional
data and fit a polynomial in the real wage wr = w/ Pt where Pt is the price index in year t
relative to 2003. Defining pwr as the probability mass for a real wage bin wr , we specify the
regression equation as:

                                     w0 +∆w                    K
                           p wr =     ∑        β j 1wr × Pt =j + ∑ αi wri + ewr           (25)
                                    j=w0 −∆w                  i=0

   We again iterate estimating this equation until MM = MMA + MMB to recover ∆w. If
the real wage distribution is assumed to be stable during this period (i.e. the αi are constant
over time), then in principle the latent wage distribution within the bunching interval
can be identified nonparametrically, because each wr bin falls outside of the bunching
interval in at least some periods. More precisely, suppose there were only two periods,
and (w0 − ∆w)/ PT1 ≥ (w0 + ∆w)/ PT0 , for some T1 and T0 . In this case β j is identified from
the mass at wr × PT1 controlling for a flexible function of wr which is effectively identified
from the real wage distribution in T0 as well as the mass at wr × PT0 conditional on the
real wage density in T1 . This specification is an example of a “difference in bunching”
approach that compares the same part of the real wage distribution across years (Kleven

                                                    33
(2016)), and addresses criticisms of bunching estimators being dependent on parametric
assumptions about the shape of the latent distribution (Blomquist and Newey, 2017). To
show that this assumption of non-overlapping bunching intervals is satisfied for at least
some portion of our data, Appendix Figure A.2 shows that the bunching interval around
the nominal $10.00 mode in 2007 does not overlap with that from the 2003 real wage
distribution, allowing for estimation of the latent (real) density around the nominal $10.00
mode using variation in the price level over time. In column (8) of Table 5 we show that
estimates with the repeated cross section and real wage polynomials are virtually identical
to our baseline estimates, providing reassurance that our estimates are not being driven by
parametric assumptions about the latent distribution within the bunching interval.
    The main conclusions from this section are that the missing mass seems to be drawn
symmetrically from around the bunch and from quite a broad range. As the next section
shows, these facts are informative about possible explanations for bunching and the nature
of labor markets.



6     Recovering optimization frictions from bunching estimates

The first result of our framework above is that worker left-digit bias implies that the degree
of bunching is asymmetric, in that missing mass will come more from below the round
number than above. Thus, finding symmetry in the origin of the missing mass implies
that we can approximate ω ∗ and ω∗ with the harmonic mean of the two, which we denote
         w − w0
ω ≡        w0     , and is exactly the proportional radius of the bunching interval in Table 4.
This further implies that Λ0 = Λ1 and allows us to accept the hypothesis that γ = 0. The
intuition for this is that left-digit bias implies that firms with a latent wage 5 cents below
the round number have a higher incentive to bunch than those with a latent wage 5 cents
above. We fail to reject symmetry of the missing mass in Table 4 and so we proceed holding
γ = 0.


                                                 34
   Under the assumption that bunchers have latent wages near the round number, the
presence of missing mass greater than w0 also rules out a number of explanations that do
not require monopsony in the labor market. If the labor market were perfectly competitive,
then no worker could be underpaid, even though misoptimizing firms could still overpay
workers. Explanations involving product market rents or other sources of profit for firms
cannot explain why firms systematically can pay below the marginal product of workers;
only labor market power can account for this. Similarly, however, the presence of missing
mass below w0 rules out pure employer collusion around a focal wage of w0 , as the pure
collusion case would imply that all the missing mass was coming from above w0 .
   Taking γ = 0 as given, our estimates of the proportion of firms who bunch for each latent
                                      δ
wage identifies the CDF of z1 =   η (1+η )
                                           ,   but does not allow us to identify the distributions
of δ and η separately. This section describes how one can make further assumptions
to identify these separate components. First, note that if there is perfect competition
in labor markets (η = ∞) or no optimization frictions (δ = 0), we have that z1 = 0 in
which case there would be no bunches in the wage distribution. The existence of bunches
implies that we can reject the joint hypothesis of perfect competition for all firms and no
optimization frictions for all firms. But there is a trade-off between the extent of labor
market competition and optimization friction that can be used to rationalize the data on
bunches. To see this note that if the labor market is more competitive i.e. η is higher, a
higher degree of optimization friction is required to explain a given level of bunching.
Similarly, if optimization frictions are higher i.e. a higher δ, then a higher degree of labor
market competition is required to explain a given level of bunching.
   To estimate η and δ separately from φ(ω), we need to make assumptions about the
joint distribution. A natural first place to start is to assume a single value of η and a single
value of δ. In this case, the missing mass is a constant proportion within the bunching
interval around the whole number bunch with all latent wages inside the interval and
none outside. If there is no left-digit bias (γ = 0) (because of the symmetry in the missing


                                                   35
mass), then ω , η and δ must satisfy:


                                                2δ
                                                        = ω2                                            (26)
                                             η (1 + η )

This expression shows that, armed with an empirical estimate of ω, we can trace out a δ-η
locus, showing the values of δ and η that can together rationalize a given ω. For a given
size of the bunching interval ω, a higher value of optimization frictions (higher δ) implies
a more competitive labor market (a higher η). 21
    But our estimates of the “missing mass” do not suggest a bunching interval with this
shape. At all latent wages, there seem to be some employers who bunch and others who
do not. To rationalize this requires a non-degenerate distribution of δ and/or η . We
make a variety of different assumptions on these distributions in order to investigate the
robustness of our results.
    We always assume that the distributions of η and δ are independent with cumulative
distributions H(η) and G(δ). At least one of these distributions must be non-degenerate
because, by the argument above, if they both have a single value for all firms one would
observe an area around the bunch where all firms bunch so the missing mass would be
100% - this is not what the data look like. Our estimates imply that there are always some
firms who do not bunch, however close is their latent wage to the bunch. We rationalize
this as being some fraction of employers who are always optimizers i.e. have δ = 0.
    We first make the simplest parametric assumptions that are consistent with the data:
we assume that η is constant, and δ has a 2-point distribution with δ=0 with probability
G and δ = δ∗ with probability 1 − G, so that E[δ|δ > 0] = δ∗ . Below, we will extend this
formulation to consider other possible shapes for the distribution G(δ|δ > 0), keeping a
mass point at G(0) = G.
  21 Andrews, Gentzkow and Shapiro (2017) make a similar point in a different context, arguing that differing

percentages of people with optimization frictions can substantively affect other parameter estimates using
the example of DellaVigna, List and Malmendier (2012).




                                                    36
   This then implies the missing mass at w is given by:

                                                              2δ∗
                                                                       
                                                          2
                                     φ(ω) = [1 − G ] I ω <
                                                           η (1 + η )

In this model, the share of jobs with a latent wage close to the bunch that continue to pay a
non-round w identifies G, and the radius of the bunching interval (ω) in the distribution
                δ∗
identifies   η (1+η )
                      .   The width of the interval was estimated, together with its standard error,
                                                                                                ∆w
in the estimation of the missing mass where, relative to the bunch, it was denoted by           w0 .

Under assumptions about δ∗ we can recover a corresponding estimate of η and vice versa.
   What do plausible values of optimization error imply about the likely labor supply
elasticities for bunchers? To answer this question, we report bounds using “economic
standard errors” similar to Chetty (2012). We calculate estimates of η assuming δ∗ equal
to 0.01, 0.05 or 0.1 in rows A, B, and C of Table 6 respectively. The implied labor supply
elasticity η varies between 1.337 and 5.112 when we vary δ∗ between 0.01 and 0.1. Even
assuming a substantial amount of mis-optimization (around 10% of profits) suggests a
labor supply elasticity facing a firm of less than 5.5, and we can rule out markdowns
smaller than 6 percent. If we assume, instead, a 1% loss in profits due to optimization
friction, the 90 percent confidence bounds rule out η > 3.1 and markdowns smaller than
25 percent. While our estimate for the labor supply elasticity are not highly precise, the
extent of bunching at $10.00 suggests considerable wage setting power on firms’ part even
for a sizable amount of optimization frictions, δ.
   The admissible values of δ, η can also be seen in Figure 9. Here we plot the δ∗ , η locus
for the sample mean of estimated bunching, ω, as well as for the 90 percent confidence
interval around it. We can see visually that as we consider higher values of δ∗ , the range
of admissible η 0 s increases and becomes larger in value. However, even for sizable δ∗ ’s
the implied values of the labor supply elasticity are often modest, implying at least a
moderate amount of monopsony power. Our estimates are plausible given the recent



                                                     37
literature: Caldwell and Oehlsen (2018) find an experimental labor-supply elasticity for
Uber drivers at between 4 and 5, similar to the estimates in Dube et al. (2015), while Kline
et al. (2017) estimate a labor-supply elasticity facing the firm of 2.7, using patent decisions
as an instrument for firm productivity, both of which would be well within the range of η
implied by our estimates together with a δ∗ less than 0.05.
   We examine robustness of the estimates to alternative specifications of the latent dis-
tribution of wages in Table 7. Columns 1 and 2 add indicator variables for “secondary”
modes, to capture the bunching induced at 50 cent and 25 cent bins. Columns 3 and 4
specify the latent distribution as a Fourier polynomial, in order to allow the specification
to pick up periodicity in the latent distribution that even a high-dimensional polynomial
may miss. Columns 5 and 6 of Table 7 explore changing the degree of the polynomial used
to fit the main estimates in Table 6. Column 5 uses a quadratic and column 6 uses a quartic,
and our results stay very similar to our main estimates in Table 6.



6.1   Alternative assumptions on heterogeneity

While assuming a single value of non-zero δ and a constant elasticity η may seem restrictive,
it is a restriction partially made for empirical reasons as our estimate of the missing mass at
each latent wage is not very precise and we will also be unable to distinguish heterogeneous
elasticities in our experimental design. Nonetheless, there is a concern that different
assumptions about the distribution of δ and η might be observationally indistinguishable
but have very different implications for the extent of optimization frictions and monopsony
power in the data. This section briefly describes a number of robustness exercises that vary
the possible heterogeneity in δ and η, with details relegated to Online Appendix A .
   While it is not possible to identify arbitrary nonparametric distributions of δ and η, as
robustness checks we consider polar cases allowing each to be unrestricted one at a time,
and then finally a semi-parametric deconvolution approach that allows for an unrestricted,
non-parametric distribution H(η), along with a flexible, parametric distribution G(δ). First,

                                              38
we continue to assume a constant η but allow δ to be have an arbitrary distribution
G(δ|δ > 0) while continuing to fix the probability that δ = 0 at G. Second, at the opposite
pole, we allow each firm to have its own labor supply elasticity η, while each firm either mis-
optimizes profits by a fixed fraction δ∗ or not at all.22 Finally, we continue to allow arbitrary
heterogeneity in η but only restrict G(δ) to have a continuous lognormal distribution, with
prespecified variances of .1 and 1.
    We quantitatively show robustness of our main estimates to these four alternate spec-
ifications in Table 8. Column 1 shows the implied E[δ|δ > 0] and δ̄ when an arbitrary
distribution of δ is allowed. The implied η for E[δ|δ > 0] = 0.01 is 1.67 instead of 1.33 in
the baseline estimates from Table 6. Similarly, in column 2 we see the estimates under the
2-point distribution for δ and an arbitrary distribution for η. The mean η of 1.56 in this
case is quite close to column 1. The implied bounds are somewhat larger, with a 1% loss in
profits for those bunching (i.e., E(δ|δ > 0) = 0.01) generating 95% confidence intervals that
rule out estimates of 5.4 or greater. Under 5% loss in profits, we get elasticities in columns 1
and 2 that are close to 4 , somewhat larger than the comparable baseline estimate of 3.5, but
with similarly close to 20 percent wage markdown. Therefore, allowing for heterogeneity
in either δ or η only modestly increases the estimated mean η as compared to our baseline
estimates.
    In columns 3 and 4 we report our estimates allowing for an arbitrary distribution for
η, along with a lognormal conditional distribution for δ. These estimates are obtained
using a deconvolution estimator to recover the distribution of a difference in random
variables, described in more detail in Online Appendix B. As in columns 1 and 2, we
consider the case where E(δ|δ > 0) = 0.01 or 0.05, but now allow the standard deviation
  22 This exercise is in the spirit of Saez (2010) who estimates taxable income elasticities using bunching in
income at kinks and thresholds in the tax code (Kleven 2016). Kleven and Waseem (2013) use incomplete
bunching to estimate optimization frictions, similar to our exercise in this paper; however, in our case
optimization frictions produce bunching while in Kleven and Waseem (2013) they prevent it. This has been
applied to estimating the implicit welfare losses due to various non-tax kinks, such as gender norms of
relative male earnings (Bertrand, Kamenica and Pan 2015) as well as biases due to behavioral constraints
(Allen et al. 2016).



                                                     39
σδ to vary. In column 3 we take the case where δ is fairly concentrated around the mean
with σδ = 0.1. Here the estimated E(η) is equal to 2.5, which is larger than the analogous
baseline estimates in columns 1 and 2 allowing for an arbitrary distributions for δ and η,
respectively. In column 4, we allow δ to be much more dispersed, with σδ = 1. In this case
the estimated E(η) falls somewhat to 2. With E(δ|δ > 0) = 0.05, we get E[η] = 6 and 4.6
under σδ = 0.1 and σδ = 1, respectively, and we are able to rule out markdowns less than 5
percent easily. Encouragingly, for a given mean value of optimization friction, E[δ|δ > 0],
allowing for heterogeneity in δ and η together only modestly affects the estimated mean η
as compared to our baseline estimates.
   Overall, a wide range of assumptions made about the distribution of δ and η continue
to suggest that the degree of bunching observed in the data is consistent with a moderate
degree of monopsony along with a modest reduction in profits from optimization errors;
and that an assumption of a more competitive labor market implies larger profit loss from
mispricing.



6.2    Heterogeneous δ by Firms - Evidence from Oregon Administrative

Data

We can now examine what type of firms are more likely to bunch exactly at $10.00 to pro-
vide additional validation for the hypothesis that this reflects employer mis-optimization.
If heterogeneity in δ is indeed driving variation in bunching, then firms that bunch should
exhibit plausibly “behavioral” characteristics, for example a lack of administrative sophis-
tication or modern management practices. While we do not have extensive firm-level
data on human resource practices, we do have a variety of firm characteristics from the
matched employer-employee data from Oregon. In Figure 10 we show the firm-specific
determinants of bunching, where we regress the extent of bunching (ratio of excess mass
to latent wage density) on a variety of firm level characteristics, including firm size, deciles



                                              40
of hourly wage firm effects23 , industry, and part-time (less than 20 hours) share of em-
ployment. While bunching is present in every subgroup, with no coefficient less than 1,
we find that the firms most likely to bunch are very small firms, those in the construction
sector , and those in the bottom of the firm-effect distribution for hourly wages. This is
consistent with these firms being relatively “unsophisticated,” more likely to pay in cash,
and less likely to have standardized pay practices (e.g. automatic inflation escalation) that
would eliminate employer discretion in wage setting; this results in bunching of wages
at round numbers. The public sector also exhibits some unusual bunching, which could
reflect low cost mininimization pressure on public wage-setting, but may also indicate
some preference of public sector workers or unions for benefits over wages. Starting wages
are also more likely to bunch; this is consistent with firms using other rules for raises
(such as a common percentage increase in wages for all workers) that erode bunching at
round numbers over time. Overall, the variation in the use of round numbered wages
across firms is consistent with the hypothesis that it is driven by optimization errors by
employers.
     24




7      Conclusion

Significantly more U.S. workers are paid exactly round numbers than would be predicted
by a smooth distribution of marginal productivity. This fact is documented in admin-
istrative data, mitigating any issues due to measurement error, and is present even in
Amazon MTurk, an online spot labor market, where there are no regulatory constraints nor
long-term contracts. We integrate imperfect labor market competition with left-digit bias
    23 These
           firm effects are estimated using the Abowd et al. (1999) decomposition, with the Oregon-specific
hourly wage decomposition results detailed more fully in Bassier et al. (2019).
  24 In Appendix Table C.1 we examine heterogeneity in η by worker characteristics, holding fixed δ and

using measurement error corrected CPS data. The estimates are consistent with plausible heterogeneity in
residual labor supply elasticities: women have lower estimated η while new workers have higher values,
but the extent of heterogeneity is generally limited.


                                                   41
by workers and a general employer preference for round-number wages to evaluate the
source of left-digit bias. Using administrative wage data, we reject a role for worker left-
digit bias using the symmetry of the missing mass around round numbers. We also reject
the left-digit bias hypothesis using a high-powered, preregistered experiment conducted
on MTurk: despite considerable monopsony power (in a putatively thick market), there is
no discontinuity in labor supply or quality of work at 10 cents relative to 9. Observational
evidence from administrative hourly wage data from Oregon similarly confirms the lack
of any discontinuity in labor supply facing firms at $10/hour, as do stated preference
experiments conducted with Wal-Mart workers.
   This evidence shows that the extent of round-number bunching can be explained by a
combination of a plausible degree of monopsony together with a small degree of employer
mis-optimization. We show that when there is sizable market power, it requires only a
modest extent of optimization error to rationalize substantial bunching in wages. With
optimization error leading to a profit loss of less than 5%, the observed degree of bunching
in administrative data can be rationalized with a firm-specific labor supply elasticity less
than 2.5; at 1% of profits lost from round-number bias of employers, the implied firm labor-
supply elasticity is between .8 and 1.5, depending on the extent and shape of heterogeneity
assumed.
   This research suggests that bunching in the wage distribution may not be merely a
curiosity. Spikes at arbitrary wages suggest a failure of labor-market arbitrage due to
employer mis-optimization and market power. Given the prevalence of round numbers in
the wage distribution, it suggests that market power may be ubiquitous in labor markets
as well as product markets. Moreover, our evidence suggests that when there is market
power, we can expect employers to exhibit a variety of deviations from optimizing behavior,
including adoption of heuristics such as paying round number wages.




                                            42
References

Abowd, John M, Francis Kramarz, and David N Margolis. 1999. “High wage workers and
  high wage firms,” Econometrica, 67(2): 251–333.

Akerlof, George A and Janet L Yellen. 1985. “A near-rational model of the business cycle,
  with wage and price inertia,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100(Supplement): 823–
  838.

Allen, Eric J, Patricia M Dechow, Devin G Pope, and George Wu. 2016. “Reference-
  dependent preferences: Evidence from marathon runners,” Management Science.

Anderson, Eric T and Duncan I Simester. 2003. “Effects of $9 price endings on retail sales:
  Evidence from field experiments,” Quantitative marketing and Economics, 1(1): 93–110.

Andrews, Isaiah, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M Shapiro. 2017. “Measuring the Sensitiv-
  ity of Parameter Estimates to Estimation Moments,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics:
  1553–1592.

Azar, José, Ioana Marinescu, and Marshall I Steinbaum. 2017. “Labor Market Concentra-
  tion,”Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Babcock, Linda, William J Congdon, Lawrence F Katz, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2012.
 “Notes on behavioral economics and labor market policy,” IZA Journal of Labor Policy,
  1(1), p. 2.

Backus, Matthew, Tom Blake, and Steven Tadelis. 2015. “Cheap talk, round numbers, and
  the economics of negotiation,” NBER Working Paper No. 21285.

Bassier, Ihsaan, Arindrajit Dube, and Suresh Naidu. 2019. “Monopsony In Movers.”

Basu, Kaushik. 1997. “Why are so many goods priced to end in nine? And why this practice
  hurts the producers,” Economics Letters, 54(1): 41–44.


                                            43
          2006. “Consumer cognition and pricing in the nines in oligopolistic markets,”
  Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 15(1): 125–141.

Berger, David W, Kyle F Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey. 2019. “Labor Market
  Power,”Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bertrand, Marianne, Emir Kamenica, and Jessica Pan. 2015. “Gender identity and relative
  income within households,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(2): 571–614.

Blomquist, Sören and Whitney Newey. 2017. “The bunching estimator cannot identify the
  taxable income elasticity,”Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen. 2007. “Measuring and explaining management
  practices across firms and countries,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4): 1351–
  1408.

Caldwell, Sydnee and Emily Oehlsen. 2018. “Monopsony and the Gender Wage Gap:
  Experimental Evidence from the Gig Economy,” Massachusetts Institute of Technology
  Working Paper.

Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Joerg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2018. “Firms and
  labor market inequality: Evidence and some theory,” Journal of Labor Economics, 36(S1):
  S13–S70.

Chen, Daniel L and John J Horton. 2016. “Are Online Labor Markets Spot Markets for
  Tasks? A Field Experiment on the Behavioral Response to Wage Cuts,” Information
  Systems Research, 27(2): 403–423.

Chernozhukov, Victor, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian Hansen,
  Whitney Newey, and James Robins. 2017. “Double/debiased machine learning for
  treatment and structural parameters,” The Econometrics Journal.




                                           44
Chetty, Raj. 2012. “Bounds on elasticities with optimization frictions: A synthesis of micro
  and macro evidence on labor supply,” Econometrica, 80(3): 969–1018.

Cho, David. 2018. “The Labor Market Effects of Demand Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence
  from the Recovery Act,”Technical report, Princeton University.

Cho, Sungjin and John Rust. 2010. “The flat rental puzzle,” The Review of Economic Studies,
  77(2): 560–594.

Delaigle, A and Irène Gijbels. 2004. “Bootstrap bandwidth selection in kernel density
  estimation from a contaminated sample,” Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics,
  56(1): 19–47.

Della Vigna, Stefano and Devin Pope. 2016. “What motivates effort? Evidence and expert
  forecasts,” The Review of Economic Studies.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Matthew Gentzkow. 2017. “Uniform Pricing in US Retail
  Chains,”Technical report, Working Paper.

DellaVigna, Stefano, John A List, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2012. “Testing for altruism and
  social pressure in charitable giving,” The quarterly journal of economics, 127(1): 1–56.

Dittmar, Jeremiah and Suresh Naidu. 2016. “Contested Property: Fugitive Slaves in the
  Antebellum US South,”Technical report, Working paper.

Dube, Arindrajit, Laura M Giuliano, and Jonathan S Leonard. 2015. “Fairness and frictions:
  The impact of unequal raises on quit behavior.”

Dube, Arindrajit, Jeff Jacobs, Suresh Naidu, and Siddarth Suri. 2018. “Monopsony Power
  In Crowdsourcing Markets,” Unpublished manuscript.

Gabaix, Xavier. 2017. “Behavioral Inattention,” NBER Working Paper No. 21285.




                                             45
Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson. 2006. “Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia, and
  information suppression in competitive markets,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  121(2): 505–540.

Goldfarb, Avi and Mo Xiao. 2011. “Who thinks about the competition? Managerial ability
  and strategic entry in US local telephone markets,” The American Economic Review, 101(7):
  3130–3161.

Hall, Robert E and Alan B Krueger. 2012. “Evidence on the incidence of wage posting,
  wage bargaining, and on-the-job search,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  4(4): 56–67.

Heidhues, Paul and Botond Kőszegi. 2008. “Competition and price variation when con-
  sumers are loss averse,” The American Economic Review, 98(4): 1245–1268.

         2018. “Behavioral Industrial Organization.”

Hortacsu, Ali and Steven L Puller. 2008. “Understanding strategic bidding in multi-unit
  auctions: a case study of the Texas electricity spot market,” The RAND Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 39(1): 86–114.

Horton, John J, David G Rand, and Richard J Zeckhauser. 2011. “The online laboratory:
  Conducting experiments in a real labor market,” Experimental Economics, 14(3): 399–425.

Kingsley, Sara Constance, Mary L Gray, and Siddharth Suri. 2015. “Accounting for market
  frictions and power asymmetries in online labor markets,” Policy & Internet, 7(4): 383–
  400.

Kleven, Henrik J and Mazhar Waseem. 2013. “Using notches to uncover optimization
  frictions and structural elasticities: Theory and evidence from Pakistan,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 128(2): 669–723.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen. 2016. “Bunching,” Annual Review of Economics, 8: 435–464.

                                            46
Kline, Patrick, Neviana Petkova, Heidi Williams, and Owen Zidar. 2017. “Who Profits from
  Patents? Rent-sharing at Innovative Firms,” Mimeo.

Krueger, Alan B. and Orley Ashenfelter. 2017. “Theory and Evidence on Employer Collu-
  sion in the Franchise Sector,” Unpublished manuscript.

Kuziemko, Ilyana, Michael I Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2015.
 “How elastic are preferences for redistribution? Evidence from randomized survey
  experiments,” The American Economic Review, 105(4): 1478–1508.

Lacetera, Nicola, Devin G Pope, and Justin R Sydnor. 2012. “Heuristic thinking and limited
  attention in the car market,” The American Economic Review, 102(5): 2206–2236.

Lamadon, T, M Mogstad, and B Setzler. 2018. “Imperfect competition and rent sharing in
  the us labor market,” University of Chicago mimeo.

Levy, Daniel, Dongwon Lee, Haipeng Chen, Robert J Kauffman, and Mark Bergen. 2011.
 “Price points and price rigidity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(4): 1417–1431.

Manning, Alan. 2011. “Imperfect competition in the labor market,” Handbook of labor
  economics, 4: 973–1041.

Manning, Kenneth C and David E Sprott. 2009. “Price endings, left-digit effects, and
  choice,” Journal of Consumer Research, 36(2): 328–335.

Matějka, Filip. 2015. “Rationally inattentive seller: Sales and discrete pricing,” The Review
  of Economic Studies, 83(3): 1125–1155.

Matejka, Filip and Alisdair McKay. 2015. “Rational inattention to discrete choices: A new
  foundation for the multinomial logit model,” American Economic Review, 105(1): 272–98.

Naidu, Suresh. 2010. “Recruitment restrictions and labor markets: Evidence from the
  postbellum US South,” Journal of Labor Economics, 28(2): 413–445.


                                             47
Naidu, Suresh, Yaw Nyarko, and Shing-Yi Wang. 2016. “Monopsony power in migrant
  labor markets: evidence from the United Arab Emirates,” Journal of Political Economy,
  124(6): 1735–1792.

Pope, Devin G, Jaren C Pope, and Justin R Sydnor. 2015. “Focal points and bargaining in
  housing markets,” Games and Economic Behavior, 93: 89–107.

Rebitzer, James B and Lowell J Taylor. 1995. “Do Labor Markets Provide Enough Short-
  Hour Jobs? An Analysis of Work Hours and Work Incentives,” Economic Inquiry, 33(2):
  257–273.

Saez, Emmanuel. 2010. “Do taxpayers bunch at kink points?” American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 2(3): 180–212.

Shapiro, Carl and Joseph E Stiglitz. 1984. “Equilibrium unemployment as a worker disci-
  pline device,” The American Economic Review, 74(3): 433–444.

Shaw, Aaron D, John J Horton, and Daniel L Chen. 2011. “Designing incentives for inexpert
  human raters,” in Proceedings of the ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported cooperative
  work: 275–284, ACM.

Snir, Avichai, Daniel Levy, Alex Gotler, and Haipeng Allan Chen. 2012. “Not all price
  endings are created equal: price points and asymmetric price rigidity.”

Sokolova, Anna and Todd Sorensen. 2018. “Monopsony in Labor Markets: A Meta-
  Analysis.”

Solow, Robert M. 1979. “Another possible source of wage stickiness,” Journal of macroeco-
  nomics, 1(1): 79–82.

Starr, Evan P, Norman Bishara, and JJ Prescott. 2016. “Noncompetes in the US labor force.”

Stefanski, Leonard A and Raymond J Carroll. 1990. “Deconvolving kernel density estima-
  tors,” Statistics, 21(2): 169–184.

                                            48
Strulov-Shlain, Avner. 2019. “More than a Penny’s Worth: Left-Digit Bias and Firm Pricing,”
  University of California, Berkeley.

Thomas, Manoj and Vicki Morwitz. 2005. “Penny wise and pound foolish: the left-digit
  effect in price cognition,” Journal of Consumer Research, 32(1): 54–64.

Wang, Xiao-Feng and Bin Wang. 2011. “Deconvolution Estimation in Measurement Error
  Models: The R Package Decon,” Journal of Statistical Software, 39(10), p. i10.

Webber, Douglas A. 2016. “Firm-Level Monopsony and the Gender Pay Gap,” Industrial
  Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 55(2): 323–345.




                                             49
               Figure 1: Prevalence of Round Nominal Wages in the CPS




                                       .5
                        Share of workers with wages .00
                        .1        .2   0    .3       .4




                                                            1983    1988     1993   1998       2003   2008   2013 2016
                                                                                       Year
                                           50          40
                            # States with $10 modal wage
                           10        20    0   30




                                                             1980          1990         2000          2010        2020
                                                                                       Year


Notes. The top figure shows the CPS hourly nominal wage distribution, pooled between 2010 and
2016, in 10 cent bins. The middle figure shows the fraction of hourly wages in the CPS that end
in .00 from 2003 through 2016. The bottom figure shows the fraction of states with $10.00 modal
wages in the CPS. We exclude imputed wages.




                                                                                    50
Figure 2: Histogram of Hourly Wages In Pooled Administrative Payroll Data from Min-
nesota, Oregon, and Washington, 2003-2007
                                                                         Nominal wage distribution in 10 cent bins
                                                                           Administrative data from ORMNWA
                                                   .02
                 Probability (share of workers)




                                                  .015




                                                   .01




                                                  .005




                                                    0
                                                         0   200   400     600     800     1000    1200    1400      1600   1800   2000
                                                                                  Nominal wage in cents


Notes. The figure shows a histogram of hourly wages in $0.10 (nominal) wage bins, averaged over
2003q1 to 2007q4, using pooled administrative Unemployment Insurance payroll records from the
states of Oregon, Minnesota and Washington. Hourly wages are constructed by dividing quarterly
earnings by the total number of hours worked in the quarter. The counts in each bin are normalized
by dividing by total employment in that state, averaged over the sample period. The UI payroll
records cover over 95% of all wage and salary civilian employment in the states. The vertical line is
the highest minimum wage in the sample (7.93 in WA 2007). The counts here exclude NAICS 6241
and 814, home-health and household sectors, which were identified by the state data administrators
as having substantial reporting errors.




                                                                                      51
       Figure 3: Bunching in Task Rewards in Online Labor Markets - MTurk
                                             Reward distribution in 1 cent bins
                                                       MTurk Data

                             .15




                              .1
               Probability




                             .05




                              0
                                   0   500                  1000                  1500   2000
                                                  Nominal wage in cents


Notes. The figure shows a histogram of posted rewards by $0.01 (nominal) bins scraped from
MTurk. The sample represents all posted rewards on MTurk between May 01, 2014 and September
3, 2016.




                                                       52
Figure 4: Distribution of Randomized Rewards in the MTurk Experiment, and Result-
ing Probability of Task Acceptance
                                          .82




                                           .8
              Probability of Acceptance




                                          .78




                                          .76




                                          .74



                                                5        10                                15
                                                    Wage in cents


Notes. The figure shows the raw probability of accepting the bonus task as a function of the wage. Dots are
scaled proportionally to the number of observations.




                                                    53
                                       Figure 5: Oregon separation response by wage bin
                                .03




                                .02
              Separation Rate




                                .01




                                  0




                                -.01




                                -.02


                                           $9.60      $9.80          $10.00       $10.20   $10.40
                                                              10-cent wage bins


Notes: Estimated from quarterly matched worker-establishment data from Oregon 2003-2007. Separations
with blue circles are coefficient on $0.10 wage bin dummies relative to $9.90 (the bin right below $10.00),
and control for fully saturated interactions of current quarter, quarter of hire, starting wage bin ($0.10),
5-categories of weekly hours, and firm fixed effects. Robust standard errors are clustered at the 1-cent wage
bin level.




                                                                54
     Figure 6: Wal-Mart worker stated job mobility preference by offered wage bin




Notes: Estimated from responses of Wal-Mart workers in stated preference experiments. Stay probabilities
with blue circles are coefficient on $0.10 wage bin dummies relative to dit = -$0.10 (the bin right below round
number), and control for respondent fixed effect and $1 interval fixed effect. Confidence intervals constructed
from robust standard errors.




                                                      55
Figure 7: Excess Bunching and Missing Mass Around $10.00 Using Administrative Data
on Hourly Wages (MN, OR, WA)
               .02
               .015
               .01
               .005




                      800             1000                    1200             1400
                                              Wage in cents

                                      Missing Mass             Excess Mass
                                      Predicted PDF


Notes. The reported estimates of excess bunching at $10.00, and missing mass in the interval around
$10.00 as compared to the smoothed predicted probability density function, using administrative
hourly wage counts from OR, MN and WA, aggregated by $0.10 bins, over the 2003q1-2007q4
period. The darker shaded blue bar at $10.00 represents the excess mass, while the lighter red
shaded region represents the missing mass. The dotted lines represent the estimated interval from
which the missing mass is drawn. The predicted PDF is estimated using a sixth order polynomial,
with dummies for each $0.10 bin in the interval from which the missing mass is drawn. The width
of the interval is chosen by iteratively expanding the interval until the missing and excess masses
are equal, as described in the text.




                                                 56
Figure 8: Excess Bunching and Missing Mass Around $10.00 Using Measurement Error
Corrected CPS Data
                .02
                .015
                .01
                .005
                0




                       800             1000                   1200              1400
                                              Wage in cents

                                      Missing Mass             Excess Mass
                                      Predicted PDF


Notes. The reported estimates of excess bunching at $10.00, and missing mass in the interval around
$10.00 as compared to the smoothed predicted probability density function, using CPS data for
MN, OR, and WA, corrected for measurement error using the 1977 administrative supplement.
The darker shaded blue bar at $10.00 represents the excess mass, while the lighter red shaded
region represents the missing mass. The dotted lines represent the estimated interval from which
the missing mass is drawn. The predicted PDF is estimated using a sixth order polynomial, with
dummies for each $0.10 bin in the interval from which the missing mass is drawn. The width of
the interval is chosen by iteratively expanding the interval until the missing and excess masses are
equal, as described in the text.




                                                 57
Figure 9: Relationship Between Labor Supply Elasticity (η) , Optimization Frictions (δ)
and Size of Bunching (ω): Administrative Hourly Wage Data from MN, OR, and WA
                     δ




                                                         η


Notes. The solid, red, upward sloping line shows the locus of the labor supply elasticity η and optimization
frictions δ∗ = E[δ|δ > 0] consistent with the extent of bunching ω estimated using the administrative hourly
wage data from MN, OR, and WA between 2003q1-2007q4, as described in equation 26 in the paper. The
dashed lines are the 95 percent confidence intervals estimated using 500 bootstrap replicates.




                                                    58
             Figure 10: Heterogeneity in bunching by Oregon firm characteristics
                                           Firm size 1-50
                Firm size               Firm size 51-500
                                         Firm size > 500

                                    Firm effect quantile 1
                                    Firm effect quantile 2
                                    Firm effect quantile 3
                                    Firm effect quantile 4
        AKM firm effects            Firm effect quantile 5
                                    Firm effect quantile 6
                                    Firm effect quantile 7
                                    Firm effect quantile 8
                                    Firm effect quantile 9

                                              Agriculture
                                             Construction
                                           Manufacturing
                                           Other services
                 Sectors
                            Education and health services
                             Accomod. and food services
                                            Public admin.
                                    Retail and wholesale

                                 PT share above median
           Other features        PT share below median
                                            Entry wage
                                                             0       2             4             6        8
                                                                  Excess mass divided by latent density


Notes: AKM firm effects refer to deciles of firm effects estimated via Abowd et al. (1999), PT refers to part-time
workers (less than 20 hours).The omitted firm size category is over 500 workers; the omitted sector is Retail.
95 percent confidence intervals are based on standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                             59
Table 1: Task Acceptance Probability by Offered Task Reward on MTurk
                  (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)       (8)
 Log Wage      0.063***   0.077**   0.089**             0.120***   0.149**    0.227***
                (0.023)   (0.034)   (0.041)              (0.044)   (0.064)     (0.078)

 Jump at 10                -0.009                                   -0.019
                          (0.015)                                  (0.027)

 Spline                              -0.075                                    -0.132
                                    (0.140)                                   (0.254)

 Local                                         0.002                                      0.031
                                              (0.020)                                    (0.041)

 Global                                       -0.005                                      -0.009
                                              (0.014)                                    (0.025)

 η             0.080***   0.097**                       0.144***   0.179**
                (0.029)   (0.043)                        (0.053)   (0.077)

 Sample        Pooled     Pooled    Pooled    Pooled    Sophist.   Sophist.   Sophist.   Sophist.
 Sample Size    5017       5017      5017      5017      1618       1618       1618       1618

 Notes. The reported estimates are logit regressions of task acceptance probabilties on log wages,
 controlling for number of images done in the task (6 or 12), age, gender, weekly hours worked
 on MTurk, country (India/US/other), reason for MTurk work, and an indicator for HIT ac-
 cepted after pre-registered close date. Column 1 reports specification 1 that estimates the
 labor-supply elasticity, without a discontinuity. Column 2 estimates specification 2, which tests
 for a jump in the probability of acceptance at 10 cents. Column 3 estimates a knotted spline in
 log wages, with a knot at 10 cents, and reports the difference in elasticities above and below 10
 cents. Column 4 estimates specification 4, including indicator variables for every wage and
 testing whether the different in acceptance probabilities between 10 and 9 cents is different
 from the average difference between 12 and 8 (local) or the average difference between 5 and
 15 (global). Columns 5-8 repeat 1-4, but restrict the sample to "sophisticates": Turkers who
 respond that they work more than 10 hours a week and their primary motivation is money.
 Mean acceptance rate for the full sample is 0.78, and 0.8 for the sophisticates sample. Robust
 standard errors in parentheses.
 * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.5, *** p < 0.01




                                               60
              Table 2: Oregon Separation response around $10.00/hour jobs



                          (1)     (2)      (3)     (4)       (5)       (6)      (7)     (8)                     (9)
Log wage                -0.233* -0.192** -0.510* -0.277*** -0.558*** -0.242** -0.268* -0.268
                        (0.108) (0.075) (0.232) (0.063) (0.160) (0.091) (0.144) (0.152)

Jump at 10.00                                  0.021                0.018                0.002
                                              (0.016)              (0.010)              (0.007)

Spline                                                                                             -0.000
                                                                                                   (0.001)

Local                                                                                                         0.006
                                                                                                             (0.007)

Global                                                                                                       (0.005)
                                                                                                             (0.005)

η                       -3.055** 2.577** 6.834** 3.709*** 7.472*** 3.737*** 4.137*
                        (1.469) (1.023) (3.045) (0.846) (2.080) (1.401) (2.199)

Obs                     821797     755634     755634     380129    380129    100744     100744     100744    100744
Standard controls                    Y          Y          Y         Y         Y          Y          Y         Y
Sector and firm size                                       Y         Y
Firm FE                                                                         Y          Y          Y         Y

Notes. Baseline controls include saturated interactions between current quarter, quarter of hire, 0.10 starting wage
 bin, 6-part weekly lagged hours category. The outcome is all separations. The mean quarterly separation rate in this
 sample is 0.13. Exact 10-dollar bin defined as [10.00, 10.09]. Robust standard errors are clustered at the 1-cent wage
 bin level.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                    61
Table 3: Wal-Mart worker job mobility response to offered wage around a round num-
ber


                                                 (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)
      Log wage                                -0.618***    -0.625***    -0.456    -0.309
                                               (0.045)      (0.199)     (0.304)   (0.562)

      Jump at Round Number                                               -0.009
                                                                        (0.013)

      Spline                                                                       -1.058
                                                                                  (1.959)

      Local                                                                                   0.001
                                                                                             (0.021)

      Global                                                                                  -0.003
                                                                                             (0.017)

      η                                        3.164***     3.198***     2.336
                                                (0.231)      (1.021)    (1.554)

      Obs                                        9171        9171        9171       9171      9161

      Wage Relative to Round Number               N            Y           Y         Y          Y

      Notes. Estimated from responses of Wal-Mart workers in stated preference experiments. Re-
       gressions control for respondent fixed effect and $1 interval fixed effect. Dependent variable
       is an indicator variable that the subject chose "Stay at current job and do nothing", instead of
       "Ask for a Raise", or "Leave current job for offered job", and the sample mean of this variable
       is 0.39. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
      * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                   62
Table 4: Estimates for Excess Bunching, Missing Mass, and Interval around Threshold
                                                (1)                           (2)                             (3)                    (4)
      Value of w0                             $10.00                        $10.00                          $10.00                 $10.00

      Excess mass at w0                         0.010                         0.034                           0.014                  0.041
                                              (0.002)                       (0.008)                         (0.004)                (0.009)
      Total missing mass                       -0.013                        -0.043                          -0.016                 -0.033
                                              (0.009)                       (0.034)                         (0.017)                (0.047)
       Missing mass below                      -0.007                       -0.024                          -0.009                  -0.019
                                              (0.007)                       (0.023)                         (0.010)                (0.029)
       Missing mass above                      -0.006                       -0.019                          -0.007                  -0.014
                                              (0.008)                       (0.029)                         (0.013)                (0.036)

      Test of equality of missing
      shares of latent < and > 0:
        t-statistic                           -0.338                         -0.097                          -0.065                -0.151

                        Actual mass
      Bunching =       Latent density          2.555                         6.547                           4.172                  8.394
                                              (0.343)                       (6.476)                         (1.772)                (7.405)

      wL                                      $9.20                         $9.30                           $9.30                  $9.30
      wH                                      $10.80                        $10.70                          $10.70                 $10.70
           (w–H w0 )
      ω=      w0                               0.080                         0.070                           0.070                  0.070
                                              (0.026)                       (0.033)                         (0.034)                (0.033)

      Data:                             Admin OR & MN & WA       CPS-Raw OR & MN & WA            CPS-MEC OR & MN & WA            CPS-Raw

      Notes. The table reports estimates of excess bunching at threshold w0 , missing mass in the interval around w0 as compared to the
      smoothed predicted probability density function, and the interval (ω L , ω H ) from which the missing mass is drawn. It also reports
      the t-statistic for the null hypothesis that the size of the missing mass to the left of w0 is equal to the size of the missing mass to
      the right. The predicted PDF is estimated using a sixth order polynomial, with dummies for each bin in the interval from which
      the missing mass is drawn. The width of the interval is chosen by iteratively expanding the interval until the missing and excess
      masses are equal, as described in the text. In columns 1-3, estimates are shown for bunching at $10.00 from pooled MN, OR, and
      WA using the administrative hourly wage counts, the raw CPS data, and measurement error corrected CPS (CPS-MEC) over the
      2003q1-2007q4 period. Bootstrap standard errors based on 500 draws are in parentheses.




                                                                      63
                    Table 5: Robustness of Estimates for Excess Bunching, Missing Mass, and Interval Around Threshold
                                          Dum. for $0.5   Dum. for $0.25 & $0.5   Poly. of degree 4   Poly. of degree 7   Fourier, degree 3   Fourier, degree 6   Real wage poly.
                                              (1)                  (2)                   (3)                 (4)                 (5)                 (6)                 (7)
     Value of w0                            $10.00               $10.00                $10.00              $10.00              $10.00              $10.00              $10.00

     Excess mass at w0                        0.010               0.010                 0.010                0.010              0.010               0.009              0.010
                                             (0.002)             (0.002)               (0.001)             (0.002)             (0.001)             (0.001)            (0.002)
     Total missing mass                      -0.010              -0.011                -0.012               -0.013              -0.009             -0.017             -0.009
                                             (0.005)             (0.005)               (0.007)             (0.011)             (0.004)             (0.006)            (0.003)
      Missing mass below                      -0.007             -0.007                -0.006               -0.006              -0.007              -0.007            -0.004
                                             (0.005)             (0.005)               (0.005)             (0.007)             (0.004)             (0.005)            (0.003)
      Missing mass above                      -0.004             -0.004                -0.006               -0.006              -0.002              -0.009            -0.005
                                             (0.004)             (0.004)               (0.004)             (0.008)             (0.004)             (0.004)            (0.003)

     Test of equality of missing
     shares of latent < and > w0 :




64
       t-statistic                           -0.325              -0.341                -0.812              -0.595              -0.875              -0.830             -1.216

                          Actual mass
     Bunching =          Latent density       2.658               2.625                 2.594               2.566               2.643               2.233              2.664
                                             (0.297)             (0.298)               (0.293)             (0.342)             (0.238)             (0.285)            (0.238)

     wL                                      $9.40               $9.40                 $9.20               $9.20               $9.30               $9.40              $9.20
     wH                                      $10.60              $10.60                $10.80              $10.80              $10.70              $10.60             $10.80
          ( w H – w0 )
     ω=       w0                              0.060               0.060                 0.080               0.080               0.070               0.060              0.080
                                             (0.023)             (0.023)               (0.025)             (0.026)             (0.038)             (0.025)            (0.026)


     Notes. The table reports estimates of excess bunching at the threshold w0 as compared to a smoothed predicted probability density function, and the interval (ω L , ω H )
     from which the missing mass is drawn. All columns use the pooled MN, OR, and WA administrative hourly wage data. The predicted PDF is estimated using a
     K-th order polynomial or values of K between 2 and 6 as indicated, with dummies for each bin in the interval from which the missing mass is drawn. The width
     of the interval is chosen by iteratively expanding the interval until the missing and excess masses are equal, as described in the text. Columns 1 and 2 include
     indicator variables for wages that are divisible by 50 cents and 25 cents, respectively. Columns 3 and 4 vary the order of the polynomial used to estimate the latent
     wage. Columns 5 and 6 represent the latent wage with a 3 and 6 degree Fourier polynomial, respectively. Column 7 estimates the predicted PDF using a sixth order
     polynomial of real wage bins, as opposed to the nominal ones. Bootstrap standard errors based on 500 draws are in parentheses.
Table 6: Bounds for Labor Supply Elasticity in Administrative Data
                         (1)                           (2)                            (3)                      (4)
A. δ∗ = 0.01
δ                       0.001                         0.004                          0.002                   0.003
η                       1.337                         1.581                          1.581                   1.581
90% CI              [0.417, 2.050]                [0.417, 4.525]                 [0.472, 9.512]          [0.417, 4.525]
95% CI              [0.417, 2.871]                [0.417, 4.525]                 [0.417, 9.512]          [0.417, 4.525]

B. δ∗ = 0.05
δ                       0.005                         0.020                          0.011                    0.017
η                       3.484                         4.045                          4.045                    4.045
90% CI              [1.291, 5.112]               [1.291, 10.692]                [1.429, 21.866]          [1.291, 10.692]
95% CI              [1.291, 6.970]               [1.291, 10.692]                [1.291, 21.866]          [1.291, 10.692]

C. δ∗ = 0.1
δ                       0.010                         0.041                          0.022                    0.034
η                       5.112                         5.908                          5.908                    5.908
90% CI              [1.983, 7.421]               [1.983, 15.319]                [2.182, 31.127]          [1.983, 15.319]
95% CI             [1.983, 10.053]               [1.983, 15.319]                [1.983, 31.127]          [1.983, 15.319]

G(0)= G                 0.896                         0.592                          0.785                   0.662

Data:          Admin OR & MN & WA         CPS-Raw OR & MN & WA           CPS-MEC OR & MN & WA              CPS-Raw

Notes. The table reports point estimates and associated 95 percent confidence intervals for labor supply elasticities, η,
and markdown values associated with different values of optimization friction δ. All columns use the pooled MN, OR,
and WA administrative hourly wage data. In columns 1, 2 and 3, we use hypothesized values of δ of 0.01, 0.05 and 0.1
respectively. The labor supply elasticity, η, and the markdown are estimated using the estimated extent of bunching, ω,
and the hypothesized δ, using equations 26 and 2 in the paper. The 95 percent confidence intervals in square brackets
are estimated using 500 boostrap draws.




                                                         65
     Table 7: Bounds for Labor Supply Elasticity in Administrative Data — Robustness to Specifications of Latent Wage
                      Dum. for $0.5    Dum. for $0.25 & $0.5   Poly. of degree 4   Poly. of degree 7   Fourier, degree 3   Fourier, degree 6   Real wage poly.
                          (1)                   (2)                   (3)                 (4)                 (5)                 (6)                (7)
       A. δ∗ = 0.01
       δ                  0.001                0.001                0.001               0.001                0.001               0.002              0.001
       η                  1.909                1.909                1.337               1.337                1.581               1.909              1.337
       90% CI         [0.472, 2.050]       [0.472, 2.050]       [0.417, 2.050]      [0.417, 2.050]       [0.300, 2.871]      [0.538, 2.871]     [0.417, 2.050]
       95% CI         [0.417, 2.050]       [0.417, 2.050]       [0.417, 2.050]      [0.417, 2.871]       [0.247, 2.871]      [0.417, 4.525]     [0.417, 2.871]

       B. δ∗ = 0.05
       δ                  0.006                0.006                0.005               0.005                0.005               0.008              0.004
       η                  4.794                4.794                3.484               3.484                4.045               4.794              3.484




66
       90% CI         [1.429, 5.112]       [1.429, 5.112]       [1.291, 5.112]      [1.291, 5.112]       [0.984, 6.970]      [1.593, 6.970]     [1.291, 5.112]
       95% CI         [1.291, 5.112]       [1.291, 5.112]       [1.291, 5.112]      [1.291, 6.970]       [0.839, 6.970]     [1.291, 10.692]     [1.291, 6.970]

       C. δ∗ = 0.1        0.889                0.883                0.906               0.899                0.908               0.835              0.919
       δ

       Notes. The table reports point estimates and associated 95 percent confidence intervals for labor supply elasticities, η, and markdown values associated
       with hypothesized δ = 0.01 and δ = 0.05. All columns use the pooled MN, OR and WA administrative hourly wage counts. The first two columns
       control for bunching at wage levels whose modulus with respect to $1 is $0.5, and $0.5 or $0.25, respectively. Column 3 uses a quadratic polynomial to
       estimate the wage distribution, whereas column 4 uses a quartic. In columns 5 and 6, instead of polynomials, Fourier transformations of degree 3 and
       6 are employed. Column 7 estimates the predicted PDF using a sixth order polynomial of real wage bins, as opposed to the nominal ones. In row A,
       we hypothesize δ = 0.01; whereas it is δ = 0.05 in row B. The labor supply elasticity, η, and markdown values are estimated using the estimated extent
       of bunching, ω, and the hypothesized δ, using equation 26 and 2 in the paper. The 95 percent confidence intervals in square brackets are estimated
       using 500 boostrap draws.
Table 8: Bounds for Labor Supply Elasticity in Offline Labor Market - Heterogeneous δ
and η
                                                                                      Heterogeneous δ & η,        Heterogeneous δ & η,
                               Heterogeneous δ             Heterogeneous η
                                                                                            σδ = 0.1                     σδ = 1
     A. E(δ|δ > 0)= 0.01
     δ                               0.001                        0.001                       0.001                        0.001
     η                               1.668                        1.559                       2.469                        1.849
     90% CI                      [0.969, 4.394]               [0.917, 4.650]              [1.056, 5.446]               [0.758, 4.163]
     95% CI                      [0.845, 4.816]               [0.823, 5.328]              [0.905, 6.589]               [0.649, 5.062]

     Markdown                        0.375                        0.391                       0.288                        0.351
     90% CI                      [0.185, 0.508]               [0.177, 0.522]              [0.155, 0.486]               [0.194, 0.569]
     95% CI                      [0.172, 0.542]               [0.158, 0.548]              [0.132, 0.525]               [0.165, 0.606]

     B. E(δ|δ > 0)= 0.05
     δ                                0.006                       0.006                        0.006                       0.006
     η                                4.244                       3.991                        6.036                       4.616
     90% CI                      [2.629, 10.397]             [2.503, 10.965]              [2.808, 12.739]              [2.108, 9.833]
     95% CI                      [2.337, 11.346]             [2.284, 12.453]              [2.469, 15.445]             [1.837, 11.894]

     Markdown                        0.191                        0.200                       0.142                        0.178
     90% CI                      [0.088, 0.276]               [0.084, 0.285]              [0.073, 0.263]               [0.092, 0.322]
     95% CI                      [0.081, 0.300]               [0.074, 0.304]              [0.061, 0.288]               [0.078, 0.352]

     G(0)= G                         0.880                        0.880                       0.880                        0.880

     Data:                 Admin OR & MN & WA          Admin OR & MN & WA           Admin OR & MN & WA          Admin OR & MN & WA

      Notes. The table reports point estimates and associated 95 percent confidence intervals for labor supply elasticities, η, and markdown
      values associated with hypothesized δ=0.01 and δ=0.05. All columns use the pooled MN, OR, and WA administrative hourly wage
      counts. Heterogeneous δ and η are allowed in columns 1 and 2, using equations 27 and 28, respectively. Columns 3 and 4 allow
      heterogeneous δ and η, and assume a conditional lognormal distribution of δ, using a deconvolution estimator based on equation
      29. The third column assumes a relatively concentrated distribution of δ (σδ = 0.1); whereas the fourth column assumes a rather
      dispersed distribution (σδ = 1). In row A, we hypothesize δ = 0.01; whereas it is δ = 0.05 in row B. The 90 and 95 percent confidence
      intervals in square brackets in columns 1 and 2 (3 and 4) are estimated using 500 (1000) boostrap draws.




                                                                      67
Online Appendix A

Additional Figures

Appendix Figure A.1 plots the histograms of hourly wages in (nominal) $0.10 bins using
administrative data separately for the states of Minnesota (panel A), Oregon (Panel B) and
Washington (panel C). All are based on hourly wage data from UI records from 2003-2007.
Hourly wages are constructed by dividing quarterly earnings by the total number of hours
worked in the quarter. The counts are normalized by dividing by total employment in that
state, averaged over the sample period. The figure shows very clear bunching at multiples
of $1 in both states, especially at $10. Appendix Figure A.2 plots the overlaid histograms of
hourly wages, pooled across MN, OR, and WA, in real $0.10 bins from 2003q4 and 2007q4,
and shows that the nominal bunching at $10.00 occurs at different places in the real wage
distribution in 2003 and 2007.




                                             68
Figure A.1: Histograms of Hourly Wages In Administrative Payroll Data from Min-
nesota, Oregon, and Washington, 2003-2007
                                                                             Panel A: Minnesota
                                                                                    Nominal wage distribution in 10 cent bins
                                                                                         Administrative data from WA
                                                             .02




                           Probability (share of workers)
                                                            .015




                                                             .01




                                                            .005




                                                              0
                                                                   0   200    400     600     800     1000    1200    1400      1600   1800   2000
                                                                                             Nominal wage in cents



                                                                               Panel B: Oregon
                                                                                    Nominal wage distribution in 10 cent bins
                                                                                         Administrative data from OR
                                                             .02
                           Probability (share of workers)




                                                            .015




                                                             .01




                                                            .005




                                                              0
                                                                   0   200    400     600     800     1000    1200    1400      1600   1800   2000
                                                                                             Nominal wage in cents



                                                                             Panel C: Washington
                                                                                    Nominal wage distribution in 10 cent bins
                                                                                         Administrative data from WA
                                                             .02
                           Probability (share of workers)




                                                            .015




                                                             .01




                                                            .005




                                                              0
                                                                   0   200    400     600     800     1000    1200    1400      1600   1800   2000
                                                                                             Nominal wage in cents



Notes. The figure shows histograms of hourly wages in $0.10 (nominal) wage bins, averaged over
2003q1 to 2007q4, using administrative Unemployment Insurance payroll records from the states of
Minnesota (Panel A) , Oregon (Panel B), and Washington (Panel C). Hourly wages are constructed
by dividing quarterly earnings by the total number of hours worked in the quarter. The counts in
each bin are normalized by dividing by total employment in that state, averaged over the sample
period. The UI payroll records cover over 95% of all wage and salary civilian employment in the
states. The counts here exclude NAICS 6241 and 814, home-health and household sectors, which
were identified by the state data administrators as having substantial reporting errors.


                                                                                                69
Figure A.2: Histograms of Real Hourly Wages In Administrative Payroll Data from
Minnesota, Oregon, and Washington, 2003-2007

                                        Real wage densities in 2003q1 and 2007q1
                                        Administrative data from MN, OR, and WA
                            .03
      Probability density




                            .02




                            .01


                                                                                                2003 density
                                                                                                $10 nominal mode in 2003
                                                                                                2007 density
                                                                                                $10 nominal mode in 2007
                             0
                                  400    600   800   1000   1200   1400    1600   1800   2000
                                                Wage in cents, 2003q1$


Notes. The figure shows a histogram of hourly wages in $0.10 real wage bins (2003q1 dollars)
for 2003q1 and 2007q1, using pooled administrative Unemployment Insurance payroll records
from the states of Minnesota and Washington. The nominal $10 bin is outlined in dark for each
year—highlighting the fact that this nominal mode is at substantially different part of the real wage
distributions in these two periods. Hourly wages are constructed by dividing quarterly earnings
by the total number of hours worked in the quarter. The counts in each bin are normalized by
dividing by total employment in that state for that quarter. The UI payroll records cover over 95%
of all wage and salary civilian employment in the states. The counts here exclude NAICS 6241 and
814, home-health and household sectors, which were identified by the state data administrators as
having substantial reporting errors.




                                                                          70
Online Appendix B

Allowing Flexible Heterogeneity in η and δ

In this Appendix, we provide details on the derivations of the robustness checks in section
6.1. We also show the estimated CDFs for the distributions of δ and η under the different
distributional assumptions.
   For the first exercise, we continue to assume a constant η but allow δ to have an arbitrary
distribution G(δ|δ > 0) while continuing to fix the probability that δ = 0 at G. In this case,
for a given value of η the non-missing mass at ω would equal:


                                                            ω2
                                 φ (ω ) = 1 − Ĝ(η(1 + η)      )
                                                            2

   This expression implicitly defines a distribution Ĝ(δ):

                                                  s              !
                                                         2δ
                                Ĝ(δ) = 1 − φ                                                  (27)
                                                      η(1 + η)

                                                                 ω2
   Note that this implies that δ ∈ [0, δmax ] where δmax =       2 η(1 + η)   where ω is the radius
of the bunching interval. We then fix E(δ|δ > 0) at a particular value, similar to what
we do with δ∗ , and then can identify both an arbitrary shape of Ĝ(δ) as well as η. Figure
B.3 shows the distribution along with values of η from equation (27) in the MN-OR-WA
administrative data. As can be seen, a higher η implies a first-order stochastic dominating
distribution of δ; thus average δ is higher for higher η. This CDF also suggests our 2-point
distribution is not too extreme an assumption: the non-zero δ are confined to about 20%
of the distribution, and are bounded above by 0.11, suggesting that most firms are not
foregoing more than 10% of profits in order to pay a round number.
   A natural question is how our estimates could differ if, instead of a constant η and
flexibly heterogeneous δ, we assume a heterogeneous η with an arbitrary distribution H(η),
along with some specified distribution G(δ). The simplest variant of this is to consider


                                             71
a two-point distribution (where δ is either 0 or δ∗ ) as in our baseline case above. In this
variant of the model each firm is allowed to have its own labor supply elasticity, and each
firm either mis-optimizes profits by a fixed fraction δ∗ or not at all. In this case, solving for
the positive value of η, the missing mass at ω should be equal to:

                                                        r               !!
                                                  1           8δ∗
                          φ ( ω ) = [1 − G ] H              1+ 2 −1
                                                  2           ω

   Since we can identify G = G(0) = 1 − limω →0+ φ̂(ω), for a particular δ∗ we can empiri-
cally estimate the distribution of labor supply elasticities as follows:

                                                 s                !
                                                          8δ∗
                                           φ̂                2
                                                       (2η+1) −1
                                 Ĥ(η) =                                                          (28)
                                                      1−G
                                          ˆ for a given value of δ∗ :
   We can use Ĥ(η) to estimate the mean E(η)

                                                 Z ∞
                                       ˆ =
                                      E(η)             ηd Ĥ(η)
                                                 0
                                                                                     q
                                                                                 1            ∗
   Note that under these assumptions, η is bounded from below at ηmin =          2       1 + 8δ
                                                                                             ω2
                                                                                                − 1.
In other words, the lower bound of η from the third method is equal to the constant estimate
of η from our baseline, both of which come from the marginal bunching condition at the
boundary of the interval ω. While we can only recover the distribution of η conditional on
δ > 0 (i.e. those that choose to bunch), we can make some additional observations about
the parameters for non-bunchers. In particular, we can rule out the possibility that some
of the the non-bunchers have δ > 0 while being in a perfectly competitive labor market
with η = ∞. This is because in our model those firms would be unable to attract workers
from those firms with δ = 0 and η = ∞. The gradual reduction in the missing mass φ (ω )
that occurs from moving away from ω = 0 is entirely due to heterogeneity in η 0 s. It rules
out, for instance, that such a gradual reduction is generated by heterogeneity in δ0 s in
contrast to the second method. As a result, the third method is likely to provide the largest


                                                 72
estimates of the labor supply elasticity.
   In parallel fashion to the previous case, we graphically show the implied distribution
of η with a 2-point distribution for δ in Figure B.4. This figure shows the distribution of η
implied by different values of δ from the MN-OR-WA administrative data. As can be seen,
a higher η implies a first-order stochastic dominating distribution of η, thus average η is
higher for higher δ.
   Finally, we can extend this framework to allow for G(δ) to have a more flexible para-
metric form (with known parameters) than the 2-point distribution. We rely on recently
developed methods in non-parametric deconvolution of densities to estimate the implicit
H(η). If we condition on δ > 0,we can take logs of equation 20 (again maintaining that
γ = 0) we get


 2 ln(ω) = ln(2) − ln(η(1 + η)) + ln(δ) = ln(2) − ln(η(1 + η)) + E[ln (δ) |δ > 0] + ln(δres ) (29)


   Here ln(δres ) ∼ N(0, σδ2 ), and we fix E[ln (δ) |δ > 0] = ln ( E(δ|δ > 0)) + 12 σδ2 . We
can use the fact that the cumulative distribution function of 2 ln(ω) is given by 1 −
               
φ 12 exp(2 ln(ω) ) to numerically obtain a density for 2 ln(ω). This then becomes a well-
known deconvolution problem, as the density of − ln(η(1 + η)) is the deconvolution of the
density of 2 ln(ω) by the Normal density we have imposed on ln(δres ). We can then recover
the distribution of η,H(η), from the estimated density of − ln(η(1 + η)) + E[ln (δ) |δ > 0].
   We now illustrate how Fourier transforms recover the distribution H(η). Consider the
general case of when the observed signal (W) is the sum of the true signal (X) and noise
(U). (In our case W = 2 ln(ω) − E[ln (δ) |δ > 0] and U = ln(δres ).)


                                            W = X+U

     Manipulation of characteristic functions implies that the density of W is f W (x) =
                   R
( f X ∗ f U ) (x) = f X (x − y) f U (y)dy where ∗ is the convolution operator. Let Wj be the


                                               73
observed sample from W.
                                                               ˜ =                 f W (x)eitx dx =
                                                                               R
   Taking the Fourier transform (denoted by ∼) , we get that f W
f˜X × f˜U . To recover the distribution of X, in principle it is enough to take the inverse
                       f˜                                              1
                                                                         R −itx ∑ Nj=1 eitW
                                                                                         N
                                                                                            j

Fourier transform of fW ˜ . This produces a “naive” estimator   f
                                                                c X = 2π  e          φ(t) dt, but
                        U

unfortunately this is not guaranteed to converge to a well-behaved density function. To
obtain such a density, some smoothing is needed, suggesting the following deconvolution
estimator:

                                                              itWj
                                     1
                                         Z
                                               −itx
                                                          ∑N  e
                                                           j=1 N
                               fX =
                               c             e      K(th)        dt
                                    2π                      φ(t)

where K is a suitably chosen kernel function (whose Fourier transform is bounded and
compactly supported). The finite sample properties of this estimator depend on the choice
of f U . If f˜U decays quickly (exponentially) with t (e.g. U is normal), then convergence
occurs much more slowly than if f˜U decays slowly (i.e. polynomially) with t (e.g. U is
Laplacian). Note that once we recover the density for X = ln(η(1 + η)), we can easily
recover the density for η.
   For normal U = ln(δres ), Delaigle and Gijbels (2004) suggest a kernel of the form:


                                    cos(x)      15         sin(x)      5
                        K(x) = 48          (1 −    ) − 144        (1 −    )
                                     πx4        x2          πx5        x2

   We use the Stefanski and Carroll (1990) deconvolution kernel estimator. This estimator
also requires a choice of bandwidth which is a function of sample size. Delaigle and Gijbels
(2004) suggest a bootstrap-based bandwidth that minimizes the mean-integral squared
error, which is implemented by Wang and Wang (2011) in the R package decon, and we
use that method here, taking the bandwidth that minimizes the mean-squared error over
1,000 bootstrap samples.
   In Figure B.5, we show the distribution of η using the deconvolution estimator, as-
suming a lognormal distribution of δ. In the first panel, we estimate H(η) assuming the


                                                74
standard deviation σln(δ) = 0.1, which is highly concentrated around the mean. In the
second panel, we instead assume σln(δ) = 1. This is quite dispersed: among those with a
non-zero optimization friction, δ around 16% have a value of δ exceeding 1, and around
31% have a value exceeding 0.5. As a result, we think the range between 0.1 and 1 to repre-
sent a plausible bound for the dispersion in δ. As before, we see a higher E[δ|δ > 0] leads
to first-order stochastic dominance of H(η). For both cases with high- and low-dispersion
of δ, the distribution H(η) is fairly similar, though increase in σln(δ) tends to shift H(η) up
somewhat, producing a smaller E(η).




                                              75
                   Figure B.3: Implied Distribution of δ Under Constant η
                       1
                       0.8
                       0.6
                     G(δ)
                       0.4
                       0.2
                       0




                             0                             .05                             .1                             .15
                                                                            δ
                                         E(δ|δ>0) = 0.01                  E(δ|δ>0) = 0.05                  E(δ|δ>0) = 0.1
                             η is 1.073, 2.873, and 4.244 for E(δ|δ>0) = 0.01, E(δ|δ>0) = 0.05, and E(δ|δ>0) = 0.1, respectively


Notes. The figure plots the cumulative distributions G(δ) based on equation 27, for alternative values of
E(δ|δ > 0). The elasticity η is assumed to be a constant. The estimates use administrative hourly wage data
from MN, OR, and WA.




                                                                      76
          Figure B.4: Implied Distribution of η with a 2-point Distribution of δ
                        1
                        0.8
                        0.6
                     H(η)
                        0.4
                        0.2
                        0




                              0        1         2        3         4        5         6        7         8          9   10
                                                                             η
                                                  δ* = 0.01                     δ* = 0.05                     δ* = 0.1
                              E(η) is 0.924, 2.522, and 3.744 for δ* = 0.01, δ* = 0.05, and δ* = 0.1, respectively


Notes. The figure plots the cumulative distributions H(η) based on equation 28, for alternative values of
δ∗ = E(δ|δ > 0). δ is assumed to follow a 2-point distribution with δ = 0 with probability G and δ = δ∗ with
probability 1 − G. The estimates use administrative hourly wage data from MN, OR, and WA.




                                                                        77
Figure B.5: Implied Distribution of η using a Deconvolution Estimator where δ has a
Conditional Lognormal Distribution
                                                                                  σlnδ=0.1
                        1
                        0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
                     H(η)
                        0




                                          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920
                                                                                        η
                                                                  E(δ|δ>0) = 0.01                      E(δ|δ>0) = 0.05
                                          E(η) is 2.469 and 6.036 for E(δ|δ>0) = 0.01 and E(δ|δ>0) = 0.05, respectively



                                                                                    σlnδ=1
                        1
                        0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
                     H(η)
                        0




                                          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920
                                                                                        η
                                                                  E(δ|δ>0) = 0.01                      E(δ|δ>0) = 0.05
                                          E(η) is 1.849 and 4.616 for E(δ|δ>0) = 0.01 and E(δ|δ>0) = 0.05, respectively


Notes. The figure plots the cumulative distributions H(η) using a deconvolution estimator based on equation
29, for alternative values of E(δ|δ > 0). The procedure allows for an arbitrary smooth distribution of η, while
assuming δ is lognormally distributed (conditional on being non-zero) with a standard deviation σδ . The top
panel assumes a relatively concentrated distribution of δ with σδ = 0.1; in contrast, the bottom panel assumes
a rather dispersed distribution with σδ = 1. The estimates use administrative hourly wage data from MN,
OR, and WA.




                                                                                 78
Online Appendix C

Bunching in Hourly Wage Data from Current Population

Survey and Supplement

In this appendix, we show the degree of bunching in hourly nominal wage data using the
national CPS data. In Figure C.6, we plot the nominal wage distribution in U.S. in 2003 to
2007 in $0.10 bins. There are notable spikes in the wage distribution at $10, $7.20 (the bin
with the federal minimum wage), $12, $15, along with other whole numbers. At the same
time, the spike at $10.00 is substantially larger than in the administrative data (exceeding
0.045), indicating rounding error in reporting may be a serious issue in using the CPS to
accurately characterize the size of the bunching.
   We also use a 1977 CPS supplement, which matches employer and employee reported
hourly wages, to correct for possible reporting errors in the CPS data. We re-weight wages
by the relative incidence of employer versus employee reporting, based on the two ending
digits in cents (e.g., 01, 02, ... , 98, 99). As can be seen in Figure C.7, the measurement error
correction produces some reduction in the extent of visible bunching, which nonetheless
continues to be substantial. For comparison, the probability mass at $10.00 is around
0.02, which is closer to the mass in the administrative data than in the raw CPS. This is
re-assuring as it suggests that a variety of ways of correcting for respondent rounding
produce estimates suggesting a similar and substantial amount of bunching in the wage
distribution.



Online Appendix C.1            Heterogeneous η by Worker Characteristics-CPS

In Appendix Table C.1 we estimate the implied η for different δ∗ under our baseline 2-
point model across subgroups of the measurement corrected CPS data, as we do not have
worker-level covariates for the administrative data. We examine young and old workers,


                                               79
as well as male and female separately. Consistent with other work suggesting that women
are less mobile than men (Webber (2016); Manning (2011)), the estimated η for women is
somewhat lower than that for men. We do not find any differences between older and
younger workers. However, the extent of bunching is substantially larger for new hires
consistent with bunching being a feature of initial wages posted, while workers with some
degree of tenure are likelier to have heterogeneous raises that reduce the likelihood of
being paid a round number. We find that among new hires the estimated η is somewhat
higher than non-new hires. However, even for new hires—who arguably correspond
most closely to the wage posting model—the implied η is only 1.58 if employers who are
bunching are assumed to be losing 1% of profits from doing so, increasing to 4 when firms
are allowed to lose up to 5% in profits.




                                           80
       Figure C.6: Histogram of Hourly Wages in National CPS data, 2003-2007
                                                                       Nominal wage distribution in 10 cent bins
                                                                                2003-2007 CPS Data
                                                 .05
                Probability (share of workers)




                                                 .04



                                                 .03



                                                 .02



                                                 .01



                                                  0
                                                       0   200   400     600     800        1000   1200   1400     1600   1800   2000
                                                                                Nominal wage in cents


Notes. The figure shows a histogram of hourly wages by $0.10 (nominal) wage bins, averaged
over 2003q1 and 2007q4, using CPS MORG files. Hourly wages are constructed by average weekly
earnings by usual hours worked. The sample is restricted to those without imputed earnings. The
counts here exclude NAICS 6241 and 814, home-health and household sectors. The histogram
reports normalized counts in $0.10 (nominal) wage bins, averaged over 2003q1 and 2007q4. The
counts in each bin are normalized by dividing by total employment, averaged over the sample
period.




                                                                                       81
Figure C.7: Wage Bunching in CPS data, 2003-2007, Corrected for Reporting Error Using
1977 CPS supplement
                                                                         Nominal wage distribution in 10 cent bins
                                                                  2003-2007 CPS Data with measurement error correction

                                                  .02
                Probability (share of workers)




                                                 .015




                                                  .01




                                                 .005




                                                   0
                                                        0   200     400    600     800    1000   1200    1400   1600     1800   2000
                                                                                 Nominal wage in cents


Notes. The figure shows a histogram of hourly wages by $0.10 (nominal) wage bins, averaged
over 2003q1 to 2007q4, using CPS MORG files, where individual observations were re-weighted
to correct for overreporting of wages ending in particular two-digit cents using the 1977 CPS
supplement. Hourly wages are constructed by dividing average weekly earnings by usual hours
worked. The sample is restricted to those without imputed earnings. The counts here exclude
NAICS 6241 and 814, home-health and household sectors. The histogram reports normalized
counts in $0.10 (nominal) wage bins, averaged over 2003q1 and 2007q4. The counts in each bin are
normalized by dividing by total employment, averaged over the sample period.




                                                                                     82
     Table C.1: Bounds for Labor Supply Elasticity in U.S. Labor Market — Heterogeneity by Demographic Groups
                                                                                                                       Same job          Different job
                                                 Male             Female            Age<30            Age≥30
                                                                                                                     as last month     from last month
             Excess mass at w0                   0.018             0.015             0.030             0.012              0.014              0.028
                                                (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.006)           (0.003)            (0.003)            (0.006)
             Total missing mass                  -0.011            -0.012           -0.042            -0.012             -0.015              -0.023
                                                (0.009)           (0.007)           (0.013)           (0.006)            (0.007)            (0.012)

                             Actual mass
             Bunching =     Latent density       5.906             3.890             4.923             3.907             4.137              6.347
                                                (2.034)           (0.989)           (1.634)           (1.033)           (1.122)            (2.273)

             A. δ∗ = 0.01
             δ                                   0.002             0.001             0.003             0.001             0.002              0.003
             η                                   1.581             1.337             1.337             1.337             1.337              1.581
             90% CI                          [0.538, 4.525]    [0.618, 9.512]    [0.538, 4.525]    [0.618, 9.512]    [0.576, 9.512]     [0.538, 4.525]




83
             95% CI                          [0.472, 9.512]    [0.538, 9.512]    [0.472, 4.525]    [0.472, 9.512]    [0.472, 9.512]     [0.472, 4.525]

             B. δ∗ = 0.05
             δ                                    0.009             0.005             0.014             0.007             0.008             0.013
             η                                    4.045             3.484             3.484             3.484             3.484             4.045
             90% CI                          [1.593, 10.692]   [1.791, 21.866]   [1.593, 10.692]   [1.791, 21.866]   [1.687, 21.866]   [1.593, 10.692]
             95% CI                          [1.429, 21.866]   [1.593, 21.866]   [1.429, 10.692]   [1.429, 21.866]   [1.429, 21.866]   [1.429, 10.692]

             G(0)= G                             0.820             0.895             0.713             0.863             0.834              0.750

             Data:                             CPS-MEC           CPS-MEC           CPS-MEC           CPS-MEC           CPS-MEC           CPS-MEC

             Notes. The table reports point estimates and associated 95 percent confidence intervals for labor supply elasticities, η, and
             markdown values associated with hypothesized δ=0.01 and δ=0.05. All columns use the national measurement error corrected
             CPS data. The first two columns analyze by gender, the third and fourth by age, and the columns 5 and 6 by incumbency. In
             row A, we hypothesize δ = 0.01; whereas it is δ = 0.05 in row B. The labor supply elasticity, η, and markdown are estimated
             using the estimated extent of bunching, ω, and the hypothesized δ, using equations 26 and and 2 in the paper. The 95 percent
             confidence intervals in square brackets are estimated using 500 boostrap draws.
Online Appendix D

Testing Discontinuous Labor Supply on Amazon Mechani-

cal Turk Observational Data

Our Amazon Mechanical Turk experiment focused on discontinuities at 10 cents, while our
bunching estimator used the excess mass at $1.00. In this appendix we present evidence
from observational data scraped from Amazon Mechanical Turk to show that there is also
no evidence of a discontinuity in worker response to rewards at $1.00. Our primary source
of data was collected by Panos Ipseiros between January 2014 and February 2016, and, in
principle, kept track of all HITs posted in this period.
   We keep the discussion of the data and estimation details brief, as interested readers can
see details in Dube et al. (2018). Dube et al. (2018) combines a meta-analysis of experimental
estimates of the elasticity of labor supply facing requesters on Amazon Mechanical Turk
with Double-ML estimators applied to observational data.. That paper does not look at
discontinuities in the labor supply at round numbers.
   Following Dube et al. (2018) we use the observed duration of a batch posting as a
measure of how attractive a given task is as a function of observed rewards and observed
characteristics. We calculate the duration of the task as the difference between the first
time it appears and the last time it appears, treating those that are present for the whole
period as missing values. We convert the reward into cents. We are interested in the labor
supply curve facing a requester. Unfortunately, we do not see individual Turkers in this
data. Instead we calculate the time until the task disappears from our sample as a function
of the wage. Tasks disappear once they are accepted. While tasks may disappear due to
requesters canceling them rather than being filled, this is rare. Therefore, we take the time
until the task disappears to be the duration of the posting—i.e., the time it takes for the
task to be accepted by a Turker. The elasticity of this duration with respect to the wage
will be equivalent to the elasticity of labor supply when offer arrival rates are constant and

                                             84
reservation wages have an exponential (constant hazard) distribution.
   In order to handle unobserved heterogeneity, Dube et al. (2018) implement a double-
machine-learning estimator proposed by Chernozhukov et al. (2017), which uses machine
learning (we used random forests) to form predictions of log duration and log wage
                                          \ h ) and ln(wage
(using one half of the data), denoted ln(duration     \ h ),and then subtracts them

from the actual variable values in the other sample, leaving residualized versions of both
variables. The predictions use a large number of variables constructed from the metadata
and textual descriptions of each task, and have high out-of-sample predictive power, and
so the residuals are likely to reflect variation that, if not exogenous, are at least orthogonal
to a very flexible and predictive function of all the other observable characteristics of a
task. See Dube et al. (2018) for further details on implementation and estimation.
   We then estimate regressions of the form:


         ln(durationh ) − ln(duration
                              \ h ) = η × (ln(wageh ) − ln(wage
                                                          \ h )) + γ1w>w + e
                                                                        0




   Results are shown in Table D.2. We restrict attention to windows of wages around
our two most salient round numbers, 10 cents, where the window is 6 to 14 cents, and 1
dollar, where the window is $0.80 to $1.20. Across specifications, there is a clear negative
relationship between wages/rewards and duration, with a coefficient on η similar in
magnitude to the - 0.11 estimate obtained on the whole sample in Dube et al. (2018),
and close to the experimental estimates reported there. We also show analogues of our
experimental specifications from our pre-analysis plan. The first approach tests for a
discontinuity by adding an indicator for rewards greater than or equal to 10 or 100 (“Jump
at 10/100”). This level discontinuity is tested in specifications 3 and 4, and there is no
evidence of log durations becoming discontinuously larger above either 10 cents or $1.00.
The second approach tests for a slope break at $1.00 by estimating a knotted spline that
allows the elasticity to vary between 6 and 9 cents, 9 and 10 cents, and then greater than 10



                                              85
cents, or 81 and 95 cents, 95 cents and $1.00, and then greater than $1.00 up to $1.20. The
slope break specification is tested in specifications 5 and 6, where we report the change
in slopes at 10 cents and $1.00 (“Spline”). Again, there is no evidence of a change in the
relationship between log duration and log reward between 9 and 10 cents, vs greater than
10 cents, or $0.95 and $1.00 versus greater than $1.00.




                                            86
Table D.2: Duration of Task Posting by Log Reward and Jump at $1.00
                   (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
Log Wage        -0.089***    -0.066***   -0.089***    -0.069***   -0.090***    -0.070***
                 (0.024)      (0.014)     (0.024)      (0.015)     (0.025)      (0.015)

GEQ 10                                     0.014
                                          (0.018)

GEQ 100                                                 0.027
                                                       (0.026)

Spline 10                                                           0.084
                                                                   (0.225)

Spline 100
                                                                                 0.693
                                                                                (0.700)
Double-ML           Y           Y            Y           Y            Y            Y
Window             6-14       80-120        6-14       80-120        6-14       80-120

Sample size      59,654       39,442       59,654      39,442       59,654      39,442

 Notes. Sample is restricted to HIT batches with rewards between 80 and 120 cents.
 Columns 3, 4 and 8 estimate a specification testing for a discontinuity in the duration
 at $1.00, as in our pre-analysis plan, while columns 5 and 6 estimate the spline specifi-
 cation testing for a change in the slope of the log duration log reward relationship at
 $1.00, also from the pre-analysis plan. Significance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.




                                           87
Online Appendix E

Additional Experimental Details and Specifications from Pre-

analysis Plan

Figure E.1 shows screenshots from the experimental layout facing MTurk subjects. while
Table E.3 shows specifications parallel to those from the main text, except with the number
correct as the outcome, to measure responsiveness of subject effort to incentives. There is
no evidence of any effect of higher rewards on the number of images labeled.
   In Tables E.1 and E.2 we show specifications from our pre-analysis plan that parallel
those in E.2 and E.3, respectively. These were linear probability specifications in the level of
wages not dropping any observations, nor with any controls, instead of the specifications
with log wages and controls we show in the main text. We also pool the two different task
volumes. The initial focus of our experiment was to test for a discontinuity at 10 cents,
which is unaffected by our changes in specification. While the elasticity is qualitatively
very similar, albeit slightly smaller, the log wage specification shown in the text is closer to
our model, a variant of the model specified by Card et al. (2018), and improves precision
on the elasticity estimate.




                                              88
                     Figure E.1: Online Labor Supply Experiment on MTurk
                                                                                                           Page 3: Image Tagging Task



               Page 1: Consent Form




               The instructions are the same on all subsequent pages, but are collapsed (though they can
               be revealed by clicking the “Show” link).


               Page 2: Demographic Info Sheet

                                                                                                           Page 4: Option to Continue




Notes. The figure shows the screen shots for the consent form and tasks associated with the online labor
supply experiment on MTurk.
                                                                                                                                    2




                                                          1




                                                                                                    89
 Figure E.2: Online Stated Preference Experiment for Wal-Mart Workers on Facebook




Notes. The figure shows the screen shots for the stated preference experiment conducted on Facebook
with Wal-Mart. Items in the left column are characteristics of the worker’s current job at Wal-Mart, items
in the right column are hypothetical characteristics of an offered job, with differences from current job
highlighted in yellow. For the full survey go to: https://cumc.co1.qualtrics.com/jfe/preview/SV_
d4LInUIkk9d3CHX?Q_SurveyVersionID=current




                                                   90
Figure E.3: Distribution of Reported Wages and Hypothetical Offered Wages in Wal-
Mart Survey Experiment




Notes. The figure shows the density of survey respondent’s entered wages together with the density of
random hypothetical wage offers, the vertical line is at 11.00, which is Wal-Mart’s statutory minimum wage
as of January 2018.




                                                   91
Figure E.4: Wal-Mart Stated Preference Experiment: Asking for a Raise Does Not Jump
At Round Numbered Wages




Notes. The figure is identical to Figure 6 except the outcome is asking for a raise at the Wal-Mart job.




                                                      92
     Table E.1: Preanalysis Specifications: Task Acceptance Probability by Offered Task Reward on MTurk
                        (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)      (8)       (9)       (10)      (11)     (12)
       Wage            0.004     0.008     0.004               0.001     0.003     -0.003             0.008*     0.013    0.011*
                      (0.003)   (0.006)   (0.004)             (0.004)   (0.008)   (0.005)             (0.004)   (0.009)   (0.006)

       Jump at 10                          0.001                                   0.022                                   -0.021
                                          (0.016)                                 (0.022)                                 (0.025)

       Spline                    -0.002                                  0.193                                   -0.205
                                (0.156)                                 (0.206)                                 (0.236)

       Local                                         0.010                                   0.015                                   0.004
                                                    (0.023)                                 (0.031)                                 (0.034)

       Global                                       -0.000                                   0.011                                  -0.012




93
                                                    (0.015)                                 (0.020)                                 (0.023)

       η               0.052     0.090     0.050               0.015     0.035    -0.029              0.095*     0.157    0.140*
                      (0.033)   (0.071)   (0.048)             (0.042)   (0.087)   (0.062)             (0.051)   (0.116)   (0.073)

       Sample         Pooled    Pooled    Pooled    Pooled    6 HITs    6 HITs    6 HITs    6 HITs    12 HITs   12 HITs   12 HITs   12 HITs
       Sample Size     5184      5184      5184      5184      2683      2683      2683      2683      2501      2501      2501      2501

        Notes. The reported estimates are linear regressions of task acceptance probabilities on log wages, controlling for number of
        images. Column 1 reports specification 1 that estimates the labor-supply elasticity, without a discontinuity. Column 2 estimates
        specification 2, which tests for a jump in the probability of acceptance at 10 cents. Column 3 estimates a knotted spline in log
        wages, with a knot at 10 cents, and reports the difference in elasticities above and below 10 cents. Column 4 estimates specification
        4, including indicator variables for every wage and testing whether the difference in acceptance probabilities between 10 and
        9 cents is different from the average difference between 12 and 8 (local) or the average difference between 5 and 15 (global).
        Columns 5-8 repeat 1-4, but restrict the sample to "sophisticates": Turkers who respond that they work more than 10 hours a
        week and their primary motivation is money. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
        * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.5, *** p < 0.01
     Table E.2: Preanalysis Specifications: Task Correct Probability by Offered Task Reward on MTurk
                       (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)        (9)       (10)      (11)     (12)
     Wage            -0.001    0.001     -0.001              0.001    0.006*     0.001              -0.003**    -0.005    -0.003
                    (0.001)   (0.003)   (0.002)             (0.002)   (0.004)   (0.003)              (0.002)   (0.003)   (0.002)

     Jump at 10                          -0.000                                  0.000                                    -0.002
                                        (0.007)                                 (0.011)                                  (0.009)

     Spline                    -0.012                                  -0.013                                   -0.008
                              (0.067)                                 (0.101)                                  (0.087)

     Local                                         0.003                                  -0.000                                    0.006
                                                  (0.012)                                 (0.018)                                  (0.015)

     Global                                       -0.003                                  -0.007                                    0.000




94
                                                  (0.007)                                 (0.009)                                  (0.009)

     η              -0.009     0.014    -0.008               0.008    0.060*     0.008              -0.029**   -0.047*   -0.026
                    (0.013)   (0.024)   (0.018)             (0.020)   (0.036)   (0.029)              (0.015)   (0.028)   (0.023)

     Sample         Pooled    Pooled    Pooled    Pooled    6 HITs    6 HITs    6 HITs    6 HITs    12 HITs    12 HITs   12 HITs   12 HITs
     Sample Size     5184      5184      5184      5184      2683      2683      2683      2683      2501       2501      2501      2501

      Notes. The reported estimates are linear regressions of task acceptance probabilities on log wages, controlling for number of
      images. Column 1 reports specification 1 that estimates the labor-supply elasticity, without a discontinuity. Column 2 estimates
      specification 2, which tests for a jump in the probability of acceptance at 10 cents. Column 3 estimates a knotted spline in log
      wages, with a knot at 10 cents, and reports the difference in elasticities above and below 10 cents. Column 4 estimates specification
      4, including indicator variables for every wage and testing whether the difference in acceptance probabilities between 10 and
      9 cents is different from the average difference between 12 and 8 (local) or the average difference between 5 and 15 (global).
      Columns 5-12 repeat 1-4, but restrict attention to subsamples based on the number of images given (randomized to be either 6 or
      12). Robust standard errors in parentheses.
      * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.5, *** p < 0.01
Table E.3: Task Correct Probability by Offered Task Reward on MTurk
                 (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
Log Wage       -0.004    -0.000    0.011               0.008      0.016      0.032
              (0.012)   (0.017)   (0.018)             (0.023)    (0.034)    (0.042)

Jump at 10               -0.003                                   -0.005
                        (0.007)                                  (0.013)

Spline                             -0.019                                    -0.043
                                  (0.067)                                   (0.124)

Local                                        0.000                                      0.007
                                            (0.012)                                    (0.024)

Global                                      -0.004                                      -0.003
                                            (0.007)                                    (0.012)

η             -0.005    -0.000                         0.008      0.017
              (0.012)   (0.017)                       (0.024)    (0.035)

Sample        Pooled    Pooled    Pooled    Pooled    Sophist.   Sophist.   Sophist.   Sophist.
Sample Size    3966      3966      3966      3966      1345       1345       1345       1345

Notes. The reported estimates are logit regressions of getting at least 1 out of 2 images cor-
rectly tagged on log wages (conditional on accepting the task), controlling for number of
images done in the task (6 or 12), age, gender, weekly hours worked on MTurk, country (In-
dia/US/other), reason for MTurk, and an indicator for HIT accepted after pre-registered close
date. Column 1 reports specification 1 that estimates the labor-supply elasticity, without a
discontinuity. Column 2 estimates specification 2, which tests for a jump in the probability of
acceptance at 10 cents. Column 3 estimates a knotted spline in log wages, with a knot at 10
cents, and reports the difference in elasticities above and below 10 cents. Column 4 estimates
specification 4, including indicator variables for every wage and testing whether the different
in acceptance probabilities between 10 and 9 cents is different from the average difference
between 12 and 8 (local) or the average difference between 5 and 15 (global). Columns 5-12
repeat 1-4, but restrict attention to subsamples based on the number of images given (random-
ized to be either 6 or 12). Robust standard errors in parentheses.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.5, *** p < 0.01




                                             95
Online Appendix F

Theoretical extension: An efficiency wage interpretation where

effort depends on wage

In the main paper, we assume that the firm’s ability to set wages comes from monopsony
power. However, it may be recast in terms of efficiency wages where wage affects worker
productivity: there, too, the employer will set wages optimally such that the impact of
a small change in wages around the optimum is approximately zero. In this section, we
show a very similar logic applies in an efficiency wage model with identical observational
implications as our monopsony model, with a re-interpretation of the labor supply elasticity
η as capturing the rate at which the wage has to increase to ensure that the no-shirking
condition holds when the firm wishes to hire more workers. Indeed, the observation that
the costs of optimization errors are limited when wages are a choice variable was originally
made by Akerlof and Yellen (1985) in the context of an efficiency wage model.
    As in Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984), workers choose whether to work or shirk. Working
entails an additional effort cost e. Following Rebitzer and Taylor (1995), we allow the
detection of shirking, D(l), to fall in the amount of employment l(w).25 Workers quit with
an exogenous rate q. An unemployed worker receives benefit b and finds an offer at rate
s. The discount rate is r. All wage offers are assumed to be worth accepting; once we
characterize the wage setting mechanism, this implies a bound for the lowest productivity
firm. Finally, generalizing both Rebitzer and Taylor (1995) and Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984),
  25 In Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984), the detection probability is exogenously set. This produces some predic-
tions which are rather strong. For example, the model does not predict wages to vary with productivity, as
the no shirking condition that pins down the optimal wage does not depend on firm productivity. The same
is true for the Solow model, where the Solow condition is independent of firm productivity (see Solow 1979).
As a result, those models cannot readily explain wage dispersion that is independent of skill distribution,
which makes it less attractive to explain bunching. However, if we generalize the Shapiro-Stiglitz model to
allow the detection probability to depend on the size of the workforce as in Rebitzer and Taylor (1995), this
produces a link between productivity, firm size and wages. Going beyond Rebitzer and Taylor, we further
generalize the model to allow for heterogeneity in firm productivity, which produces a non-degenerate
equilbrium offer wage distribution.



                                                    96
we allow the wages offered by firms to vary; indeed our model will predict that higher
productivity firms will pay higher wages—leading to equilibrium wage dispersion.
   We can write the expected value of not shirking as:


                                                (1 − q)V N (w) qV U
                           V N (w) = w − e +                  +
                                                    1+r         1+r

   The value of shirking can be written as:


                               (1 − q)(1 − D)V S (w) (1 − (1 − q)(1 − D)) V U
               V S (w) = w +                        +
                                       (1 + r)                (1 + r)

   Finally, the value of being unemployed is:


                                             sEV N + (1 − s)V U
                                  VU = b +
                                                  (1 + r)

   The (binding) no shirking condition, NSC, can be written as:


                                        V N (w) = V S (w)

   Plugging in the expressions above and simplifying we get the no-shirking condition:


                                        r        e(r + q)
                                  w=       VU +
                                       1+r      D(l)(1 − q)

   We can further express V U as a function of the expected value of an offer V N and the
probability of receiving an offer, s, as well as the unemployment benefit b. However, for
our purposes, the key point is that this value is independent of the wage w and is taken to
be exogenous by the firm in its wage setting. Since detection probability D(l) is falling in l,
we can now write:


                                                  e (r + q )
                                D(l) =                     
                                                     1
                                           w − e + 1+r V U (1 − q)



                                                 97
     This generates a relationship between l and w:

                                                                               
                                                                                   
                                                                    1    U (1 − q)
                                    e (r + q )            w − e +  1+r V
             l(w) = D −1                         = d                          
                             w − e + 1 V U (1 − q)               e (r + q )
                                        1+r

     where d(x) = D −1 ( 1x ). Since D 0 (x) < 0, we have d0 (x) > 0. This is analogous to the labor
supply function facing the firm: to attract more workers who will work, one needs to pay
a higher wage because detection is declining in employment, D 0 (l) < 0. Therefore, we can
write the elasticity of the implicit labor supply function as:


                                         l 0 (w)w d0 (.)w    1−q
                                                 =        ×
                                            l(w)   d(.)     e(r + q)

.
     If we assume a constant elasticity d(x) function with elasticity ρ then the implicit
“effective labor” supply elasticity is also constant:


                                                l 0 (w)w       1−q
                                          η=             = ρ×
                                                   l(w)       e(r + q)

     The elasticity is falling in effort cost e, exogenous quit rate q, as well as the discount
rate, r. It is also rising in the elasticity ρ, since a higher ρ means detection does not fall as
rapidly with employment.
     The implicit effective labor supply function is then:

                                                                              1− q
                                                                      ρ×
                                                     wη w e(r+q)
                                              l(w) =   =
                                                     C    C

     which is identical to the monopsony case analyzed in the main text. For a firm with
productivity pi , profit maximization implies setting the marginal cost of labor to the
marginal revenue product of labor (pi ), i.e., wi =
                                                                        η       26
                                                                       1+η pi .
                                                                             
                                                                 η
                                       ( E(w)−e)(1+r)           1+η E(p)− e       (1+r)
    26 We   can also solve for V N =      r −b(1+r)     =          r −b(1+r)              . This implies we can write the equi-
librium value of being unemployed as a function of the primitive parameters as follows: V U =


                                                            98
     Finally, we can augment this labor supply function to exhibit left-digit bias. Consider
the case where for wage w ≥ w0 , the wage is perceived to be to equal to w̃ = w + g while
under w0 it is perceived to be w̃ = w. Now, the labor supply can be written as:
                                                    1
                                                                      
            − 1         e(r+q)                  (w−e+ 1+r V U )(1−q)
  l(w) = D                1                =d        e(r+q)
                                                                        for w < w0
                 ( w−e+ 1+r V U )(1−q)
                                                                         
                                                             1
            − 1           e(r+q)                  (w+g−e+ 1+r   V U )(1−q)
  l(w) = D                   1               =d           e(r+q)
                                                                             for w ≥ w0
                  (w+g−e+ 1+r   V U )(1−q)
  Note that under the condition that d(x) has a constant elasticity, the implicit labor
supply elasticity continues to be constant both below and above w0 . However, there is a
discontinuous jump up in the l(w) function at w0 . Therefore, we can always appropriately
choose a γ such that this implicit labor supply function can be written as:

                                                                1 w j ≥ w0               1− q
                                                                                     ρ× e(r+q)        1 w j ≥ w0
                                                         wη × γ                  w               ×γ
                                            l(w j , γ) =                     =
                                                              C                                  C

     Facing this implicit labor supply condition, firms will optimize:


                                                   Π(p, w) = (p − w)l(w, γ) + D(p)1w=w0

     With a distribution of productivity, p, higher productivity firms will choose to pay more,
as the marginal cost of labor implied by the implicit labor supply function is equated with
the marginal revenue product of labor at a higher wage. Intuitively, higher productivity
firms want to hire more workers. But since detection of shirking falls with size, this requires
them to pay a higher wage to ensure that the no shirking condition holds. Similarly, all
of the analysis of firm-side optimization frictions goes through here as well. A low η
due to (say) high cost of effort now implies that a large amount of bunching at w0 can be
consistent with a small amount of optimization frictions, δ.
     One consequence of this observational equivalence is that it may be difficult to distin-
guish between efficiency wages and monopsony. At the same time, it is useful to note that
many of the implications from this efficiency wage model are quite similar to a monopsony
           h                                               i
                b           e               ηE(p)
(1 + r )       r+s   −   1−b(1+r   +   (1+η )(r −b(1+r )



                                                                       99
one: for instance, both imply that minimum wages may increase employment in equilib-
rium, as Rebitzer and Taylor show. Therefore, while understanding the importance of
specific channels is useful, the practical consequences may be less than what may appear
at first blush.
   However, as an empirical matter, a variety of evidence suggests monopsony plays
an important role in explaining the prevalence of round-number bunching. First, in
our experimental analysis, we find that the evidence from online labor markets is more
consistent with a monopsony interpretation than an effort one, due to the absence of
any effect of wages on the number of images tagged correctly. Second, our finding from
the separations response to wage in the Oregon data is inconsistent with the efficiency
wage model above, which suggests a constant (exogenous) separation rate. Moreover, the
separation response to wage is driven primarily by job-to-job separations, i.e., likely to be
quits as opposed to firings; this pattern is inconsistent with efficiency wage models. Finally,
our stated preference experiment directly measures workers likelihood of quitting a job as
a function of wage, which again points to the relevance of monopsony power in mediating
the relatively low cost of mispricing in the labor market. At the same time, the extent to
which efficiency wage considerations are important, they suggest that our estimates for
optimization frictions (i.e., profit loss from mispricing) are likely to be an upper bound.




                                             100
