                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      IMPROVING NON-ACADEMIC STUDENT OUTCOMES USING ONLINE AND
                       TEXT-MESSAGE COACHING

                                        Philip Oreopoulos
                                        Uros Petronijevic
                                         Christine Logel
                                         Graham Beattie

                                       Working Paper 24992
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24992


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2018


We are indebted to the first-year economics instructors at the University of Toronto for their
willingness to incorporate an experiment into their courses for a third consecutive year. We
especially thank Aaron de Mello, our web developer, for his tireless commitment to designing
and perfecting the experiment’s website, as well as for his help with organizing and extracting the
experimental data. Dana Britton, Holly Fenton, Ayush Gupta, Aamir Husain, Anthony
Koundourakis-Soares, Julianna Lu, Sukhi Singh, and Kadachi Ye showed great enthusiasm and
professionalism in their role as coaches. Seminar participants at the Canadian Institute for
Advanced Research provided useful feedback. We also thank participants at the SOLE 2018
conference in Toronto for helpful comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Philip Oreopoulos, Uros Petronijevic, Christine Logel, and Graham Beattie. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Improving Non-Academic Student Outcomes Using Online and Text-Message Coaching
Philip Oreopoulos, Uros Petronijevic, Christine Logel, and Graham Beattie
NBER Working Paper No. 24992
September 2018
JEL No. I20,J24

                                         ABSTRACT

We design and experimentally evaluate two low-cost, scalable interventions – an online
preparatory module and a text-message coaching program – in a sample of over 3,000
undergraduate students at a large Canadian university. Supplementing administrative data on
academic outcomes with a unique follow-up survey on student well-being and study habits, we
estimate positive program effects on students’ non-academic outcomes, despite estimating null
effects on course grades and credit accumulation. Given the low costs associated with
administering these programs, our results suggest that the positive impacts on student experiences
may warrant program expansion even in the absence of impacts on academic outcomes.


Philip Oreopoulos                               Christine Logel
Department of Economics                         Renison University College
University of Toronto                           240 Westmount Road North
150 St. George Street                           Waterloo, ON N2L 3G4
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7                             Canada
CANADA                                          clogel@uwaterloo.ca
and NBER
philip.oreopoulos@utoronto.ca                   Graham Beattie
                                                Loyola Marymount University
Uros Petronijevic                               University Hall 4218
York University                                 1 LMU Drive
Department of Economics                         Los Angeles, CA 90045
Vari Hall                                       US
4700 Keele Street                               grb57@pitt.edu
Toronto, ON M3J 1P3
CANADA
upetroni@yorku.ca




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24992
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at AEARCTR-0000810
1. Introduction

Designing and evaluating student support programs remains a priority on the public policy agenda

in higher education, given a pervasive sense that many students underperform and acquire limited

skills throughout post-secondary education (Arum and Roksa 2011). This sentiment is reflected in

a growing literature that points to the promise of comprehensive support programs that bundle

financial aid, coaching, tutoring, and group activities to induce behavioral change among students.

Such programs have caused significant improvement in student grades and graduation rates,

proving effective at both two-year (Scrivener and Weiss 2013; Evans et al. 2017) and four-year

colleges (Bettinger and Baker 2014; Andrews, Lovenheim, and Imberman 2016; Page, Keho,

Caslteman, and Sahadewo, forthcoming). Although these programs tend to improve student

outcomes, they are often expensive and difficult to scale to large populations.

       To expand student support in a cost-effective way, researchers and policymakers are

increasingly turning toward briefer behavioral interventions that can be delivered to thousands of

students simultaneously at low cost. These programs aim to improve academic outcomes by

providing students with helpful information and encouraging them to focus more on the present,

avoid relying on unsuccessful routines, and associate less with negative identities (Lavecchia, Liu,

and Oreopoulos 2016, Damgaard and Nielsen 2018). Behavioral interventions are often built

around timely information provision (Castleman and Page 2015, Castleman and Page 2016,

Castleman and Meyer 2016; Oreopoulos and Petronijevic 2018), financial incentives (Angrist,

Lang, and Oreopoulos 2009; Angrist, Oreopoulos, Williams 2014), personal assistance and

coaching (Bettinger, Long, Oreopoulos, Sanbonmatsu 2012; Oreopoulos and Petronijevic 2018),

and attempts to help students develop more adaptive mindsets (Yeager et al. 2016; Bettinger et al.

2018). Their efficacy often depends on whether the target outcome involves immediate concrete

                                                 1
action (e.g., completing an application) or one that involves more continuous effort (e.g., GPA).

For example, interventions that offer personal assistance or provide timely information have been

shown to successfully affect relatively simple (often one-time) actions, such as completing a

financial aid application (Bettinger et al. 2012), enrolling in college (Castleman and Page 2015),

or renewing financial aid once enrolled (Castleman and Page 2016). In contrast, such interventions

have been less successful at affecting outcomes such as grades or credit accumulation, which

typically require continuous and sustained behavioral change from students (Angrist, Lang, and

Oreopoulos 2009; Castleman and Meyer 2016; Oreopoulos and Petronijevic 2018).

       While a large and still-growing literature finds comparatively small or null effects on

academic performance, less attention has been devoted to investigating the effects on non-

academic outcomes, such as mental health, school engagement, participation in extracurricular

activities, and students’ sense of belonging and support. These outcomes have important

consequential effects on overall well-being, both during a program and beyond. A national survey

of American college students, for example, found that fully 43% of students reported having felt

very lonely in the previous 30 days and 42% reported having felt overwhelming anxiety (American

College Health Association, 2018). Even among students with similar grades and persistence,

those who endure greater levels of stress and depression may suffer lower levels of immediate and

long-term utility. Non-academic outcomes are also becoming increasingly important as awareness

of mental health problems and care about student experience increases.

       Behavioral interventions may therefore make students feel happier, more engaged, or more

supported, even if they fail to nudge them towards academic improvement. For example, new

technologies like text messaging offer new means to converse with students conveniently and

quickly at home or on weekends. More detailed and personalized data can be used to flag those

                                                2
struggling and reach out to offer help. These new methods for communicating offer fascinating

possibilities for improving student experience and overall well-being.

        We explore these issues in this paper, focusing on two behavioral interventions – a

psychologically-informed and personalized online module and a text-message coaching program

– and demonstrating that non-academic outcomes are a potentially important metric by which to

evaluate program effectiveness. We design and experimentally evaluate the treatments in a sample

of over 3,000 undergraduate students at the University of Toronto (U of T) during the 2016-17

academic year and supplement administrative grades data with a unique (and mandatory) follow-

up survey designed to capture important non-academic outcomes.

        The first treatment requires students to complete a 60-minute, one-time, online module

during the first two weeks of class. 1 We designed the module based on the notion that a potential

barrier to the effectiveness of many large-scale interventions is their inability to target the broad

range of students’ diverse academic needs. For example, some students benefit from interventions

focused on study skills, while others have effective study skills and benefit more from

interventions addressing low motivation. Other students have both skills and motivation but are

hampered by stress in their personal lives, while students from historically underrepresented

groups may underperform because of the pressure from contending with negative stereotypes (see

Steele, 1997). To address the underlying heterogeneity among students, we incorporate a novel

design that lets students personalize their experience according to their own academic needs

through an online module we named ‘Choose Your Own Challenge,’ or CYOC.


1
  Interactive online modules are an increasingly common mode of delivering intervention materials, used, for example,
in social psychology research on adaptive mindsets (Yeager and Walton 2011; Walton 2014; Bettinger et al. 2018),
research on goal-setting interventions (Dobronyi, Oreopoulos, and Petronijevic 2017; Clark, Gill, Prowse, and Rush
2017), and research on timely information provision to graduating high school students (Oreopoulos and Ford 2016;
Hastings, Neilson, and Zimmerman 2018).

                                                         3
         The Choose Your Own Challenge (CYOC) treatment module teaches students helpful

academic behaviors while guiding them to reflect on, and then overcome, behavioral and

psychological barriers to implementing those behaviors. CYOC may also benefit future students

by helping the university better understand student transitions. Part One of the module presents

students with six broad factors critical to academic success, 2 with subsequent sections elaborating

on each factor and taking students through tasks that draw on psychological research on attitude

and behavior change. Part Two presents students with eight institutional barriers to success, most

related to academic success factors, but also related to the implications of being part of a negatively

stereotyped group, (i.e., “feeling that maybe ‘people like them’ are not especially welcome at U of

T”), or of experiencing significant life challenges, (i.e., “dealing with a great deal of personal

stress”). Students are invited to choose the two barriers most relevant to future students like them,

identify and write about a reason why students might struggle with this problem, and identify and

write about a potential solution.

         The second treatment begins with both parts of the CYOC module and then enhances it

with a text-message coaching program drawing on recent work in the economics of education

(Castleman and Meyer 2016; Oreopoulos and Petronijevic 2018). Treated students are matched

with senior undergraduate student coaches who offer advice and consultation via text message

throughout the academic year. Students assigned to the online CYOC condition completed only

that module, whereas students assigned to the enhanced text-message condition completed the

same online module and were additionally invited to join the coaching program. 3




2
  These include studying enough, studying effectively, seeking help, attending class, staying motivated, being patient
and taking a long-term perspective.
3
  As we describe below, students in the control group were given a personality test measuring their relative ranking
on each of the Big Five personality traits.

                                                          4
       With respect to academic outcomes, our results indicate that neither treatment is effective

at improving student grades or credit accumulation, both in the full sample and across student

subgroups. Taking advantage of a unique follow-up survey that was conducted at the end of the

fall semester, we then investigate treatment effects on non-academic outcomes. We follow the

method of Kling, Leibman, and Katz (2007) to aggregate student responses to the survey into two

main indices. The ‘core well-being’ index includes life satisfaction, belonging, confidence, and

depression (reverse-coded) and the ‘success strategies’ index includes measures of study strategies

and help-seeking, such as time management and frequency of meeting with instructors. We

estimate that the enhanced text-message coaching treatment improves the core well-being index

by 4 percent of a standard deviation and the success strategies index by 5 percent of a standard

deviation, on average. A more disaggregated analysis shows that the effects on these non-academic

outcomes are driven by treated students experiencing a greater sense of belonging and support and

seeking help more often from course instructors and tutors. Using student responses to direct

questions about the coaching program, we also show that the majority of treated students report

feeling supported by their coaches, appreciating the messages they receive from their coaches, and

having a better experience at U of T because of their coaches.

       The effects of the online CYOC module on its own trend in a positive direction on both

indices, at approximately 3 percent of a standard deviation, but are not statistically differentiable

from zero. However, our experimental design does not let us tease apart the degree to which this

online module contributed to the significant effects in the enhanced text-message coaching

condition, as the effects of the CYOC module alone and of the module enhanced with text-message

coaching are not statistically differentiable from each other. Given that our design does not include




                                                 5
a condition testing the text-message coaching treatment on its own, we cannot determine whether

treatment effects are additive, complementary, or entirely driven by the coaching treatment.

        To our knowledge, our paper is the first to provide evidence for the effects of a brief

behavioral intervention on non-academic outcomes in an education-based context. 4 Our findings

suggest that such interventions can improve student experiences in college, despite not causing

discernable improvement in course grades. Although the effects we estimate on student well-being

and success strategies are modest, both the CYOC module and the text-message coaching

intervention are relatively cheap to implement, suggesting that such programs are potentially worth

administering even when effects on grades or credit accumulation are not present. The cost of

administering the CYOC module together with the text-message coaching intervention is

approximately $12 per student when factoring in setup costs and $2 per student when only

considering the cost of sending and receiving text messages throughout the academic year. Our

findings that treated students felt supported by their coaches, appreciated the messages they

received, and thought coaches were in part responsible for their improved experience, suggest that

these types of program can be a cost-effective way for colleges to improve student experience and

support.

        Our paper also contributes to the growing literature on text-message interventions in

education contexts. These programs push helpful suggestions to students or their parents, with

content focused on tips for learning, studying, or navigating through the environment at a given

institution. They appear more effective when communicating with parents, as many studies

estimate positive effects on student achievement from providing information to parents about the



4
 For reviews on the literature of behavioral interventions in education, see Lavecchia, Liu, and Oreopoulos (2016)
and Damgaard and Nielsen (2018).

                                                        6
behavior and grades of their children and effective ways to help their children learn (Kraft and

Dougherty 2013; Kraft and Rogers 2014; Mayer et al. 2015; Bergman 2017; Bergman and Chan

2017; Kraft and Monti-Nussbaum 2017). The evidence on programs that communicate with

students directly is more nuanced. Sending messages to students with the goal of nudging them

toward taking one-time, relatively simple actions has proven effective – for example, such

interventions have been shown to increase the likelihood of students enrolling in college

(Castleman and Page 2015) and renewing financial aid (Castleman and Page 2016) once enrolled.

But texting campaigns have been relatively ineffective at changing outcomes for which

improvement requires sustained changes in student behavior, such as test scores, course grades, or

overall GPA (Fryer 2016; Castleman and Meyer 2016; Oreopoulos and Petronijevic 2018). Our

estimated null effects on student academic outcomes are consistent with this finding. The treatment

does improve non-academic outcomes, however, suggesting that future research on these

interventions should consider and attempt to estimate broader treatment effects in order to obtain

a more complete program evaluation.

       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a detailed

description of our interventions and their implementation. Section 3 describes the experimental

data and outlines our empirical strategy for estimating the treatment effects. Section 4 presents the

results, while Section 5 provides concluding remarks.

2. Description of the Intervention

The setup of the interventions in our study is similar to the one used in Oreopoulos and Petronijevic

(2018). Throughout the 2016-17 academic year, we ran an experiment at the main campus of the

University of Toronto (St. George). We partnered with all first-year introductory economics

instructors to make completion of our online ‘warm-up’ exercise worth 2 percent of students’ final

                                                 7
course grades. Students had to complete the exercise within the first two weeks of the fall semester

to receive course credit. The type of exercise each student completed depended on whether he or

she was randomly sorted to one of two treatment groups or the control group. We then administered

a follow-up survey to all students in the final two weeks of the fall semester, approximately 12

weeks after the intervention exercise. The survey solicited students’ feelings about non-grades

outcomes, such as life satisfaction, feelings of support and belonging, and self-reported study

habits. Completion of the follow-up survey was also worth 1 percent of students’ final grade in

their economics courses.

   All students started the online warm-up exercise by creating an account and completing the

same short introductory survey, in which they responded to background questions about their

parents’ education, their own expected educational attainment, first-year and international status,

work and study plans, and tendencies to procrastinate or become distracted. After completion of

the initial survey, students were randomly sorted to either a treatment group or the control group.

Students sorted to the CYOC treatment group completed an online module. Students sorted to the

text-message coaching treatment group also completed the online module but were additionally

offered the opportunity to provide a cell phone number and participate in a text-message coaching

program. Students assigned to the control group were given a personality test. We now describe

the treatment and control modules, as well as the follow-up survey, in more detail.

   2.1. Treatment One: Choose Your Own Challenge (CYOC) Online Module

   We conceptualized the CYOC module based on the premise that students succeed and maintain

well-being at least in part because of effective academic behaviors and adaptive perspectives.

Teaching students effective academic behaviors is necessary but not sufficient for their success, as

people can know effective behaviors but fail to follow through with them in nearly every domain.

                                                 8
Students also face a diverse array of barriers to implementing and following through with effective

behaviors. These barriers include low motivation, personal life stress, and common identity threat

concerns (i.e., concerns that one’s social identities, such as race, gender, or socioeconomic status,

could be devalued in a given context). Moreover, taking adaptive perspectives requires not just

learning what those perspectives might be, but having the opportunity to reflect on them and

incorporate them into one’s way of thinking about the world.

    As such, the CYOC intervention aimed to teach students effective behaviors and perspectives,

increase their likelihood of following through on the behaviors and taking on the perspectives as

their own, and address the diverse array of barriers to success, all while being cost-effective and

implementable to large numbers of students. Consisting of two parts, the entire CYOC online

module was designed to take 60 minutes to complete. An information page emphasized that the

purpose of the exercise was to allow U of T and the economics department to learn more about

students’ perceptions of the transition to university, with the intent of later using this information

to create helpful resources for future students. Stipulating that the information students provided

would be used to help future generations follows the format of most studies on the belonging

mindset (see, for example, Walton, Logel, et al. 2015). To underscore this framing, most segments

included items asking students about the degree to which most students already understand each

concept, or which one of a set of related statements they think is most relevant to most students.

    In part one, students were asked to think about their own future and education, which we

explained would help U of T better understand how students form strategies for achieving their

goals. 5 An initial page listed six broad strategies critical to academic success: studying enough,


5
 There is a growing literature devoted to understanding whether encouraging students to focus on their goals can
improve outcomes. See, for example, Dobronyi, Oreopoulos, and Petronijevic (2017) and Clark, Gill, Prowse, and
Rush (2017).

                                                        9
studying effectively, getting help when you do not understand, keeping up and going to class,

staying motivated, and being patient and taking a long-term perspective. Later subsections

elaborated on each strategy, using elements designed to educate participants about the factor,

change their attitude towards it, and then improve the intention-behavior link. For example, the

subsection on ‘studying enough’ started with evidence of its efficacy (e.g., noting the strong

relationship between studying and doing well) and provided detailed examples (e.g., finding at

least 20 hours a week; treating it as a full-time job). Next, it used an ‘implementation intentions’

writing task, shown to increase the likelihood of behavior change (e.g., Gollwitzer and Schaal,

1998), in which students created a plan for studying enough and committed to it. Part one of the

CYOC module also incorporated visualization techniques (e.g., “Let your mind imagine details of

your environment” and “Where are you sitting? What does the desk look like?”).

   Part two of the CYOC module was designed to address either barriers to carrying out the

behaviors and perspective changes from part one or barriers that can remain even when those

behaviors and perspectives are adopted (e.g., low motivation, personal life stress, and

psychological threats experienced by students whose social identities are underrepresented or

negatively stereotyped academically). It used a ‘self-persuasion’ design, in which students

meaningfully engage to develop the material rather than passively reading through pre-determined

content (see Canning and Harackiewicz 2015). To ensure that due consideration was given to each

component of the module, we placed varying minimum word-count and time restrictions on

several pages of the exercise.

   The activity was framed in the context of attributing academic struggles to changeable situation

factors rather than to unchangeable personal factors. To connect it to students’ identities, while

keeping it focused on helping future students, the introductory page described how U of T only

                                                10
accepts students whose records show that they have the motivation, background knowledge, and

skills to succeed, so each student is capable of doing well academically. It then presented a set of

situations that could interfere with academic success, ostensibly for the purpose of getting

students’ advice about which problems are most common and how to solve them.

    To prompt participants to connect this task to their own social identities, instructions describe

how U of T accepts more than 15,000 students each year, so it is highly likely that the following

year there will be at least some students with the same ethnic, religious, national background, age,

and many of the same strengths and struggles as the participant. The module then presented a series

of situational barriers to success, including those that could be related to social identity threat (e.g.,

“feeling that maybe ‘people like them’ are not especially welcome at U of T” and “Wondering if

they just don’t have what it takes to do well academically at U of T”), significant life challenges

(e.g., “dealing with a great deal of personal stress and challenges along with classes”), and the

academic success factors identified in part one (e.g., “Feeling unmotivated to devote time and

energy to doing well in university” and “waiting too long to seek out help when class concepts are

unclear”). Participants were asked to choose the two most important barriers for ‘people like them.’

    The survey program routed each student to content specific to the two barriers they chose. For

each of those two barriers, students were provided with four potential reasons for that barrier and

asked to choose one and write about why students might struggle with this problem. The four

reasons focused on changeable situational factors and some included a subtle message to change

students’ attributions. For example, for the barrier of “feeling that maybe people like them were

not especially welcome at U of T”, the four reasons were designed to convey a message that

belonging concerns are common (e.g., “Thinking they are the only ones wondering if they belong”

and “Seeing other students and thinking that they seem to be completely comfortable at U of T”).

                                                   11
Participants were then given a list of four solutions and asked to choose one and elaborate on it. In

the above example, solutions include “giving it time – realizing that, in time, most students come

to feel that they do belong at U of T.” Psychological interventions that convey to students

experiencing identity threat that belonging concerns are common and pass with time have been

shown to reduce belonging uncertainty and improve academic retention and success (see Walton

and Cohen 2011).

    Upon completion of the entire online module, students were emailed a printable poster of the

tips for success presented in part one. Full documentation for the online exercise is available in

Appendix A.

    2.2. Treatment Two: Online Exercise with Follow-Up Text-Message Coaching

A second group of students was randomly offered the opportunity to participate in a text-message

coaching program. These students also completed the CYOC module described above but, upon

completion, were asked to provide their phone numbers to participate in a text-message coaching

program. Branded You@UofT, 6 the coaching program was active throughout both the fall

semester of 2016 and the winter semester of 2017. The experiment featured a total of 10 coaches,

each being assigned between 70 and 185 students. The coaching team consisted of 8 senior

undergraduate students and two of the paper’s coauthors, Oreopoulos and Petronijevic, making a

team of 10 coaches. In the description of the data below, we provide details on the precise number

of students assigned to each coach.

        By assigning students to individual coaches, we attempted to combine the most promising

features of the text-messaging and in-person coaching treatments that are evaluated in Oreopoulos

6
  As in Oreopoulos and Petronijevic (2018), we chose the name to emphasize that the program would help coach
students toward their individual definitions of success.

                                                    12
and Petronijevic (2018). In that paper, we evaluated a mass two-way text-messaging campaign

that facilitated communication with a large sample of students at low cost but was ineffective at

improving outcomes. Students who participated in that text-messaging campaign were not

assigned to individual coaches; instead, they were sent mass texts every week in which we invited

them to share concerns and ask for help. In contrast, an in-person coaching treatment did improve

academic outcomes, likely because coaches could proactively initiate discussions with students

about challenges and establish relationships based on trust. The text-message coaching treatment

in this paper is designed to continue to reach a large sample of students at low cost while integrating

some of the features that made the in-person coaching program successful.

        To that end, eight undergraduate students with previous student support experience were

recruited to act as coaches. 7 Based on our results in Oreopoulos and Petronijevic (2018), coaches

were trained to message their students regularly and to gently encourage those students to discuss

the challenges they faced navigating through university. A web-based coaching platform we

designed provided coaches with the ability to make notes about each individual student, allowing

them to easily recall recently discussed topics with each student and follow-up regularly about

specific issues. Coaches could also program batch messages to be sent at specific times of the day,

further specifying subgroups of students to which each batch would be sent. Students could be

differentiated based on international or domestic status, first-year or non-first year status, and

incoming high-school grades. Coaches were also able categorize students into three distinct

categories (red, yellow, and green), which indicated the degree of help or attention the coach

deemed each student required.



7
 Most coaches participated through enrolling in a research opportunity course and received course credit rather than
payment. Two coaches were not eligible to take the course and received a stipend of about $2,000.

                                                        13
         Students who were randomly sorted to the text-message coaching treatment were offered

the opportunity to enroll and had to make an active opt-in decision if they wanted to participate.

Approximately 90 percent of students chose to opt-in, with less than 3 percent later choosing to

opt out. As mentioned, coaches were instructed to initiate communication with each of their

students at least once a week (often twice a week), which they typically did using pre-programed

batch messages designed to stimulate conversation. Coaches were also encouraged to follow-up

with individual students on the specific issues they had recently discussed to make sure that

students were effectively progressing. 8 Once contact was established, conversations evolved

organically, with coaches usually trying to determine how students were progressing throughout

university, both academically and emotionally. 9 Appendix B provides categorized summaries of

the different types of message that coaches sent.

    2.3. Control Group: Personality Test

As in Oreopoulos and Petronijevic (2018), students who were assigned to the control group at both

campuses were given a personality test measuring the Big Five personality traits. The test could

be completed in 45 to 60 minutes, and students were emailed a report describing their scores on

each trait upon completion of the exercise. Beattie, Laliberté, and Oreopoulos (2018) use the data

resulting from the personality test to explore non-academic predictors of performance in

university. The appendix of that paper provides a full description of the personality test.

    2.4. Follow-Up Survey




8
  Topics of conversation were also sometimes dictated by the events currently unfolding at the university. During
midterm and exam periods, for example, coaches tended to guide conversations toward making study schedules and
effective study strategies.
9
  Coaches did not act as tutors for course material; instead, they mentored students on effective study strategies, how
to learn from past mistakes, and how to seek out campus resources when extra help was required.

                                                          14
During the last two weeks of the fall semester, approximately 12 weeks after the initial treatments,

all students were again required to log into their accounts and complete a 15-minute follow-up

survey for an additional 1 percent of their course grade. We used the follow-up survey to solicit

students’ answers to questions about non-academic outcomes, such as life satisfaction, confidence,

feelings of belonging, and study habits, such as study strategies and the frequency with which they

sought help from instructors, tutors, and advisors. Most questions could be answered using

dropdown menus of prepopulated choices, but we also did ask all students to freely write responses

to open-ended questions about their biggest challenges to academic success, how the university

could better help them, and how they could better help themselves. Students who were in the text

message coaching treatment were also asked about their satisfaction with the coaching program

and open-ended questions about the how helpfulness of their coaches.

       Beattie, Laliberté, Michaud-Leclrec, and Oreopoulos (2017) use the data from this follow-

up survey to descriptively explore behavioral and mental health differences between high- and

low-achieving university students. The follow-up survey is documented in full in the appendix of

that paper. In Section 3.2 below, we discuss how we categorize the variables from this survey to

use them in our analysis of treatment effects on non-grades outcomes.




3. Data Description and Empirical Strategy for Estimating Treatment Effects

In this section, we describe the experimental data and sample, the follow-up survey, and the

interactions that took place between students and coaches in the text-message treatment. Having

described the environment, we then outline our empirical strategy for estimating treatment effects

on both academic and non-academic outcomes.


                                                15
     3.1. Experimental Randomization and Sample Description

We begin our data description by reporting the fractions of students sorted to treatment and control

groups. Prior to the experiment, we intended to randomly sort one-third of the students to each

group, based on the randomly-generated digits of their student numbers. 10 Table 1 shows that we

successfully reached our randomization targets: the p-values for the tests of the difference between

the realized and intended fraction are all well above conventional significance levels. Furthermore,

the completion rates for both the personality test and the treatment modules are very high, each at

99 percent.

     The full experimental sample consists of 3,395 students, from which 1,119 were assigned to

the control group, 1,154 were assigned to only complete the online module, and 1,122 were

assigned to the text-message coaching group. We could match 91 percent of the 3,395 students to

the university’s administrative data on grades on background characteristics, leaving us with a

final analysis sample of 3,088 students for estimating treatment effects on course grades. 11

     Table 2 presents summary statistics and balancing tests. Across a rich set of student

background variables – obtained from both our survey and the university’s administrative data –

almost no variables are statistically different, on average, between the control group and the two

treatment groups. The only exceptions are that students assigned to complete only the online

module are approximately 3.6 percentage points less likely to expect to earn an average grade of

at least A- and to self-report checking their cell phones often, while students assigned to the text-


10
   Students provided their student numbers upon registering online for the experiment and had a strong incentive to
provide the correct student number, as completion of the online exercise accounted for 2 percent of their final course
grade.
11
   The matching rate is not significantly different across treatment and control groups. Regressing an indicator variable
for whether a student cannot be matched to the grades data on treatment indicators results in coefficient estimates of
0.005 (se=0.012) and 0.019 (se=0.012) for the online only and the online with text message treatment groups,
respectively.

                                                           16
message coaching treatment are 3.3 percentage points more likely to report expecting to work (for

pay) more than 8 hours per week in the upcoming academic year. We show below that our main

results are robust to controlling for these and many other background variables.

    In terms of sample composition, half of our sample (55 percent) is female, and the average

student starts university at 18.45 years of age and has an incoming high school average of 90.45

percent. Approximately 72 percent of our sample consists of first-year students, 45 percent speak

English as their mother tongue, and 48 percent are international students. Approximately 43

percent of students live in residence and 29 percent of students are first generation (neither mother

nor father attended university). Most students (68 percent) plan to earn more than a bachelor’s

degree and at least an A- average throughout their undergraduate studies, but the average student

plans to study only 18.26 hours per week, less than the amount of time one would typically devote

to a part-time job.

    3.2. Follow-up Survey: Sample Description and Outcomes

We use twenty-four questions from the follow-up survey in our main analysis of treatment

effects. 12 To address the issue of multiple hypothesis testing directly and to draw general

conclusions about treatment effects on non-grades outcomes, we group student answers to these

questions into two main indices. We construct each index using the method of Kling, Leibman and

Katz (2007), by which we standardize a student’s answer to each question relative to the control

group mean and standard deviation and then take a simple (within-student) mean of the resulting

standardized variables to construct the index. As shown in Table 3, we broadly define the two main


12
   Among the students with available grades data, 465 (15 percent) did not complete the follow-up survey at the end
of the fall semester. The attrition rate, however, is not significantly different across treatment and control groups.
Regressing an indicator variable for whether a student completed the follow-up survey on treatment indicators results
in coefficient estimates of 0.016 (se=0.015) and 0.024 (se=0.016) for the online only and the online with text message
treatment groups, respectively.

                                                         17
indices as the ‘core well-being’ index and the ‘success strategies’ index, with the former being an

aggregation of 14 variables and latter being an aggregation of 10 variables. The last column of

Table 3 lists the questions that contribute to the construction of each index.

     These two indices are our main outcome variables from the follow-up survey. We provide a

further disaggregation of the core well-being index by breaking it apart into four sub-indices,

reflecting (i) overall satisfaction with life and the university, (ii) feelings of belonging at and

support by U of T, (iii) confidence to succeed at U of T, and (iv) overall depression or stress. The

success strategies index is also disaggregated into two sub-indices, reflecting (i) study strategies

and (ii) help-seeking behavior. In our empirical analysis below, we report treatment effects on the

two main indices and each of the sub-indices. 13

     3.3. Text Message Coaching Program and Data

Throughout the duration of the text-message coaching program, every text message sent by a coach

or student was stored, allowing us to assemble a large dataset of the text dialogue between each

student and his or her coach. To provide a fuller description of the text-message coaching program,

we present summary statistics from this dataset in Table 4, focusing our discussion on the

assignment of students to coaches and the resulting interactions that took place.

     The average coach was assigned 100 students; however, there was wide variation in the number

of students assigned to each coach: senior undergraduate coaches received between 70 to 95

students, while Oreopoulos and Petronijevic were assigned 185 students each. The variation in the

number of students per coach occurred because we achieved a higher opt-in rate (90 percent) into

the text-messaging program than we expected prior to launching the experiment. To avoiding

13
  Appendix C offers a completely disaggregated analysis of treatment effects on each of the twenty-four variables in
Tables C1 and C2.

                                                        18
breaking the workload agreements that we made with senior undergraduate coaches, we allowed

each coach to choose whether he or she would accept more than 70 students. Five coaches stopped

at approximately 70 students, three coaches accepted 95 students, and the remaining students were

assigned to Oreopoulos and Petronijevic.

     Prior to the time we stopped sorting students to all coaches (when approximately 700 students

had already completed the online exercise), students who were assigned to the text-message

coaching treatment were also randomly assigned to a coach. After we stopped directing students

to the coaches who did not wish to accept more than 70 students (and later, to coaches who did not

wish to accept more than 95 students), the sorting of students to coaches was no longer random.

Coaches who continued accepting students were less averse to a larger workload while the students

who were being sorted to these coaches completed the warmup exercise relatively late. Using

similar data from a prior experiment, Beattie, Laliberté, Oreopoulos (2018) show that these

students tend to have a strong tendency to procrastinate and do not perform well in their courses.

We address concerns over non-random sorting of students to coaches below by estimating

specifications that control for three ‘coach group’ binary variables, each of which captures the

sorting rule of students to coaches that applied during the (calendar) time when a student completed

the online module. 14 Controlling for these binary variables creates conditional random assignment

of students to coaches.

     Among the 1,122 students who were randomly offered the coaching treatment, 114 opted not

to provide a phone number and an additional 25 students asked to be removed from the program



14
  Students who completed during the initial time period were sorted to all coaches; students who completed during
the second time period were sorted to Oreopoulos and Petronijevic and senior undergraduate coaches who were
willing to accept between 70 and 95 students; and students who completed during the third time period were sorted
only to Oreopoulos or Petronijevic.

                                                       19
during of the academic year, leaving us with a total of 983 students in our dataset of text message

exchanges. A majority of students who were offered the coaching treatment (62 percent) sent a

text message to their coach at least once. On average, students sent 17 text messages to their

coaches in the fall semester and received a total 47 messages, with 32 of those messages being a

batch message the coach sent to many students at once. Engagement fell in the winter semester,

with students sending only 6 messages, on average, and receiving 23 from their coach, 18 of which

were batch messages.

   The average coach sent 1,521 non-batch messages and 3,122 batch messages to their students

in the fall semester. If we do not double count batch messages that go out to multiple students at

once, the average coach sent 47 unique batch messages in the fall semester. The decline in

engagement in the winter semester is again reflected in the number of messages sent by coaches,

as the average coach sent 482 non-batch messages, 1,734 batch messages, and 19 unique batch

messages.

   In Appendix B, we provide more detail about the batch text messages students received from

their coaches, presenting summary statistics on text characteristics and categorized examples of

select batch messages.

   3.4. Empirical Strategy for Estimating Treatment Effects

Having successfully randomized students across treatment and control groups, we estimate the

effects of the online-only and text-messaging treatments with a comparison of mean outcomes in

a simple regression framework. The main specification we estimate is given by


                         𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖 = 𝛽𝛽0 + 𝛽𝛽1 𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖 + 𝛽𝛽2 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖 + 𝜌𝜌′ 𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖 + 𝑢𝑢𝑖𝑖 ,   (1)




                                                            20
where the outcome of student 𝑖𝑖 is regressed on an indicator for the student being assigned to the

online (CYOC) treatment only, an indicator for the student being assigned to complete the online

module and receive text-message coaching and, in some specifications, additional student-level

control variables.

       The main parameters of interest are 𝛽𝛽1 and 𝛽𝛽2, the estimated average effects of the online

module alone and online module enhanced with the text-message coaching. These parameters

represent intent-to-treat effects, as students are included in the treatment groups if they are offered

the opportunity to work through the online module or provide a cell phone number (based on the

randomly-generated digits of their student numbers) without necessarily having to complete the

module or opt-in to texting messaging. Given that our completion rates and opt-in rate are quite

high, these estimates are likely close to the average treatment effect.

       Our main outcomes of interest are course grades, overall grade point average (GPA), the

number of credits earned, and the number of credits failed. In terms of non-grades outcomes, we

explore treatment effects on our core well-being and success strategies indices as well as the effects

on each of their sub-indices (described above). When the outcome of interest is course grades, we

stack all course grades and run a regression at the student-course level. In these cases, we cluster

standard errors at the student level. The effects on all other outcomes are estimated with regressions

at the student level and robust standard errors are reported.

4. Experimental Results

In this section, we present the estimated effects of the CYOC condition and the enhanced text-

messaging condition, followed by a series of robustness checks and an exploration of

heterogeneous treatment effects.


                                                  21
     4.1. Grades Outcomes

In Table 5, we estimate treatment effects on course grades using student-course level regressions

and clustering standard errors at the student level. In columns (1) and (2), we report the estimated

treatment effects from regressions without and with additional control variables. Importantly, the

set of control variables includes ‘coach group’ binary variables for the date the student completed

the online module, which preserves random assignment of students to coaches. 15 Treatment effects

for the online module and text-messaging program across all course grades are small and

statistically insignificant in both cases. Columns (3) and (4) show estimated effects on fall semester

(September 2016 - December 2016) courses, while columns (6) and (7) show effects on winter

semester (January 2017 – April 2017) courses. 16 Treatment effects are again statistically and

economically insignificant in both cases. In the last columns, (8) and (9), the dependent variable

is students’ first-year economics course grades, the class in which they completed the online

module. Here, the treatment effects are larger than those estimated across all courses, but they

remain small and insignificant.

     In Table 6, we further present estimated treatment effects on student GPA and credit

accumulation. Neither the online module nor the text-messaging treatment affected student GPA

or credit accumulation, as we find precisely estimated null effects across all courses taken

throughout the academic year, fall-semester courses, and winter-semester courses. Overall, the




15
   Additional control variables include student age, self-reported expected study hours per week, expected paid-work
hours per week, expected average grade, tendency to finish what he or she starts, tendency to get discouraged by
setbacks, tendency to study at the last minute, and indicator variables for first-year status, international student status,
first-generation status, gender, English mother-tongue status, whether the student lives on residence, a self-reported
desire to earn more than an undergraduate degree, and a self-reported tendency to check his or her cell phone often.
16
   Treatment effects in columns (1) and (2) were estimated using all available courses, which include those from the
fall semester, those from the winter semester, and those that run across both semesters and conclude in the winter.

                                                            22
evidence clearly demonstrates that the online-module and text-message coaching treatment are

ineffective at improving student grades and credit accumulation.

    4.2. Non-Grades Outcomes

Having shown that neither treatment affected student grades, we now explore treatment effects on

the indices created from our follow-up survey. Recall that the questions used to construct each

index are reported in Table 3.

        In Table 7, we report treatment effects on the core well-being index and its four sub-indices.

The estimates in columns (1) and (2) show that students in the coaching treatment scored 4 percent

of a standard deviation higher on the aggregate core well-being index. Breaking the index apart

into four sub-indices, the treatment effect is driven by the effect on students’ sense of belonging

and support, as treated students score 5.5 percent of a standard deviation higher on the belonging

and support index. Treatment effects on the three other sub-indices are also positive, although they

are not statistically distinguishable from zero.

        Although the estimated treatment effect of the online module on the core well-being index

is not statistically different from zero, it also not statistically different from the effect of the text-

message coaching treatment, as indicted by the p-values pertaining to the tests for treatment

differences. Comparing the effects of the online module and the text-message coaching treatments

on the sub-indices of the core well-being index indicates that, despite it not having an overall effect

on the core well-being index, the point estimates for the effects of the online module are sometimes

larger than the point estimates for the text-messaging treatment. In particular, students who only

completed the online module reported higher overall satisfaction with life and the university and

indicated great confidence to succeed in university. Taken together, we cannot rule out that the


                                                   23
significant effect for the text-message coaching treatment is driven, at least in part, by students

having completed the CYOC module.

         For completeness and to further investigate mechanisms, we report treatment effects on

each of the 14 variables used to construct the core well-being index in Appendix Table C1. The

estimates imply that the effects of the text-message coaching program operate by causing students

to feel more like being a student at U of T is a large part of their identity, like U of T wants them

to succeed, and like they know where to get advice at U of T. Treatment effects on these variables

range between 9.4 and 12.5 percent of a standard deviation and are statistically significant.

Students in the text-message coaching treatment also felt more supported by U of T and were less

likely to report having a tough transition to the university, although these effects are not statistically

significant at conventional levels. Overall, the evidence is consistent with the text-message

coaching program causing students to form stronger ties with the university and feel like they are

better equipped to navigate the challenges in their environment. 17

         We now turn to treatment effects on the success strategies index, which are reported in

Table 8. Students who were in the text-message coaching treatment scored 5 percent of a standard

deviation higher on the aggregate success strategies index. Breaking the index apart into its two

sub-indices in columns (3) to (6) shows that the effect is mainly driven by the help-seeking index,

although the point estimates of the effects on the strategies index are approximately the same

magnitude but estimated less precisely. Once again, we find that the effects of the text-message

treatment and the online module are not statistically different from each other, despite the latter

not having a statistically significant effect on student outcomes. The evidence is therefore


17
  As is the case for the main indices, despite the treatment effects for the online module not being statistically different
from zero, they are also not statistically different from the effects of the coaching treatment, suggesting that the
students in the coaching treatment may have benefited from completing the online module.

                                                            24
consistent with at least part of the text-message coaching treatment effect being driven by students

having completion of the CYOC module, although we cannot determine whether treatment effects

are additive, complementary, or driven entirely by the text-message coaching.

           In Appendix Table C2, we break apart the treatment effects on the success strategies index

and its two sub-indices by estimating treatment effects on each of the 10 variables used to construct

these indices. The effect of the online module combined with the text-message coaching program

on the aggregate indices is driven mainly by students meeting with instructors and free tutors more

often. Relative to the control group mean, the text-message coaching treatment increased the

number of times students met with instructors by 16.5 percent and the number of times they met

with free tutors by 17 percent.

           Given the evidence that the text-message program resulted in students meeting more often

with tutors and instructors, it may appear somewhat surprising that we estimate no treatment effect

on grades. There are two ways to reconcile these results. First, although the treatment increased

the frequency of student meetings with instructors by 16.5 percent, students in the control group

only met with an instructor 1.2 times, on average, during the fall semester. Therefore, despite

visiting instructors more often, treated students still met with instructors relatively few times.

Second, although we do not report these estimates here, we used the follow-up survey to estimate

treatment effects on students’ (self-reported) independent study hours outside of the classroom.

The text-message coaching treatment did not cause students to spend more time devoted to

independent weekly study throughout the fall semester. 18 Because students in the text-messaging




18
     These results are available upon request.

                                                   25
treatment did not study more on their own and visited instructors relatively little, it is perhaps not

surprising that we find no treatment effect on course grades.

        The evidence presented thus far shows that the text-messaging treatment caused students

to feel a greater sense of belonging and support at university and to seek help more often. Students’

answers to follow-up questions about the text-message coaching program demonstrate that the

majority of students enjoyed the program and felt that their experience in first semester was better

at least in part because of the program. During the follow-up survey, treated students were asked

to express the extent to which they agree with the following statements: “I feel my coach supports

me;” “I appreciate receiving messages from my coach;” and “I am doing better at U of T in part

because of my coach.” Figure1 shows the percentage of respondents who selected each of the

possible categories for each statement.

        Nearly 60 percent of students agree or strongly agree that their coach supports them, while

85 percent of students at least somewhat agree with that statement. Similarly, 54 percent of

students agree or strongly agree with the statement that they appreciate receiving message from

their coaches, while 79 percent of students at least somewhat agree. Relative to the first two

statements, student support for the statement that they are doing better at U of T because of their

coaches is a little lower, as only 20 percent of students agree or strongly agree with this statement,

but 56 percent of students at least somewhat agree. Fewer students feeling that their coaches are

at least partly responsible for them doing better at U of T than the number of students who

appreciate their coach’s messages or feel that their coach supports them is perhaps unsurprising,

given that the coaching program had no effect on student grades and that many students likely

interpreted the question as referring to doing better with respect to grades. It is clear, however, that




                                                  26
nearly all students (80 percent) felt supported by their coaches and appreciated receiving text

messages from them.

       Overall, the analysis of treatment effects on non-grades outcomes suggests that the text-

message coaching treatment caused students to feel a greater sense of belonging and support at U

of T and encouraged them to seek help from course instructors slightly more often than students

in the control group. Descriptive evidence from the follow-up survey also demonstrates that nearly

all students felt supported by their coaches and appreciated receiving text messages from them.

Despite the online module not having a statistically significant impact on non-grades outcomes,

the evidence is consistent with at least part of the text-message coaching treatment effects being

driven by students completing the online exercise.

   4.3. Robustness Checks

In this subsection, we argue for the integrity of our experimental design and show that our results

are robust to coach heterogeneity.

       As in any field experiment, the validity of the results hinges on the control and treatment

groups being balanced. As discussed above, the estimates in Table 2 show no significant

differences between pre-determined student variables across the control and treatment groups,

except for students in the text-message treatment group being slightly more likely to report

expecting to work more than eight hours per week (for pay) during the upcoming academic year

and students in the online-only group being slightly less likely to expect to earn at least an A-

overall grade and to check their cell phones often. In Tables 5, 7, and 8 above, we demonstrated

that our results are robust to controlling for these and many other pre-determined variables.




                                                27
       We also discussed above that students assigned to the text-message coaching treatment

were initially sorted to all coaches randomly but that, after approximately 700 students were in the

coaching program, we only kept sorting students to five coaches and then subsequently only kept

sorting students to two coaches. Although this introduced non-random sorting of students to

coaches (but still preserved random assignment to treatment), we can generate conditional random

assignment to coaches by controlling for ‘coach group’ binary variables that capture the time a

student completed the online module and was sorted to a coach. As shown above in Tables 5, 7, 8,

our experimental results are robust to including these additional controls.

       Apart from ensuring the treatment and control groups are balanced on pre-determined

variables, one may also be concerned about the importance of coach heterogeneity. Specifically,

with only 10 coaches, if coaches vary considerably in their quality, one may worry that the

estimated treatment effects are quite sensitive to the presence of particular coaches. We address

this concern by re-estimating many treatment effects for several outcomes of interest, with each

estimated effect being obtained from a specification in which we drop the students of a given coach

from the regression. The results from this exercise are presented in Appendix Table C3 for student

grades (across all courses), the core well-being index, the belonging and support sub-index, the

success strategies index, and the help-seeking sub-index. Each cell contains a treatment effect

estimated from a separate regression and the column numbers indicate the number corresponding

to the coach whose students we drop from the regression.

   Regardless of which coach is dropped, and consistent with our main results above, the

estimates in Appendix Table C3 indicate that the treatment was ineffective at improving student

grades but was effective at improving students’ non-grade outcomes. Further, all ten point

estimates for a given outcome are very similar in magnitude and are not statistically differentiable

                                                28
from the main point estimates in Tables 5, 7, and 8. We therefore conclude that the estimated

treatment effects are not driven by the effectiveness of any one particular coach.

   In sum, there is robust evidence that the text-message coaching intervention did not improve

student grades but it did modestly improve students’ sense of belonging and support and caused

students to seek out help more often from instructors and tutors.

   4.4. Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

Having established that the text-message coaching intervention caused modest improvements in

students’ non-grades outcomes, we now explore potentially heterogeneous treatment effects across

student subgroups. We focus attention on subgroups defined by gender, first-year student status,

international student status, and whether the student reports (in the pre-randomization survey)

experiencing below or above median difficulty in transitioning to university (on a 7-point scale).

Potentially differential effects by gender are often of interest in education interventions. We further

chose to explore the other three student subgroups because they each partition students into groups

that differ in their familiarity or comfort with university and life in Toronto and both of our

treatments are designed to help students form study strategies and adjust to university.

       The panels of Table 9 report treatment effects across student subgroups on grades and non-

grades outcomes. Turning first to heterogeneous treatment effects on course grades in panel (a),

neither treatment was effective at improving student grades in any subgroup, except for the text-

message coaching treatment having a positive effect among non-first-year students. Non-first-year

students comprise only 25 percent of our sample. Given the lack of an effect on grades in the

overall sample and in any other student subgroup, we believe it is likely that this result is due to

chance.


                                                  29
       Focusing next on non-grades outcomes in panels (b) to (e), text-message coaching

treatment effects are larger for female students than for male students across all non-grades

outcomes, but the point estimates are not statistically differentiable in any case. Among first-year

and non-first-year students, treatment effects on the core well-being index and its belonging and

support sub-index are larger among non-first year students but treatment effects on the success

strategies index and its help-seeking sub-index are larger for first-year students. In neither case are

the point estimates statistically differentiable. A similar theme emerges for the international-

domestic student comparison, as treatment effects on well-being are larger for domestic students

but treatment effects on success strategies are larger for international students. Again, however,

the point estimates are usually not statistically differentiable, except for the effects on the main

core well-being index. Splitting students by self-reported difficulty in transitioning to university

reveals slightly larger treatment effects on the core well-being index and its belonging and support

sub-index for students with less difficulty transitioning. Treatment effects on the success strategies

index are larger for students who report having above-median transition difficulty, while treatment

effects on the help-seeking sub-index are similar across both groups.

       Although treatment effect estimates are rarely statistically differentiable across subgroups,

the evidence is potentially suggestive of two conclusions. First, the text-message coaching

treatment may have been more effective for women than for men. Second, treatment may have

been more effective at improving well-being outcomes among students who are more familiar with

university and life in Toronto (non-first year students, domestic students, and those with less

difficulty transitioning to university) while it may have been more effective at improving success

strategies among students who are less familiar with university and city life (first-year students,

international students, and those with more difficulty transitioning). Ultimately, however,


                                                  30
treatment effects in the overall sample and across all subgroups are modest, making it difficult to

draw definitive conclusions about heterogeneous treatment effects.




5. Conclusion

In this paper, we designed and evaluated two large-scale behavioral interventions aiming to

improve student experiences in college. Students assigned to the first intervention completed a

novel online preparatory module while students assigned to the second intervention were also

offered the opportunity to participate in a coaching program, in which they were matched with

senior undergraduate coaches who mentored them via text message. We found that neither

intervention improved student grades or credit accumulation but that the online module enhanced

with the text-messaging program modestly increased students’ sense of belonging and support at

the university and caused students to seek out extra help from instructors and tutors more

frequently. We also cannot rule out that at least part of the effect of the text-messaging treatment

condition stems from students having completed the online preparatory module.

       An exploration of heterogeneous treatment effects revealed that the effects of the text-

messaging program on non-academic outcomes is driven by larger effects for female students,

consistent with many studies on behavioral interventions in education (see, for example, Angrist,

Lang, and Oreopoulos 2009 or Andrews, Lovenheim, and Imberman 2016). We also found

suggestive evidence that effects on well-being outcomes are greater among students who are more

familiar with life in the city and university while effects on success strategies are larger among

students who are less familiar. Ultimately, however, we lack the statistical precision required to

make definitive statements about heterogeneous treatment effects.


                                                31
         Although the treatment effects we estimate are modest, we note that the majority of

students in the text-message coaching intervention report feeling supported by their coaches,

appreciating their coach’s messages, and feeling like they are doing better in university partly

because of their coaches. Taken together, we view our results as the start of a conversation about

the importance of non-academic outcomes and student perceptions in the evaluation of behavioral

interventions in education contexts. Future evaluations should aim to consider treatment effects on

non-academic outcomes, such as student well-being and success strategies, in addition to

commonly explored outcomes like grades, credit accumulation, and persistence. As we

demonstrate in this paper, an intervention can improve student experiences in college and also be

perceived as beneficial by students while not necessarily affecting grades and credit accumulation.

         Given the potential effects on non-academic outcomes and the low-cost of text-messaging

programs, such interventions may be worth implementing even when they do not seem to affect

student grades. The interventions we evaluated cost approximately $12 per student enrolled when

we account for the setup costs of building the online platform. Conditional on having the platform,

the costs of the text messages we sent are approximately $2 per student. 19 Given the lower costs

of these programs than more intensive, in-person coaching models, the modest estimated effects

we found on students’ non-grades outcomes suggest that such programs are potentially worth

expanding, as they may improve student experience. 20




19
   This paper is part of a broader research agenda on low-cost, scalable interventions in education. To encourage
further research and help reduce the costs of building an online platform, we have made all interventions available
online and made them customizable for other researchers who are interested in implementation at their institutions.
For details, see https://studentachievementlab.org/
20
   We studied the interventions in the context of the U of T, an institution with more than 40,000 undergraduate
students and first year class sizes that are often in the hundreds. Interventions that help students become self-directed
or provide personalized assistance may be particularly valuable at this type of larger institution.

                                                           32
       Further research is needed to better understand how the effects we found generalize across

other institutions and student populations. It is also worth exploring whether such interventions

can be made even more targeted and cost-effective by experimentally varying the characteristics

of the text messages students receive to develop a stronger understanding of the types of messages

that generate student engagement and improve outcomes. We are currently exploring both avenues

in ongoing work.




                                               33
References

American College Health Association. American College Health Association-National College

       Health Assessment II: Reference Group Executive Summary Fall 2017. Hanover, MD:

       American College Health Association; 2018.

Andrews, Rodney J., Scott A. Imberman, and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2016. “Recruiting and

       Supporting Low-Income, High-Achieving Students at Flagship Universities.” NBER

       Working Paper # 22260. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Angrist, Joshua, Daniel Lang, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2009. “Incentives and Services for College

       Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” American Economic Journal:

       Applied Economics. 1(1):136-163.

Angrist, Joshua, Philip Oreopoulos, and Tyler Williams. 2014. “When Opportunity Knocks,

       Who Answers? New Evidence on College Achievement Awards” Journal of Human

       Resources. 49(3): 572-610.

Arum, Richard, and Josipa Roksa. 2011. “Academically Adrift: Limited Learning on College

       Campuses.” Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Beattie, Graham, Jean-William P. Laliberté and Philip Oreopoulos. 2018. "Thrivers and Divers:

       Using Non-Academic Measures to Predict College Success and Failure," Economics of

       Education Review. 62: 170-182

Beattie, Graham, Jean-William P. Laliberté, Catherine Michaud-Leclerc, and Philip Oreopoulos.

       2018. " What Sets College Thrivers and Divers Apart? A Contrast in Study Habits,




                                              34
       Attitudes, and Mental Health," NBER Working Paper # 23588. Cambridge, Mass.:

       National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bergman, Peter. 2017. “Parent-Child Information Frictions and Human Capital Investment:

       Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Columbia University Working Paper.

Bergman, Peter and Eric Chan. 2017. “Leveraging Parents: The Impact of High-Frequency

       Information on Student Achievement.” Columbia University Working Paper.

Bettinger, Eric, and Rachel Baker. 2014. “The Effects of Student Coaching: An Evaluation of a

       Randomized Experiment in Student Advising.” Educational Evaluation and Policy

       Analysis. 35(1):3-19.

Bettinger, Eric, Bridget Terry Long, Philip Oreopoulos, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 2012. “The Role

       of Application Assistance and Information in College Decisions: Results from the H&R

       Block FAFSA Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3):1205-1242.

Bettinger, Eric, Sten Ludvigsen, Mari Rege, Ingeborg F. Solli, and David Yeager. 2018.

       “Increasing Perseverance in Math: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Norway.”

       Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization. 146: 1-15.

Canning, Elizabeth A. and Judith M. Harackiewicz, 2015, "Teach It, Don't Preach It: The

       Differential Effects of Directly-Communicated and Self-Generated Utility-Value

       Information." Motivation Science, 1(1): 47-71

Castleman, Benjamin, and Lindsay Page. 2015. “Summer nudging: Can personalized text

       messages and peer mentor outreach increase college going among low-income high

       school graduates?" Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 115, 144-160.



                                              35
__________. 2016. “Freshman Year Financial Aid Nudges: An Experiment to Increase FAFSA

       Renewal and College Persistence.” Journal of Human Resources, 51(2): 389-415.

Castleman, Benjamin, and Katharine Meyer. 2016. “Can Text Message Nudges Improve

       Academic Outcomes in College? Evidence from a West Virginia Initiative.” Center for

       Education Policy and Workforce Competitiveness Working Paper # 43. Charlottesville,

       VA: University of Virginia.

Clark, Damon, David Gill, Victoria Prowse, and Mark Rush. 2017. “Using Goals to Motivate

       College Students: Theory and Evidence from Field Experiments.” NBER Working Paper

       # 23638. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Damgaard, Mette Trier and Helena Skyt Nielsen. 2018. “Nudging in education.” Economics of

       Education Review. 64: 313-342.

Dobronyi, Christopher R., Philip Oreopoulos, and Uros Petronijevic. 2017. “Goal Setting,

       Academic Reminders, and College Success: A Large-Scale Field Experiment.” NBER

       Working Paper #23738. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Evans, William N, Melissa S. Kearney, Brendan Perry, and James X. Sullivan. 2017. “Increasing

       Community College Completion Rates among Low-Income Students: Evidence from a

       Randomized Controlled Trial Evaluation of a Case Management Intervention.” NBER

       Working Paper # 24150. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fryer, Roland G. 2016. "Information, Non-Financial Incentives, and Student Achievement:

       Evidence from a Text Messaging Experiment.” Journal of Public Economics. 144:109-

       121.



                                              36
Gollwitzer, Peter M. and Bernd Schaal. 1998. “Metacognition in Action: The Importance of

       Implementation Intentions.” Personality and Social Psychology Review. 2(2): 124-136.

Hastings, J., Neilson, C. A., and Zimmerman, S. D. 2018. “The effects of earnings disclosure on

       college enrollment decisions.” NBER Working Papers # 21300. Cambridge, Mass.:

       National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of

       Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica. 75(1): 83-119.

Kraft, Matthew A., and Shaun M. Doughtery. 2013. “The Effect of Teacher–Family

       Communication on Student Engagement: Evidence from a Randomized Field

       Experiment.” Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness. 6(3):199-222.

Kraft, Matthew A., and Manuel Monti-Nussbaum. 2017. “Can schools enable parents to prevent

       summer learning loss? A text messaging field experiment to promote literacy skills.” The

       ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 674(1): 85-112

Kraft, Matthew A., and Todd Rogers. 2014. “The Underutilized Potential of Teacher-to-Parent

       Communication: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Harvard Kennedy School Faculty

       Research Working Paper Series, RWP-14-049. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University

Lavecchia, Adam, Heidi Liu and Philip Oreopoulos. 2016. “Behavioral Economics of Education:

       Progress and Possibilities” Handbook of Economics of Education. (5): 1-74.

Mayer, Susan E., Ariel Kalil, Philip Oreopoulos, and Sebastian Gallegos. 2015. “Using

       Behavioral Insights to Increase Parental Engagement: The Parents and Children Together




                                              37
       (PACT) Intervention.” NBER Working Paper #21602. Cambridge, Mass.: National

       Bureau of Economic Research.

Oreopoulos, Philip and Uros Petronijevic. 2018. "Student Coaching: How Far Can Technology

       Go?" Journal of Human Resources, 53(2): 299-329.

Oreopoulos, Philip and Reuben Ford. 2016. “Keeping College Options Open: A Field

       Experiment to Help All High School Seniors Through the College Application Process.”

       NBER Working Paper # 22320. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic

       Research.

Page, Lindsay C., Stacy S. Kehoe, Benjamin L. Castleman, Gumilang A. Sahadewo. “More than

       Dollars for Scholars: The Impact of the Dell Scholars Program on College Access,

       Persistence and Degree Attainment.” Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.

Scrivener, Susan and Michael J. Weiss. 2013. “More Graduates: Two-Year Results from an

       Evaluation of Accelerated Study in Associate Programs (ASAP) for Developmental

       Education Students.” Policy Brief, MDRC.

Steele, C. M. 1997. A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and

       performance. American Psychologist, 52(6), 613-629

Walton, Gregory. 2014. “The New Science of Wise Psychological Interventions.” Current

       Directions in Psychological Science. 23(1):73-82.

Walton, Gregory and Geoffrey Cohen. 2011. “A Brief Social-Belonging Intervention Improves

       Academic and Health Outcomes of Minority Students.” Science. 331: 1447-1451.




                                                38
Walton, Gregory, Christine Logel, Jennifer Peach, Steven Spencer, and Mark Zanna. 2015. “Two

       Brief Interventions to Mitigate a “Chilly Climate” Transform Women’s Experience,

       Relationships, and Achievement in Engineering.” Journal of Educational Psychology.

       107(2):468-485.

Yeager, David, and Gregory Walton. 2011. “Social-Psychological Interventions in Education:

       They’re Not Magic.” Review of Educational Research. 81(2):267–301.

Yeager, David, Carissa Romero, Dave Paunesku, Christopher S. Hulleman, Barbara Schneider,

       Cintia Hinojosa, Hae Yeon Lee, Joseph O’Brien, Kate Flint, Alice Roberts, and Jill Trott.

       2016. “Using Design Thinking to Improve Psychological Interventions: The Case of the

       Growth Mindset During the Transition to High School.” Journal of Educational

       Psychology. 108(3):374–391.




                                              39
Tables
                          Table 1: Treatment Randomization

                           Control             Online Only   Text Messaging


 Number of Students         1119                  1154           1122

 (i) Fraction of Total      0.329                 0.339          0.330

 (ii) Intended Fraction     0.33                   0.33           0.33

  p-value of (i) – (ii)     0.96                   0.22           0.95

 Completed Exercise         1110                  1143           1113




                                        40
                                                     Table 2: Summary Statistics and Balancing Tests
                                                        Control Sample Mean         Online Only Difference          Text Message Difference          P-Value from F-Test of No
Student Characteristics                                 [Standard Deviation]           [Standard Error]                 [Standard Error]                    Difference
Female                                                          0.548                       0.000                            -0.003                            0.987

                                                               [0.498]                      [0.022]                          [0.022]

Age in First Year                                              18.453                        0.057                            0.015                             0.624

                                                               [1.388]                      [0.061]                          [0.062]

High School Average Grade                                      90.448                        -0.233                           -0.292                            0.340

                                                               [4.032]                      [0.207]                          [0.213]

First-Year Student                                              0.715                        0.003                            0.012                             0.797

                                                               [0.452]                      [0.019]                          [0.019]

English Mother Tongue                                           0.446                        -0.012                           0.001                             0.816

                                                               [0.497]                      [0.022]                          [0.022]

Lives on Residence                                              0.431                        -0.001                           0.017                             0.650

                                                               [0.495]                      [0.022]                          [0.022]

International Student                                           0.478                        0.002                            0.012                             0.828

                                                               [0.500]                      [0.021]                          [0.021]

First-Generation Student                                        0.239                        0.006                            0.006                             0.925

                                                               [0.426]                      [0.018]                          [0.018]

Expects to Earn more than BA                                    0.711                        -0.015                           0.009                             0.463

                                                               [0.453]                      [0.019]                          [0.019]

Expects at least A- Average                                     0.682                       -0.036*                           -0.025                            0.172

                                                               [0.466]                      [0.020]                          [0.020]

Checks Cell Phone Often                                         0.471                       -0.037*                           -0.034                            0.147

                                                               [0.499]                      [0.021]                          [0.021]

Expected Study Hours/Week                                      18.265                        -0.139                           -0.317                            0.820

                                                              [12.095]                      [0.500]                          [0.505]

Expected Work Hours/Week > 8                                    0.298                        -0.002                          0.033*                             0.133

                                                               [0.457]                      [0.019]                          [0.020]

Not Discouraged by Setbacks (5-point Scale)                     3.440                        -0.048                           -0.047                            0.407

                                                               [0.964]                      [0.040]                          [0.041]

Finish what I start (5-point scale)                             3.814                        -0.021                           0.007                             0.695

                                                               [0.837]                      [0.035]                          [0.035]

Think about Future (7-point scale)                              2.393                        -0.025                           -0.040                            0.722

                                                               [1.214]                      [0.051]                          [0.050]

Tend to Cram for Exams (7-point scale)                          3.941                        0.001                            0.055                             0.602

                                                               [1.521]                      [0.064]                          [0.063]

Transition has been Challenging (7-point scale)                 4.685                        0.036                            -0.029                            0.628

                                                               [1.615]                      [0.068]                          [0.068]

Summary statistics and differences are calculated using the full sample of students. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1 percent
level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                      41
Table 3: Outcome Variables from Follow-Up Survey

    Main Index                Sub Index                                       Survey Question
                                                   All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole these
                                                   days?
                             Satisfaction
                                                   All things considered, how satisfied are you with your experience at
                                                   University of Toronto so far?



                                                   I feel like I belong here at U of T

                                                   Being a student at UofT is an important part of how I see myself

                                                   UofT wants me to be successful here
                            Belonging and
                               Support             I know where to go if I need academic advice

                                                   UofT does its best to help support me

Core Well-Being                                    Other students understand more than I do about how things work here at
                                                   UofT*

                                                   I often remind myself of my goals and motivations for being here at UofT

                                                   The transition to the University of Toronto has, so far, been challenging*



                                                   How important is it to you that you do well at U of T?

                              Confidence           How confident do you feel that you have the ability to do well at University
                                                   of Toronto?




                              Depression           Since the beginning of the academic year, I have felt sad or depressed*

                                                   Since the beginning of the academic year, I have felt very stressed*

                                                   I manage my time well

                                                   I try to learn from my mistakes on past tests and assignments
                           Study Strategies        I write thoughts and ideas down when I study to test my understanding

                                                   I get feedback from my writing assignments before handing them in

Success Strategies
                                                   Last term, how often did you meet with an instructor outside of class?

                                                   Last term, how often did you meet with an academic advisor?
                            Help Seeking           Last term, how often did you use a free academic tutor?

                                                   Last term, how often did you meet with a paid tutor?

                                                   Last term, how often did you attend a workshop?

                                                   Last term, how often did you participate in an informal study group?


*Responses to these variables are re-coded so that more beneficial outcomes have higher scores.




                                                        42
Table 4: Text Message Summary Statistics


                                                  (1)          (2)             (3)              (4)                 (5)
                                                 Mean       Standard         Minimum          Maximum            Number of
                                                            Deviation                                           Observations
Coaches

Number of Students Per Coach+                    100.8        45.75             70               185                 10

Number of Messages Sent by Coaches
 Fall Semester Non-Batch Messages               1,520.5       816.02            479             2,792                10
 Fall Semester Batch Messages                   3,121.7      2,729.71           834             9,355                10
 Fall Semester Unique Batch Messages*            46.5         24.80             21               87                  10
 Winter Semester Non-Batch Messages             481.60        225.67            171              854                 10
 Winter Semester Batch Messages                 1,733.7      1,908.55           488             6,859                10
 Winter Semester Unique Batch Messages*          18.7         10.28              9               40                  10

Students

Fraction of Treated Students Sending At           0.62         0.49              0                1                 1,122
Least One Message

Number of Messages Sent by Students
 Fall Semester Messages                          17.29        28.33              0               385                983
 Winter Semester Messages                        6.21         12.72              0               140                983

Number of Messages Received by Students
 Fall Semester Total Messages                    47.22        25.62              0               287                983
 Fall Semester Batch Messages                    31.76        14.33              0               61                 983
 Winter Semester Total Messages                  22.53        14.02              0               94                 983
 Winter Semester Batch Messages                  17.63        10.93              0               39                 983

+Multiplyingthe average number of students per coach by the number of coaches gives only 1,008 students. Of the 1,122 students
who were assigned to the text-messaging treatment, 114 declined to participate and were thus not assigned a coach. An additional
25 were asked to be removed from the program, bringing the number of students who appear in the text-message data down to 983.
*We avoid double counting by counting each pre-programmed batch message that coaches sent to their students only once, despite
such messages being received by many students of a given coach.




                                                              43
     Table 5: Treatment Effects on Stacked Grades

                          (1)           (2)              (3)          (4)           (6)          (7)              (8)              (9)
                          All Course Grades             Fall Course Grades         Winter Course Grades         Economics Grade

Online Only              -0.012             0.261       -0.687           -0.531     -0.163         0.085         0.452         0.823
                        [0.575]            [0.532]     [0.624]          [0.574]    [0.761]        [0.707]       [0.761]       [0.730]

Text Messaging           0.169              0.240       -0.434           -0.410     -0.015         0.012         0.618         0.717
                        [0.554]            [0.521]     [0.603]          [0.567]    [0.720]        [0.679]       [0.751]       [0.729]

Control Mean                      70.851                         72.999                      70.993                     67.957
[Standard
Deviation]                     [15.881]                       [14.120]                     [16.526]                     [15.995]

Controls?                 No                Yes          No               Yes         No              Yes         No             Yes

Observations            20,786          20,786          6,687         6,687          7,367         7,367         2,584         2,584
The dependent variable in each regression is indicated by the column headings. The unit of observation is a student-course.
Additional control variables include student age, self-reported expected study hours per week, expected paid-work hours per
week, expected average grade, tendency to finish what he or she starts, tendency to get discouraged by setbacks, tendency to
study at the last minute, and indicator variables for first-year status, international student status, first-generation status, gender,
English mother-tongue status, whether the student lives on residence, a self-reported desire to earn more than an undergraduate
degree, and a self-reported tendency to check his or her cell phone often. Standard errors clustered at the student level are
reported in brackets in columns (1) to (7). In columns (8) and (9), we report robust standard errors in brackets. *** indicates
significance at the 1 percent level; ** indicates significance at the 5 percent level; and * indicates significance at the 10 percent
level.




                                                                   44
Table 6: Treatment Effects on GPA and Credit Accumulation

                       (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)             (9)

                                 All Courses                                Fall Courses                               Winter Courses


                                  Credits        Credits                      Credits        Credits                      Credits         Credits
                      GPA         Failed         Earned         GPA           Failed         Earned         GPA           Failed          Earned



Online Only          0.041         -0.007         -0.036        0.023          0.013         -0.015         0.043         -0.002          -0.011
                    [0.040]       [0.037]        [0.064]       [0.043]        [0.011]        [0.025]       [0.046]        [0.015]         [0.028]
Text Messaging       0.034         -0.039         -0.009        0.012          0.005         -0.006         0.007         -0.020          -0.025
                    [0.041]       [0.035]        [0.063]       [0.044]        [0.010]        [0.025]       [0.047]        [0.014]         [0.028]


Control Mean         2.546         0.376          4.142         2.779          0.060          1.151         2.664          0.110           1.228
[Standard
Deviation]          [0.979]       [0.862]        [1.461]       [0.995]        [0.222]        [0.562]       [1.067]        [0.359]         [0.631]


Observations           3,075         3,075         3,075        2,783          2,783           2,783        2,807          2,807           2,807
The dependent variable in each regression is indicated by the column headings. All regressions are run at the student level and control for student
age, self-reported expected study hours per week, expected paid-work hours per week, expected average grade, tendency to finish what he or she
starts, tendency to get discouraged by setbacks, tendency to study at the last minute, and indicator variables for first-year status, international
student status, first-generation status, gender, English mother-tongue status, whether the student lives on residence, a self-reported desire to earn
more than an undergraduate degree, and a self-reported tendency to check his or her cell phone often. Robust standard errors are reported in
brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level; ** indicates significance at the 5 percent level; and * indicates significance at the 10
percent level.




                                                                         45
Table 7: Treatment Effects on Core Well-Being Index
                           (1)      (2)        (3)                                      (4)                 (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)                                (9)           (10)
                                                                                                                      Sub-Indices
                                     Core Well-Being                                                     Belonging & Support
                                          Index                      Satisfaction Index                         Index             Confidence Index                            Depression Index

Online Only                           0.018         0.028            0.047             0.061              0.012               0.018             0.047         0.066*           -0.016          -0.005
                                     [0.025]       [0.024]          [0.043]           [0.041]            [0.026]             [0.025]           [0.036]        [0.034]         [0.041]         [0.039]

Text Messaging                       0.046*        0.041*            0.039             0.034             0.058**            0.053**             0.036          0.034           0.012           0.007
                                     [0.025]       [0.024]          [0.043]           [0.042]            [0.026]            [0.025]            [0.037]        [0.035]         [0.042]         [0.040]

P-Value for Test of
Treatment Differences               0.275            0.577           0.859             0.517             0.0771               0.163             0.763          0.350           0.503           0.763

Controls?                              No            Yes              No                Yes                 No                 Yes               No             Yes              No             Yes
Observations                          2,623          2,623           2,623             2,623              2,623               2,623             2,623          2,623           2,623           2,623
The dependent variable in each regression is indicated by the column headings. Control variables include student age, self-reported expected study hours per week, expected paid-work hours per
week, expected average grade, tendency to finish what he or she starts, tendency to get discouraged by setbacks, tendency to study at the last minute, and indicator variables for first-year status,
international student status, first-generation status, gender, English mother-tongue status, whether the student lives on residence, a self-reported desire to earn more than an undergraduate degree,
and a self-reported tendency to check his or her cell phone often. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. * indicates is significance at the 10 percent level; ** indicates significance at the
5 percent level; *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                                  46
Table 8: Treatment Effects on Success Strategies Index
                           (1)        (2)         (3)                                    (4)            (5)                     (6)
                                                                                               Sub-Indices
                                     Success Strategies
                                          Index                         Strategies Index                  Help-Seeking Index

Online Only                           0.029          0.034            0.032            0.041               0.027              0.030
                                     [0.023]        [0.022]          [0.033]          [0.031]             [0.027]            [0.026]

Text Messaging                      0.055**         0.051**           0.050            0.043             0.057**             0.057**
                                    [0.023]         [0.022]          [0.032]          [0.030]            [0.027]             [0.027]

P-Value for Test of
Treatment Differences                 0.271           0.431           0.655             0.966              0.263              0.306


Controls?                               No             Yes              No               Yes                 No                 Yes
Observations                          2,623           2,623           2,623             2,623              2,623              2,623
The dependent variable in each regression is indicated by the column headings. Control variables include student age, self-reported
expected study hours per week, expected paid-work hours per week, expected average grade, tendency to finish what he or she starts,
tendency to get discouraged by setbacks, tendency to study at the last minute, and indicator variables for first-year status, international
student status, first-generation status, gender, English mother-tongue status, whether the student lives on residence, a self-reported
desire to earn more than an undergraduate degree, and a self-reported tendency to check his or her cell phone often. Robust standard
errors are reported in brackets. * indicates is significance at the 10 percent level; ** indicates significance at the 5 percent level; ***
indicates significance at the 1 percent level.




                                                                   47
Table 9: Treatment Effects Across Student Subgroups


                                                                                                                        Transition Difficulty
                                    Gender                First Year Status           International Student                     (TD)
                              (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)                 (5)         (6)                (7)            (8)
                                                         First         Not First
                            Female         Male          Year           Year          International     Domestic      TD > Median       TD < Median
                                                                             Panel (a): Grades
Online Only                 -0.435         1.121        0.439           -0.436        -0.221             0.848           0.272              0.129
                            [0.657]       [0.863]      [0.540]         [1.405]        [0.816]           [0.683]         [0.779]            [0.712]
Text Messaging              -0.362         0.924        -0.395         2.686**         0.378             0.205           -0.112             0.287
                            [0.662]       [0.826]      [0.543]         [1.336]        [0.783]           [0.693]         [0.744]            [0.721]

Control Mean                70.976        70.696       72.305          66.407            69.645          71.933          72.017            69.896
[Standard
Deviation]                 [15.388]      [16.472]      [14.756]       [18.206]          [16.603]        [15.124]        [15.125]          [16.414]

                                                                    Panel (b): Core Well-Being Index
Online Only                  0.022         0.029        0.027          0.024         -0.002       0.047                  0.052              0.023
                            [0.031]       [0.037]      [0.026]        [0.058]        [0.033]     [0.035]                [0.034]            [0.033]
Text Messaging              0.057*         0.016        0.030          0.101         -0.003      0.084**                 0.042             0.052*
                            [0.031]       [0.036]      [0.025]        [0.066]        [0.033]     [0.034]                [0.035]            [0.031]

                                                                  Panel (c): Belonging and Support Index
Online Only                 0.004          0.029        0.020           0.004         -0.008       0.034                 0.037             0.016
                           [0.032]        [0.039]      [0.027]        [0.062]         [0.034]     [0.036]               [0.036]           [0.034]
Text Messaging             0.075**         0.019       0.044*           0.107          0.015     0.089**                 0.046            0.070**
                           [0.032]        [0.038]      [0.026]        [0.072]         [0.033]     [0.036]               [0.036]           [0.033]

                                                                    Panel (d): Success Strategies Index
Online Only                  0.033         0.036       0.048**         -0.015         0.039          0.023               0.046              0.024
                            [0.028]       [0.033]      [0.024]        [0.051]        [0.031]        [0.030]             [0.033]            [0.029]
Text Messaging              0.054*         0.044       0.057**         0.042         0.066**         0.041              0.073**             0.033
                            [0.028]       [0.034]      [0.023]        [0.057]        [0.031]        [0.029]             [0.033]            [0.029]

                                                                       Panel (e): Help-Seeking Index
Online Only                  0.027         0.030        0.032           0.030          0.018        0.038                0.029              0.032
                            [0.034]       [0.041]      [0.029]         [0.062]        [0.038]      [0.036]              [0.040]            [0.035]
Text Messaging              0.065*         0.042       0.069**          0.012          0.070*       0.049                0.056             0.061*
                            [0.035]       [0.042]      [0.029]         [0.067]        [0.039]      [0.036]              [0.040]            [0.036]
The dependent variable in each regression is indicated by the panel headings. Control variables include student age, self-reported expected
study hours per week, expected paid-work hours per week, expected average grade, tendency to finish what he or she starts, tendency to get
discouraged by setbacks, tendency to study at the last minute, and indicator variables for first-year status, international student status, first-
generation status, gender, English mother-tongue status, whether the student lives on residence, a self-reported desire to earn more than an
undergraduate degree, and a self-reported tendency to check his or her cell phone often. Standard errors clustered at the student level are
reported in brackets in panel (a). Robust standard errors are reported in brackets in panels (b) to (e). * indicates is significance at the 10 percent
level; ** indicates significance at the 5 percent level; *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level.




                                                                         48
Figures


                                                   I Feel my Coach Supports Me                                                                                                                   I Appreciate Receiving Messages from My Coach
              40




                                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                                                                                      36.48
 Percentage of Respondents




                                                                                                                                                               Percentage of Respondents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               29.90
                     30




                                                                                                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                 26.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     24.69                        23.95
                                                                                                                                          21.46
           20




                                                                                                                                                                         20
  10




                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8.56
                                                                   6.70                                                                                                                           6.95
                                                                                                                                                                                                               5.96
                                    4.71           3.85
              0




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                     e




                                                                     e
                                      e




                                                                                            ee




                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                      e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                    e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e
                                                   re




                                                                   re




                                                                                                                                       re
                                   re




                                                                                                                    re




                                                                                                                                                                                                               re




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   re




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                re
                                                                                                                                                                                                 re




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               re
                                                                                          gr




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  gr
                                                 ag




                                                                                                                                     Ag
                                                                 ag
                                 ag




                                                                                                                  Ag




                                                                                                                                                                                                             ag




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ag
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ag
                                                                                                                                                                                               ag




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ag
                                                                               tA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tA
                                             is




                                                             is
                             is




                                                                                                                                                                                                          is




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            is
                                                                                                                                                                                            is
                                                                                                                                    ly




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ly
                                                                             ha
                                             D




                                                            tD
                             D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                         D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tD
                                                                                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                                  ng




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ng
                   ly




                                                                                                                                                                                 ly
                                                                            ew




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ew
                                                          ha




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ha
                                                                                                                                ro




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ro
                 ng




                                                                                                                                                                               ng
                                                                           m




                                                                                                                              St
                                                        ew




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ew
               ro




                                                                                                                                                                             ro
                                                                         So




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          So
                                                       m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   m
             St




                                                                                                                                                                           St
                                                     So




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 So
                                           (a): I Feel my Coach Supports Me                                                                                                         (b): I Appreciate Receiving Messages from My Coach


                                                                                                         I'm Doing Better at U of T In Part Because of My Coach
                                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                            35.98
                                                                             Percentage of Respondents
                                                                                       20        30




                                                                                                                                                       16.00
                                                                                                                                    15.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             14.02
                                                                                                               12.53
                                                                              10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6.45
                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                      e




                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                  e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                             ee




                                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                    re




                                                                                                                                                      re




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               re
                                                                                                               re




                                                                                                                                                                                                           re
                                                                                                                                                                                           gr
                                                                                                                                  ag




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ag
                                                                                                                                                    ag
                                                                                                             ag




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ag
                                                                                                                                                                                     tA
                                                                                                                              is




                                                                                                                                                  is
                                                                                                          is




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ly
                                                                                                                                                                                   ha
                                                                                                                              D




                                                                                                                                               tD
                                                                                                         D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ng
                                                                                               ly




                                                                                                                                                               ew
                                                                                                                                             ha




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ro
                                                                                             ng




                                                                                                                                                              m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      St
                                                                                                                                            ew
                                                                                           ro




                                                                                                                                                            So
                                                                                                                                           m
                                                                                         St




                                                                                                                                         So




                                                                          (c): I am Doing Better at U of T In Part Because of My Coach

                                                 Figure 1: Student Feelings About the Text-Message Coaching Program
Notes: This figure shows the percentages of students in the text-message coaching program who strongly disagree,
disagree, somewhat disagree, somewhat agree, agree, and strongly agree with the statement that appears as the title of
each panel.




                                                                                                                                                            49
           Appendix C: Supplemental Analyses


           Table C1: Treatment Effects on Components of Core Well-Being Index


                          (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)            (7              8)            (9)           (10)           (11)          (12)             (13)            (14)
                          Satisfaction Index                                                  Belonging and Support Index                                                     Confidence Index               Depression Index
                                                                                                                                                                           Important     Confident
                        Overall                                     Identify        UofT         Know           UofT             Others        Often                         to do         to do
                          Life       Satisfaction   Belonging         with        Wants me       where         Supports          Know         Think of       Tough          Well at       Well at        Feelings of      Feelings
                      Satisfaction   with UofT       at UofT         UofT        to Succeed      Advice          Me              More          Goals        Transition       UofT         UofT           Depression       of Stress


Online Only            0.147**          0.016         -0.054         0.040          0.071         0.043          0.055           0.034          -0.015         0.006         0.073          0.104           0.006           -0.014
                        [0.063]        [0.060]        [0.051]       [0.057]        [0.059]       [0.054]        [0.053]         [0.054]        [0.054]        [0.059]       [0.053]        [0.066]         [0.040]         [0.038]
Text Messaging           0.089          0.002          0.027        0.125**        0.104*         0.094*         0.081           0.025          0.004          0.050         0.075          0.009           0.029           -0.016
                        [0.064]        [0.061]        [0.051]       [0.056]        [0.058]       [0.054]        [0.053]         [0.053]        [0.054]        [0.060]       [0.054]        [0.067]         [0.041]         [0.039]

P-Value for Test of
Treatment
Differences              0.361          0.816          0.114         0.129          0.561         0.340          0.620           0.862          0.715          0.463         0.965          0.156           0.583           0.971


Control Mean             4.456          4.410          4.219         4.289          3.938         4.225          3.923           3.113          4.474          2.692         5.894          4.309           2.432           2.108
[Standard
Deviation]              [1.349]        [1.333]        [1.119]       [1.237]        [1.312]       [1.178]        [1.175]         [1.155]        [1.151]        [1.232]       [1.203]        [1.473]         [0.861]         [0.830]


Observations            2,623          2,623            2,623         2,623          2,623          2,623          2,623           2,623          2,623          2,623          2,623         2,623        2,623            2,623
The dependent variable in each regression is indicated by the column headings. Control variables include student age, self-reported expected study hours per week, expected paid-work hours per week, expected average
grade, tendency to finish what he or she starts, tendency to get discouraged by setbacks, tendency to study at the last minute, and indicator variables for first-year status, international student status, first-generation status,
gender, English mother-tongue status, whether the student lives on residence, a self-reported desire to earn more than an undergraduate degree, and a self-reported tendency to check his or her cell phone often. Robust
standard errors are reported in brackets. * indicates is significance at the 10 percent level; ** indicates significance at the 5 percent level; *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                                                 50
        Table C2: Treatment Effects on Components of Success Strategies Index


                                    (1)                 (2)              (3)             (4)               (5)                 (6)                  (7)                   (8)                 (9)                (10)
                                                   Study Strategies Index                                                                             Help-Seeking Index
                                Manage Time         Learn from       Study with       Review         Times Met with        Times Met         Times Met with        Times Met with       Times Went to        Times Used
                                   Well              Mistakes           Pen           Writing          Instructor         with Advisor         Free Tutor            Paid Tutor           Workshop           Study Group


Online Only                       0.097*               0.019           0.020           0.059              0.059              0.098*               0.081                 0.007               -0.069               0.173
                                  [0.052]             [0.046]          [0.057]        [0.061]            [0.081]             [0.058]             [0.100]                [0.093]             [0.084]             [0.130]
Text Messaging                     0.035               0.053           0.018           0.100             0.198**              0.051              0.259**                0.077               -0.032               0.120
                                  [0.052]             [0.046]          [0.056]        [0.061]            [0.086]             [0.060]             [0.105]                [0.095]             [0.082]             [0.133]

P-Value for Test of Treatment
Differences                        0.243               0.455           0.982           0.503              0.104               0.440               0.086                 0.465                0.646               0.688


Control Mean                       3.589               4.644           4.095           3.597              1.200               0.752               1.533                 0.911                1.102               2.529
[Standard Deviation]              [1.171]             [1.021]          [1.243]        [1.320]            [1.724]             [1.224]             [2.165]                [1.967]             [1.814]             [2.774]


Observations                      2,623                2,623             2,623           2,623              2,623               2,623                2,623                  2,623                2,623            2,623
The dependent variable in each regression is indicated by the column headings. Control variables include student age, self-reported expected study hours per week, expected paid-work hours per week, expected average
grade, tendency to finish what he or she starts, tendency to get discouraged by setbacks, tendency to study at the last minute, and indicator variables for first-year status, international student status, first-generation
status, gender, English mother-tongue status, whether the student lives on residence, a self-reported desire to earn more than an undergraduate degree, and a self-reported tendency to check his or her cell phone often.
Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. * indicates is significance at the 10 percent level; ** indicates significance at the 5 percent level; *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                                            51
Table C3: Leave-One-Coach-Out Text-Message Coaching Treatment Effects

  Dependent Variable                 (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)             (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)

  Grades (All Courses)             0.312         0.483         0.236           0.152            0.343             0.343           0.079         0.402         0.225         0.204
                                  [0.531]       [0.521]       [0.530]         [0.535]          [0.525]           [0.538]         [0.535]       [0.534]       [0.533]       [0.546]


  Core Well-Being Index           0.046*        0.040*        0.040*          0.044*            0.037            0.045*           0.037         0.024       0.058**         0.033
                                  [0.024]       [0.024]       [0.024]         [0.024]          [0.024]           [0.024]         [0.024]       [0.025]      [0.024]        [0.025]

  Belonging and Support
  Index                           0.061**      0.051**        0.051**         0.058**          0.049*           0.056**         0.051**         0.034       0.069***       0.048*
                                  [0.025]      [0.025]        [0.025]         [0.025]          [0.025]          [0.025]         [0.025]        [0.026]       [0.025]       [0.026]

  Success Strategies Index        0.052**      0.052**        0.052**         0.055**          0.052**          0.053**         0.043**        0.044*       0.053**       0.048**
                                  [0.022]      [0.022]        [0.022]         [0.022]          [0.022]          [0.022]         [0.022]        [0.022]      [0.022]       [0.023]

  Help-Seeking Index              0.056**      0.054**        0.061**         0.059**          0.058**          0.057**          0.047*        0.052*       0.057**       0.056**
                                  [0.027]      [0.027]        [0.027]         [0.028]          [0.027]          [0.027]          [0.027]       [0.028]      [0.027]       [0.028]

  Controls?                         Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
  Each cell contains the estimated treatment effect of the text-messaging intervention and the associated standard error from a separate regression. In a given row, the dependent
  variable is the same across all specifications and indicated by the description in the first column. The specifications in each column differ according to which coach’s students
  are excluded from the regression. The excluded coach number is given by the column number. The control variables include student age, self-reported expected study hours
  per week, expected paid-work hours per week, expected average grade, tendency to finish what he or she starts, tendency to get discouraged by setbacks, tendency to study
  at the last minute, and indicator variables for first-year status, international student status, first-generation status, gender, English mother-tongue status, whether the student
  lives on residence, a self-reported desire to earn more than an undergraduate degree, and a self-reported tendency to check his or her cell phone often. Robust standard errors
  are reported in brackets. * indicates is significance at the 10 percent level; ** indicates significance at the 5 percent level; *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                         52
