                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE RIGHT STUFF? PERSONALITY AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                     Barton H. Hamilton
                                   Nicholas W. Papageorge
                                        Nidhi Pande

                                     Working Paper 25006
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25006


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from: Thomas Astebro, Jorge Balat, Robert Fairlie,
George Levi-Gayle, Bruce Hall, Bruce Hamilton, Mitchell Hoffman, Andrew Knight, Robert
Pollak, Victor Ronda, Yuya Sasaki, Kathryn Shaw, Richard Spady and Matthew Wiswall along
with seminar participants at Chinese University in Hong Kong, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, University College London, Cambridge University, University of
Essex, Georgia Tech, the 2013 Conference on New Directions in Applied Microeconomics at Cal
Tech, the 2014 SOLE Meetings, the 2014 European and North American Meetings of the
Econometric Society, the Venice Summer Institute on the Economics of Entrepreneurship and the
6th IZA/Kauffman Foundation Workshop on Entrepreneurship Research. The usual caveats
apply. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Barton H. Hamilton, Nicholas W. Papageorge, and Nidhi Pande. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Right Stuff? Personality and Entrepreneurship
Barton H. Hamilton, Nicholas W. Papageorge, and Nidhi Pande
NBER Working Paper No. 25006
September 2018
JEL No. J23,J24,J31,J32

                                         ABSTRACT

We construct a structural model of entry into self-employment to evaluate the impact of policies
supporting entrepreneurship. Previous work has recognized that workers may opt for self-
employment due to the non-pecuniary benefits of running a business and not necessarily because
they are good at it. Other literature has examined how socio-emotional skills, such as personality
traits, affect selection into self-employment. We link these two lines of inquiry. The model we
estimate captures three factors that affect selection into self-employment: credit constraints,
relative earnings and preferences. We incorporate personality traits by allowing them to affect
sector-specific earnings as well as preferences. The estimated model reveals that the personality
traits that make entrepreneurship profitable are not always the same traits driving people to open
a business. This has important consequences for entrepreneurship policies. For example,
subsidies for small businesses do not attract talented-but-reluctant entrepreneurs, but instead
attract individuals with personality traits associated with strong preferences for running a
business and low-quality business ideas.

Barton H. Hamilton                              Nidhi Pande
Olin Business School                            Delhi College of Arts & Commerce
Washington University in St. Louis              University of Delhi
Campus Box 1133                                 Netaji Nagar
One Brookings Dr.                               New Delhi-110023
St. Louis, MO 63130                             India
hamiltonb@wustl.edu                             nidhi13pande@gmail.com

Nicholas W. Papageorge
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and IZA
and also NBER
papageorge@jhu.edu
1         Introduction
Entrepreneurship has occupied economic thought for nearly a century. This sustained inter-
est reflects a widely-held view that individuals pursuing their own business ventures drive
innovation and economic growth (Schumpeter, 1949). Entrepreneurship, however, remains
poorly understood. Most small businesses fail, but it is unclear why some individuals are
successful entrepreneurs while others are not. Even more puzzling is evidence showing that
most individuals who remain self-employed would earn more in traditional paid employment
(Hamilton, 2000). Recent research in economics has led to the acknowledgement of the role
of socio-emotional, non-cognitive or soft skills — including personality traits — in driving
economic behavior like labor supply.1 This shift raises the question: could personality differ-
ences explain which individuals become entrepreneurs and, among those who enter, which
ones succeed?2
    We examine how socio-emotional skills affect both entry into self-employment and en-
trepreneurial returns. To measure socio-emotional skills, we use the Big 5 personality traits,
which will be discussed in detail in Section 2. We estimate a model in which agents who
face credit constraints maximize utility by choosing between self- and paid employment.
Previous literature has recognized the possibility that workers opt for self-employment be-
cause they enjoy it and not because they are good at it.3 Other research has demonstrated
how entrepreneurs differ from paid employees on a variety of important dimensions, includ-
ing socio-emotional skills (Levine and Rubinstein, 2017). The model we specify links these
two lines of inquiry by distinguishing between the roles of sector preferences and sector
performance in determining entry, where personality is allowed to affect both. We also ex-
ploit multiple measures of personality taken over the lifecycle to identify the distributions
of latent, stable and possibly correlated underlying traits, thus circumventing possible mis-
measurement issues associated with standard personality assessments. Using our setup, we
obtain sector-specific market prices of latent personality traits along with estimates of how
personality links to preferences over sectors.
        We highlight two key features of our model, both of which are essential for assessing
    1
     Economists have yet to settle on the nomenclature. In this paper, we focus on “personality traits” which
we sometimes refer to collectively as “personality”. In our discussion, we view personality traits as a subset
of “non-cognitive” or “socio-emotional” skills.
   2
     In this study, we define an entrepreneur as an individual who reports self-employment.
   3
     For example, Hamilton (2000) shows evidence of non-pecuniary benefits to self-employment, while Hurst
and Pugsley (2011) use data from a survey to show that most new small business owners do not plan to grow
very much, but do report strong non-pecuniary benefits of being their own boss. Our work complements
these studies. One difference from the latter piece is that we rely on revealed preferences versus stated
intentions. We also construct a structural model of entry that can be used to evaluate policy given how
preferences and expected earnings affect the decision to become self-employed.


                                                      1
counterfactual policies, such as subsidies. First, the model captures various mechanisms
affecting entry into self-employment. Capturing selection is crucial since policies such as
subsidies shift the composition of individuals who sort into self-employment and thus the
quality of businesses that are started. In the model, selection arises due to relative earnings in
paid employment, credit constraints and preferences. For example, a “lifestyle entrepreneur”
may choose to open a business based on a low-quality idea since his personality means
he enjoys the autonomy of being his own boss. Alternatively, what we term a “reluctant
entrepreneur” may have a personality type that is productive in self-employment, but also
predicts an aversion to being an entrepreneur. These types of misalignments can influence
the impact of polices designed to promote entrepreneurship. Subsidies might be useful if they
induce talented but reluctant entrepreneurs into self-employment, but could be wasteful if
they simply attract lifestyle entrepreneurs to opening unprofitable businesses.
    A second important feature of our model, which follows Evans and Jovanovic (1989) but
departs from many prior studies, is that agents are assumed to observe the quality of their
business idea prior to choosing whether to open a business.4 This is in contrast to models
where agents are assumed to lack knowledge about the business they would open and instead
choose a sector based on average earnings differences across sectors (Willis and Rosen, 1979;
Rees and Shah, 1986).5 This approach is perhaps defensible if mean earnings approximate
median earnings. However, given the highly right-skewed self-employment earnings distribu-
tion, averages in the context we study vastly exceed what nearly all potential entrepreneurs
can expect to earn. Using mean earnings as expected earnings is thus potentially misleading.
Doing so can generate the erroneous conclusion that there is a mass of reluctant potential en-
trepreneurs forgoing high expected earnings in self-employment and who thus have a distaste
for opening a business which could be overcome through policies, such as a subsidy. Our
approach is to model the worker’s information set to include the expected value of his own
potential business idea. Our modeling assumption is supported by recent research suggesting
that individuals opening businesses are aware of the quality of their venture prior to entry.
For example, Levine and Rubinstein (2017) and Hincapié (2018) show that individuals who
start more successful businesses make the costly effort of incorporating their businesses prior
to the earnings realization.
    We estimate the model using data from the 1995 and 2004 waves of the National Survey
of Midlife Development in the United States (MIDUS). Estimates reveal that the personality
traits that make entrepreneurship most profitable are not the same personality traits that
   4
     As described below, we model entrepreneurial income as a function of the quality of the business idea,
capital, and a shock that is not known by the agent ex ante.
   5
     Some recent papers relax the limited information assumption by allowing for individual types, which are
known by the individual prior to entry. See, e.g., Humphries (2017).

                                                     2
drive people to open their own business. For example, similar to earlier work (see, for
example, Caliendo, Fossen, and Kritikos (2014)), we find evidence that two of the Big 5
personality traits, extraversion and “openness to new experiences,” predict higher rates
of self-employment. However, since we explicitly distinguish between preferences versus
performance to explain the entry decision, we can go beyond earlier work to isolate different
reasons why. We show that extraverted individuals are attracted to entrepreneurship because
they earn more in self-employment than in paid employment. In contrast, open individuals
perform poorly in self-employment, but exhibit a strong preference for starting a business
which offsets their low expected earnings enough to induce entry. Identifying this type
of misalignment links our work to the more general idea that socio-emotional skills can
have different impacts in different sectors. This point is often overlooked in the literature,
though a notable exception is Lundberg (2013), which shows that the role of personality in
predicting educational attainment varies by socio-demographic group.6 Capturing this type
of misalignment also allows us to understand their consequences for counterfactual policies.
    Using our estimated model, we simulate decisions and returns under a counterfactual
policy removing credit constraints. Doing so, we show that credit constraints do not prevent
good ideas from entering the market (and may even screen out a small number of low-quality
ideas). However, removing constraints can prevent some businesses from operating at sub-
optimally small scales. We also show that counterfactual subsidies are largely ineffective.
One reason is that they subsidize businesses that would have been started absent support.
Such payments also attract individuals into entrepreneurship who possess traits, such as
openness to new experiences, which are associated with strong preferences for, but weak
performance in, self-employment. The result of these policies is an increase in entry but a
decline in the average pecuniary value of realized business ideas. These findings suggest that
policies that encourage entrepreneurship are potentially wasteful.7
   This study contributes to three separate literatures. The first studies the decision to open
a business. In a seminal paper, Evans and Jovanovic (1989) show that credit constraints
   6
     Other papers include that by Lundberg (2012), who shows that the pecuniary returns to personality
factors vary both by tenure and by educational group, suggesting that different personality traits may
enhance productivity in some occupations, but not others. Levine and Rubinstein (2017) show that deviant
behavior can lead to successful entrepreneurship and Papageorge, Ronda, and Zheng (2016) show that some
forms of childhood misbehavior capture socio-emotional skills that predict higher earnings despite also being
associated with lower educational attainment. Prada and Urzúa (2016) show that mechanical skill can reduce
four-year college attendance — not necessarily due to low academic ability, but instead due to high returns
in the labor market conditional on not attaining a four-year degree. See also Almlund et al. (2011), who
stress the importance of accounting for varying returns to socio-emotional skills and Cattan (2011), who
develops this point for traits related to an individual’s self-confidence and attitudes towards women.
   7
     Relatedly, Hurst and Pugsley (2014) provide a theoretical model of entrepreneurship that includes non-
pecuniary benefits. Their model predicts that some policies promoting self-employment can be distortionary.



                                                     3
are binding so that individuals with especially profitable ideas, but few assets, may be
unable to pursue their business venture. Relatedly, Paulson, Townsend, and Karaivanov
(2006) show that credit constraints alone cannot explain why good business ideas are not
pursued and that moral hazard also plays a role. Both papers suggest that some paid
employees would be successful entrepreneurs were it not for market imperfections. On the
other hand, Hamilton (2000) shows that many entrepreneurs who are “successful” in that
their businesses have not failed would have earned more had they remained in traditional paid
employment. This finding may reflect important non-pecuniary benefits to self-employment,
such as autonomy.8 Taken together, this research leads to the following somewhat startling
conclusion: entrepreneurship does not necessarily attract the subset of individuals for whom
it would generate the highest pecuniary returns.
    A second related literature, much of it from personnel psychology, studies how mea-
surements of personality traits relate to job performance and job satisfaction. Barrick and
Mount (1991) show that individuals who are open to new experiences are especially good
trainees, perhaps since they are eager to try new things. However, they are not necessarily
better employees. More closely related to self-employment, Barrick and Mount (1993) show
that two other traits, conscientiousness and extraversion, are associated with better job per-
formance, especially for managers who exercise more autonomy at work. Since autonomy
is a hallmark of self-employment, this finding suggests that the relationship between per-
sonality and success differs in paid versus self-employment.9 Further work from psychology
has directly examined how self-employment and personality are connected, suggesting, for
example, that entrepreneurs score highly on the trait openness to new experiences, which is
generally consistent with our findings.10
   A third, burgeoning literature to which we contribute incorporates socio-emotional skills
and personality traits into economic models of rational decision-making. Much of this work
   8
     In another key contribution, Lazear (2004) shows that a successful entrepreneur must be a “jack-of-all-
trades” with a wide variety of skills. Our focus is different in that we examine how a fixed set of skills affect
entrepreneurial entry and returns, whereas Lazear (2004) considers skills that are acquired or learned through
optimal investments. Fairlie and Holleran (2012) and Fairlie, Karlan, and Zinman (2015) connect these two
ideas, showing that personality can affect short-run responsiveness to a training program for entrepreneurs
(though they find no evidence of long-run effects of the program). Also related, Åstebro and Thompson
(2011) argue that entrepreneurs acquire a range of skills in part due to preferences for variety.
   9
     From economics, Cubel et al. (2016) assess the relationship between personality traits and productivity.
They circumvent selection issues by measuring productivity in a laboratory setting. They demonstrate
that more conscientious people perform better and more neurotic people perform worse. Although we use
observational data, we believe our study complements their research since we also aim to address how
personality can affect both selection into sectors and sector-specific performance.
  10
     These analyses include: Hisrich, Langan-Fox, and Grant (2007), Zhao and Seibert (2006), Brandstätter
(2011), Zhao, Seibert, and Lumpkin (2010) and Rauch and Frese (2007).




                                                       4
can be traced to Heckman and Rubinstein (2001).11 They show that socio-emotional skills
can account for much of the observed variance in sociodemographic outcomes. Building
on this work, economists have studied how personality traits and socio-emotional skills re-
late to a host of outcomes, including marriage (Lundberg, 2012, 2011), education (Barón
and Cobb-Clark, 2010; Savelyev, 2010; Gensowski, Heckman, and Savelyev, 2011; Heckman
and LaFontaine, 2010; Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev, 2013) and health (Heckman, 2012).
More closely related to our study are papers relating personality to labor market behavior
(Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006; Urzua, 2008; Wichert and Pohlmeier, 2009; Heineck,
2010; Störmer and Fahr, 2013). This research has led to some particularly striking results,
showing, for example, that socio-emotional skill differences can help explain education and
earnings differences between men and women or between black and white individuals.
    Comparatively little research in economics has directly connected self-employment and
socio-emotional skills. Notable exceptions include the aforementioned study by Caliendo,
Fossen, and Kritikos (2014); Levine and Rubinstein (2017), who show evidence that en-
trepreneurs differ from paid employees on a number of socio-emotional dimensions; Hartog,
Van Praag, and Van Der Sluis (2010), who examine “social ability” and entrepreneurial
firms; Asoni (2010), who studies self-employment spells and self-confidence; and Humphries
(2017), who studies a uni-dimensional measure of non-cognitive skill coming from a test
administered to Swedish army recruits. A key departure for this study is to explicitly link
multiple dimensions of socio-emotional skill (five personality traits) to various features of
selection and performance in self-employment, thus increasing the set of conclusions we can
draw about potential policies affecting the entry decision.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the “Big 5” person-
ality traits. Section 3 discusses the data we use. Section 4 specifies the model and Section
5 discusses estimation. Section 6 examines parameter estimates. Section 7 presents results
from counterfactual experiments. Section 8 concludes.


2      The “Big Five” Personality Traits
A large literature in psychology has settled upon five traits (the Big 5), which summarize an
individual’s personality. These five are chosen using statistical models (often known as factor
models) intended to focus attention on traits that are neither overlapping nor redundant.
As with any rubric, there is some debate surrounding the Big 5, but they are attractive for a
  11
    Excellent summaries of the state of this line of research are found in Borghans et al. (2008) and Alm-
lund et al. (2011). The techniques used in this literature draw upon Goldberger (1972) and Jöreskog and
Goldberger (1975).


                                                    5
few reasons.12 While research on the technology of skill formation points to the mutability of
character for children and adolescents (Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach, 2010; Heckman and
Kautz, 2013), personality traits appear to be relatively stable over the adult lifecycle (Caspi,
2000; Cobb-Clark and Schurer, 2012). One explanation for stability comes from evidence
using data on twins suggesting a genetic basis for personality traits (Zhang et al., 2009;
Shane et al., 2010; Shane and Nicolaou, 2013). The stability of personality traits among
adults should dispel concern about simultaneity if the Big 5 are used as right-hand-side
variables in regressions explaining economic behavior. As described below, we investigate
this issue by exploiting multiple assessments of a given individual’s personality in our data
to show that self-employment and earnings do not predict personality traits measured later
in life.13 Originally proposed in Goldberg (1971), the Big 5 are: agreeableness, extraversion,
neuroticism, conscientiousness and openness to new experiences. The characteristics used
to measure them are listed in Table 1.
    Despite the growing and fruitful integration of personality measures into economic mod-
els, important conceptual problems remain (Almlund et al., 2011). Most problematic is how
(or even whether) personality fits within the utility paradigm in economics. Personality
traits may reflect or be correlated with preferences. Alternatively, as Almlund et al. (2011)
propose, personality and preferences may both reflect some deeper, as yet unknown char-
acteristic, which drives human behavior. Some recent work addresses this issue, proposing
models that explicitly link preferences with socio-emotional skills (Bowles, Gintis, and Os-
borne, 2001; Rustichini et al., 2016). Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne (2001), for example, model
personality as enhancing preferences. Other researchers have used laboratory experiments
to ascertain how socio-emotional abilities relate to measures more familiar to economists,
including preferences over risk, time and ambiguity (Dohmen et al., 2008, 2010; Fréchette,
Schotter, and Trevino, 2017; Vandenberghe, St-Onge et al., 2008).14
    One way forward is to think of personality as affecting the utility cost of time in different
activities. If we accept that hours spent in each employment sector imply a distinct utility
cost, our model effectively suggests that sector-specific utility costs can differ by personal-
ity. Agents with different personalities will then differ in their sector choices once we have
controlled for differences in pecuniary returns in each sector. Personality traits may also
affect the amount of effort or time used to produce a given amount of output in each sector
so that the opportunity costs of production differ by personality traits in self- versus paid
  12
      Some rubrics suggest a sixth trait, which seems to capture agency or control. We focus on the Big 5 as
it is the most common rubric.
   13
      These findings are discussed in Section 5, when we discuss estimation.
   14
      Further work on issues integrating personality into economics is found in Heckman and Kautz (2012),
Roberts et al. (2011) and Borghans et al. (2011).


                                                     6
employment. This thinking would align our model with the framework proposed in Becker
(1965), who emphasizes that preferences over consumption reflect how different goods take
different amounts of time to consume.


3      Data
In this section, we conduct a preliminary analysis of the data set used in the paper, the
National Survey of Midlife Development in the United States (MIDUS), and highlight two
empirical patterns. First, we show that individuals with more assets are more likely to be self-
employed. However, conditional on self-employment, there is little evidence that individuals
with more assets have more profitable business ideas. Second, we illustrate the idea that
some personality traits can have opposing effects on preferences versus relative performance
in each sector, showing that “openness to new experiences” simultaneously predicts entry
into self-employment and relatively low earnings in self-employment.


3.1     The MIDUS Data Set
The MIDUS survey studies midlife from an unusually rich variety of perspectives. Informa-
tion is collected on the labor market choices and outcomes, physical health, and psychological
well-being of a representative sample of working age men and women in the United States.
Crucially for the present study, the MIDUS data set includes information on whether in-
dividuals are self-employed, their assets and standard measures of the Big 5 personality
traits.15
   MIDUS data collection occurred in two waves, the first (MIDUS I) in 1995 and the second
(MIDUS II) in 2004. The sample surveyed in 1995 included over 7,114 men and women
between ages 25 and 74 from the United States. The second wave surveyed a nationally
representative subsample of 4,009 individuals with the goal of understanding the physical,
health and psychological effects of aging. In our study, we use both waves of data, including
each individual’s answers on two personality assessments. Using both assessments helps
us to circumvent possibly mis-measured personality traits (including the effect of aging on
responses to personality assessments for a given latent factor). In particular, we use multiple
  15
    To our knowledge, only two previous papers in economics make use of the MIDUS data set. They are
Lundborg (2013) and Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010). The MIDUS survey was administered by the John D.
and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Research Network on Successful Midlife Development. The survey
is designed to be nationally representative, but over-weights older men to better assess midlife (MIDMAC,
1999).



                                                   7
measures to identify the distribution of permanent latent factors that are measured by the
personality assessments.
    The MIDUS data collects information on household assets in 1995.16 Notice, this measure
includes salable assets, which thus excludes pensions, retirement wealth or expected social
security income, which would be difficult or illegal to sell to invest in a business. In our
reduced form analysis, we use 1995 assets as a proxy for 2003 assets, which are relevant
for business investments. We address this type of measurement error more formally in our
structural estimation detailed in Sections 4 and 5
    In constructing our analytic sample, we restrict attention to male workers that are under
age 65 in 2004. Starting with the original sample of 7,114, by focussing on men, we drop
3,719 observations. By focussing on working-age men we lose another 449 observations. We
also drop individuals who are not working, losing another 231 observations. By dropping
observations with missing data on assets, we lose 550. Finally, we drop an additional 279
observations missing information on other key variables. Of the remaining 1,886 observations,
990 are not observed in 2004, which leaves us with an analytic sample of 896 working men in
2004 who have full information on key variables, including income, sector choice, personality
traits and assets in 1995.17
    Summary statistics are found in Table 2 for the analytic sample of 896 men observed
working in 2004 and then separately for individuals in self- versus paid employment. We
also include differences in means between these two groups and p-values from t-tests of
  16
     Individuals are asked “Suppose you (and your spouse or partner) cashed in all your checking and savings
accounts, stocks and bonds, real estate, sold your home, your vehicles, and all your valuable possessions.
Then suppose you put that money toward paying off your mortgage and all your other loans, debts, and
credit cards. Would you have any money left over after paying your debts or would you still owe money?”
Individuals then report the amount of assets in bins. From $1-$19,999, increments are $1,000; from $20,000-
$99,999, increments are $5,000; from $100,000 to $499,999, increments are $50,000. Remaining increments
are $500,000-$999,999 and $1,000,000 or more. Individuals are assigned the midpoint of the bin they report
and those who have negative net assets are assigned 0 salable assets.
  17
     A concern with our use of data from MIDUS II is that the sample is selected towards individuals who
were located for a follow up and agreed to participate again. Of the 990 individuals who are observed in 1995,
but not in 2004, 138 are either not working (or are not working age) in 1995. Thus, we observe 852 working
men in 1995 who are not observed in 2004. Compared to these 852 men, the men in the analytic sample
of 896 workers observed in 2004 report higher assets, earned more in 1995 and are more highly educated in
1995. Personality traits are generally not significantly different across these samples, but individuals who
are not observed in 2004 are more open to new experiences compared to those who did respond. There are
no differences across these two groups in the 1995 likelihood of self-employment. A concern arises if missing
individuals are selected on unobservables, which limits the internal validity of estimates, especially those
related to asset growth between 1995 and 2003. How we correct for this in our model and the various tests
for robustness we perform are discussed in Sections 4 and 5. Missing data is also a concern for external
validity if individuals in our sample exhibit relationships between personality and self-employment that are
not representative of the population. Reassuringly, extraversion and openness predict self-employment in
our sample, which is consistent with other papers relating personality to entrepreneurship.



                                                      8
whether group differences are significant.18 According to the table, entrepreneurs earn more
on average than paid employees. One explanation is that entrepreneurship is more lucrative
than paid employment. However, as Hamilton (2000) points out, these types of averages
ignore selection into sectors. A high-earning entrepreneur may have earned the same or
more had they chosen paid employment. Moreover, averages obscure the skewed distribution
of earnings. Looking at medians, we find that the typical individual would not expect to
earn more by opening his own business. The model specified in Section 4 incorporates both
relative sector earnings and the skewed distribution of self-employment income.
    Table 2 reports average sociodemographic and personality measures. We find that edu-
cation, marriage, number of children and spouse’s education do not differ systematically by
sectors.19 However, conditional on marriage, for individuals who choose self-employment,
spousal education is slightly higher as is the likelihood of a spouse being employed (though
the latter is only significant at the 11% level).20 Cognitive skill, as measured by fluid cogni-
tive ability, is likewise the same across sectors. However, we do find average differences by
sector in the Big 5 personality traits. For example, Table 2 shows that entrepreneurs tend
to be more agreeable, extraverted and open to new experiences than paid employees. The
latter two traits are typically associated with entrepreneurship.


3.2     Assets and Self-Employment
Table 2 also shows that individuals in self-employment have, on average, about double the
assets of paid employees. This suggests that individuals may select into self-employment
based on their ability to fund their own business. To investigate this relationship further,
Figure 1(a) plots self-employment entry against assets and includes a fitted non-parametric
polynomial. The figure shows that much of the increase in self-employment by assets occurs
at moderate levels of wealth (below $200,000).
    Credit constraints would suggest that, conditional on a business idea, assets would drive
entry. An alternative explanation is that high-asset individuals are more productive in
self-employment. To assess this possibility, Figure 1(a) plots self-employment earnings by
  18
      Table S1, found in the appendix, provides summary statistics for a larger sample of all working males
who participated in the second wave of MIDUS data collection but who may be missing information for some
variables. We show that key patterns in the data are robust to the inclusion of these individuals.
   19
      In comparison to 2004 Current Population Survey averages, MIDUS II participants report higher educ-
tion.
   20
      There are many reasons why this might be the case, including the possibility of risk-sharing or access
to benefits like subsidized health insurance. Entrepreneurs can effectively use their spouse’s more steady
employment or benefits as a safety net given the high probability of failure and the lack of benefits typical
in self-employment.



                                                     9
assets in 1995. Two patterns emerge. First, there is some evidence from the raw data
that men with more assets earn more in self-employment, especially at very high levels
(i.e., above $500,000), which could mean that men with more assets expect to earn more
in self-employment. Alternatively, it suggests that assets do not predict entry, but instead
lead to under-investment of very high-quality business ideas, forcing potentially profitable
enterprises to operate at sub-optimal scales. Second, and relatedly, credit constraints do not
appear to bar low-asset individuals from opening lucrative businesses. Figure 1(b) shows a
cluster of individuals with near-zero assets who open businesses that generate high earnings
(on the order of $50,000-$100,000), suggesting that credit constraints may not restrict entry
into self-employment. In light of these empirical patterns, our structural model will exploit
data on assets to identify possible credit constraints that potential entrepreneurs face, which
allows for the possibility of starting a business despite sub-optimal investments in the venture.
Moreover, the production function we use to model how business ideas generate income
will be specified so that low-asset individuals with profitable ideas are not precluded from
entry through, for example, some minimum level of assets needed to go into business. This
way, low asset individuals can potentially profit from very good ideas. Finally, the model
accommodates potential correlation between earnings shocks, business ideas and assets. This
accounts for the possibility that individuals with higher expected earnings in either self- or
paid employment may have accumulated more assets, which they can invest in their business
venture.


3.3    Openness, Earnings and Self-Employment
Prior studies consistently find a strong positive relationship between the personality trait
“openness to new experiences” and the probability of self-employment. In Figure 1(c), we
plot a binary variable for self-employment in 2004 against the 2004 measure of openness
for our analytic sample. We add a smoothed polynomial fitted line with 95% confidence
intervals. The figure shows that the probability of self-employment increases with openness.
However, in Figure 1(d), we plot expected log earnings differences between self- and paid
employment against 2004 openness. To do this, we first regress log earnings onto personality
traits, cognition and a series of sociodemographic observables (age, education and marriage)
separately by employment sector. Next, we use estimated coefficients to predict log earnings
for each individual and sector, which we use to compute the expected sectoral difference
(self minus paid). The result is a log earnings differential for each individual. We plot each
individual’s self-versus-paid earnings differential against their 2004 openness score. We also
plot a smoothed polynomial-fitted line along with 95% confidence intervals. The scatter plot


                                               10
and fitted line show that the expected earnings premium in self-employment declines with
openness. Moreover, the decline is both significant and monotonic. Together, Figures 1(c)
and 1(d) provide preliminary empirical evidence that openness has mixed effects, predicting
entry into a sector in which it generates relatively low returns.
    The dueling effects of openness remain when we control for other variables that we expect
to affect earnings and sector choices, including other personality traits and socio-demographic
variables. Results from these regressions are presented in Table 3. Columns 1 and 2 report
estimates from OLS regressions of log earnings in self- and paid employment, respectively.
Sector-specific prices vary for a number of factors, including openness, where the coefficient
in self-employment is -0.27 and in paid employment is 0.06.21 Column 3 presents probit
estimates where the outcome variable is an indicator for self-employment. The estimates
are similar to the estimates found in previous work linking entrepreneurship and personality
(Caliendo, Fossen, and Kritikos, 2014). In particular, the coefficient on openness is positive
and significant.22
    The finding in Table 3 that openness is associated with both a higher propensity for self-
employment and lower self-employment earnings highlights the limitations of a reduced-form
model when interpreting these results. These patterns show that an understanding of the
relationship between personality and self-employment requires consideration of the impact
of personality on both expected earnings and preferences, which cannot be decomposed from
the results in Table 3. The structural model specified in the following section is designed
to consider separately how personality affects the decision to become self-employed, both
through its direct impact on preferences and indirectly through the effect on expected sectoral
earnings.
  21
      The standard errors in Column 1 are influenced by the skewness of the self-employment earnings dis-
tribution, in particular the presence of outliers, including earnings more than $750,000. In results available
from the authors, we regress earnings in self- or paid employment on the same set of variables as in Table
3, including a full set of interactions for self-employment. Once we trim outliers, we find that the coefficient
on self-employment interacted with openness is negative and statistically significant at conventional levels,
which means that individuals with this personality trait earn less in self-employment compared to paid em-
ployment. Given how outliers can affect parameter estimates, the structural model introduced in Section 4
incorporates a mixture distribution for business ideas to accommodate the long right tail.
   22
      In Tables S2 and S3 (available in the appendix), we report estimates from a series of probit models,
where the outcome variable is an indicator for self-employment in 2004. Results on openness are robust to a
number of specifications. In results available upon request, we also show that results are robust if we limit
attention to the 726 individuals in our sample who were not self-employed in 1995. Of these, 65 (8.95%)
report self-employment in 2004.




                                                      11
4        Model
This section specifies a model of selection into self-employment that incorporates socio-
emotional skill and can be used to evaluate the impact of potential policies, such as subsidies
for small business owners. In the model, individuals choose the sector with the highest
returns, composed of earnings and non-pecuniary benefits, the latter captured as sector-
specific flow utility. Monetary returns to self-employment are a function of the individual’s
business idea along with an endogenous capital investment, which may be sub-optimally low
due to limited asset holdings and credit constraints. Socio-emotional skills can have different
impacts on earnings in each sector and on sector preferences.
    Recall that we highlight two key features of the model which are important for policy
conclusions. First, the model captures several sources of selection into self-employment:
credit constraints, flow utility and relative earnings. This means there are multiple reasons
why an individual with a high-quality business idea may not choose self-employment. Credit-
constraints can limit investments leading to low returns, the individual may enjoy paid
employment more than self-employment or paid-employment earnings could be higher.23 A
second feature of the model we highlight is that agents observe business ideas prior to entry,
which provides them with information about the returns to their business. This stands in
contrast to models assuming that individuals make sector choices based on mean monetary
returns, which could vastly overstate what individuals expect to earn due to the skewed
distribution of entrepreneurial earnings.


4.1       Business Ideas, Earnings and Non-Pecuniary Benefits
Agents indexed by i draw a business idea θi and then decide between paid and self-employment,
choosing the option delivering the highest expected utility.24 Total utility for sector s is de-
noted V s , where s ∈ {SE, PE} with SE and PE referring to self-employment and paid
employment, respectively. Utility in sector s is composed of income I s and flow utility ũs .
Each of these will be derived below.
       Entrepreneurial earnings are generated according to the production function

                                               yi = θi kiα ξi                                          (1)
  23
     The latter point is made in Prada and Urzúa (2016) regarding mechanical skill, which has high returns
among those who do not attain a college degree, helping to explain why individuals with the skill may forgo
college.
  24
     We ignore non-workers and, therefore, selection into employment, though extending our analysis to
include the decision to become employed would be straightforward.



                                                    12
where ki is agent i’s capital invested in the entrepreneurial venture and α ∈ [0, 1] is a
technology parameter that captures returns to capital. Our model of credit constraints
follows Evans and Jovanovic (1989). By entering the model multiplicatively, high draws
from the business idea distribution lead to a higher total and a higher marginal product of
capital. One consequence of this specification is that agents with low reported assets can
profit from a good idea despite constraints on their credit, which is in line with pattens in the
data suggesting that low assets do not appear to preclude high earnings in self-employment.
Rewrite this equation in logs:

                                     ln(yi ) = ln(θi ) + αln(ki ) + eyi                                   (2)

where eyi ≡ ln(ξi ) and ξi is a disturbance term that is not observed by the agent before he
chooses a sector. The distribution of eyi is specified below.
       The business idea is generated as follows:

                                                                J
                                                                X
                                     ln(θi ) =   xθi β θ   +          κθj fij + eθi                       (3)
                                                                j=1


where xθi is a vector of observable characteristics, β θ is a vector of coefficients, and fij is
personality trait j ∈ {1, . . . , 5} for individual i which is mapped by κθj to the log value of
the business idea.25 eθi captures factors affecting the business idea which are not observed
by the econometrician, but are observed by the individual prior to the entry decision and
is assumed to follow a mixed-normal distribution to account for the possibility of skew in
entrepreneurial earnings.26 Formally,

                            eθi ∼ pθ N (µθ,1 , σθ,1
                                                2
                                                    ) + (1 − pθ )N (µθ,2 , σθ,2
                                                                            2
                                                                                
                                                                                ) .                       (4)

Substituting for θi in equation (2), we obtain the following expression for self-employment
earnings:
                                         J
                                         X
                                   θ θ
                        ln(yi ) = xi β +   κθj fij + eθi + αln(ki ) + eyi .             (5)
                                                 j=1

Whereas eyi is a post-decision disturbance, eθi is observed by the agent prior to his decision
and thus must be integrated out of the model. This distinguishes our model from one in
which the agent does not know eθi prior to entry and instead the expected value of θi helps
  25
    As will be explained in Section 5, the five fij are possibly correlated latent factors identified from two
measures of each of the five personality traits for each individual.
 26
    Estimating means of eθi implies that equation (3) does not include a constant.


                                                           13
to explain sector choices. ki is likewise not observed by the econometrician, but is derived
from the optimal capital investment for a given business idea θi subject to possible credit
constraints.
       If the agent chooses paid employment, he earns wage wi :

                                                               J
                                                               X
                                     ln(wi ) =   xw
                                                  i β
                                                      w
                                                          +          κw        w
                                                                      j fij + ei                             (6)
                                                               j=1


where xw                                                                                 w
        i is a row-vector of observable characteristics that influence wage with prices β ,
κw                                                                 w
 j is the price of personality trait j in the wage sector and ei is a disturbance term,
the distribution of which is specified below.27 Net income from self-employment and paid
employment are given by
                                   IiSE = yi + r(Ai − ki )
                                                                                        (7)
                                  IiP E = wi + rAi
respectively, where r is the risk-free interest rate and Ai are assets in 2003. If the individual
is in paid employment, he earns wi along with returns to his assets. If he chooses self-
employment, he earns yi along with returns on assets net of what is invested in his business
(Ai − ki ).
   A problem with our data is that we do not observe assets in 2003, but only in 1995 or 2004.
Using 1995 assets as a proxy for 2003 assets introduces measurement error, while using 2004
assets could introduce bias if they reflect (rather than affect) 2004 self-employment decisions.
We therefore approximate 2003 assets as follows:

                                          ln(Ai ) = ln(Ãi )β a + eai                                        (8)

where Ãi are observed 1995 assets, βa measures asset growth until 2003 and eai a disturbance
term capturing variance in asset growth that is normally distributed with mean zero and
variance σa2 . We jointly estimate these parameters with other model parameters.28 Credit
  27
     We model self-employment in greater detail than we model paid employment to account for the role of
optimal investments based on a business idea and credit constraints. Moreover, we permit flexibility in the
portion of the business idea that is unobserved to the researcher (but is assumed to be observed to the agent
prior to entry) to capture the skewed distribution of self-employment earnings.
  28
     Identification is discussed in the following section. Modeling 2003 assets in this manner essentially treats
1995 assets as a “noisy” measure of 2003 assets. If we instead use 1995 assets as a proxy, most qualitative
results remain unchanged, though the credit constraint is more noisily estimated and has a smaller impact
on earnings. Another option is to estimate β a and σ a outside of the model by regressing 2004 assets onto
1995 assets and then predict 2003 assets. Doing so does introduces potential bias, but in practice yields asset
growth predictions in line with estimated parameters. By estimating these parameters jointly, however, we
can allow asset growth to be correlated with other unobservables, which we explain below when discussing
the error structure and correlation across equations.


                                                          14
constraints are imposed upon the entrepreneur such that ki ≤ λAi , where λ ≥ 1. The
entrepreneur is a net borrower when Ai < ki∗ and a net-saver when Ai ≥ ki∗ , where ki∗
denotes the optimal investment.29
       The agent chooses the sector s ∈ {SE, PE} that generates the highest expected utility
Vis    given by
                                        Vis = ρIis + ũsi ,                              (9)

where ũsi are non-pecuniary returns for sector s and ρ is a scaling parameter that converts
dollars to utils. As we can only identify differences in non-pecuniary returns from choosing
one sector versus the other, we specify net non-pecuniary benefits to self-employment as:

                                        uSE
                                         i  = ũSE
                                                i  − ũPi E ≡ zi γ SE                              (10)

which is equivalent to setting ũP E = 0. Here, zi is a vector of characteristics and γ SE
are net non-pecuniary returns to observable characteristics in self-employment. zi contains
observable variables that are not included in the returns equations, such as spouse education,
spousal employment and number of children.


4.2       Correlation Across Earnings Equations
Recall that while the agent observes eθi prior to entry, eyi and ew
                                                                  i are post-entry earnings
shocks in self- and paid employment, respectively. We permit correlation across the earnings
equations by assuming the following error structure.

                                 eyi = δ1y eθi + δ2y Ãi + δ3y eai + νiy
                                                                                                   (11)
                                 ew
                                  i  = δ1w eθi + δ2w Ãi + δ3w eai + νiw

       where
                                    !        "            !           !#
                              νiy                  2
                                                 −σy,ν /2      2
                                                              σy,ν 0
                                        ∼N                  ,                                      (12)
                              νiw                  2
                                                 −σw,ν /2          2
                                                               0 σw,ν

   The error structure means that the post-entry sector-specific earnings disturbances eyi
and ewi are not assumed independent. Rather, they are dependent via realizations observed
by the agent prior to entry, including 1995 assets Ãi , the asset growth shock eai and the
portion of the business idea unobserved to the econometrician eθi . Intuitively, this structure
  29
    The credit constraint is homogenous across groups, which could be relaxed. However, when we interact
λ with other variables, we fail to detect significant differences.



                                                     15
permits 1995 assets, along with asset growth between 1995 and 2003 and the business idea
draw, to provide information to the agent about factors affecting post-entry earnings shocks.


4.3      Optimal Investment and Expected Earnings
When deciding between sectors, the agent first computes expected self-employment earnings.
He computes the optimal choice of ki (supposing θi is known) by solving the following
maximization problem:

                           maxk          E[ViSE |θi , Ai ]
                                    =    E[IiSE + uSE i |θi , Ai ]
                                    =    E[ρ(yi + rAi − rki ) + uSE    i |θi , Ai ]                          (13)
                                    =    E[ρθi ki ξi + ρrAi − ρrki + uSE
                                                 α
                                                                            i |θi , Ai ]
                                             α
                                    =    θi ki E[ξi |θi , Ai ] − rki .

ξi is equal to exp(eyi ), which is log-normally distributed.30 Its expectation is thus given by:

                     E[exp(eyi )] = exp[δ1y eθi + δ2y Ãi + δ3y eai + σy,ν
                                                                       2         2
                                                                           /2 − σy,ν /2]
                                          y θ       y         y a                                            (14)
                                  = exp[δ1 ei + δ2 Ãi + δ3 ei ]

The agent’s maximization problem conditional on entry is thus:

                             maxk       E[ViSE ]
                                      = θi kiα [exp[δ1y eθi + δ2y Ãi + δ3y eai ]] − rki                     (15)
                                      ≡ θi kiα ψi − rki .

where we set ψi = exp[δ1y eθi + δ2y Ãi + δ3y eai ].31 This means that:
                                                                      1
                                                                     1−α
                                                           αψi θi
                                             ki∗   =                        ,                                (16)
                                                            r

Plugging optimal capital ki∗ into the credit constraint inequality implies that entrepreneur
is credit-constrained whenever:
                                             r
                                     θi ψi > (λAi )1−α .                                (17)
                                            α
  30
     If we instead assumed independence of eyi and ew                                     θ
                                                          i , we would obtain that E[ξi |ei , Ai ] = E[ξi ] = 1. In
results available from the authors, we show that results using this simplifying assumption are qualitatively
similar to our findings.
  31
     Note that if the δ y are all equal to zero (or if we assume that eyi and ew
                                                                               i are independent), then ψi = 1.




                                                            16
The inequality means that the agent is credit-constrained when he has a very good business
idea but low assets. Expected paid-employment earnings prior to the sector choice also
depend on Ai , ea and eθi and are given by:

                             w̄i = E[wi |eθi , Ai ] = xw   w    w θ
                                                       i β + E[ei |ei , Ai ]
                                                                                                                      (18)
                                 = xw  w        w θ      w    w a        2
                                    i β + δ1 ei + δ2 Ãi + δ3 ei − σw,ν /2


    The value of the optimal sector choice, denoted Vi∗ , is given by:

                                                        1
                    (
                        max{((φα − rφ)(θi ψi ) 1−α + ρ1 uSE
                                                         i , w̄i ]}               if     θi ψi ≤ αr (λAi )1−α
          Vi∗   =                                                                                                     (19)
                          max{(θi (λAi )α − rλAi + ρ1 uSE
                                                       i , w̄i ]}                 if     θi ψi > αr (λAi )1−α
                                                                    1
where ψi is defined as above and where φi ≡ ( αr ) 1−α .


5     Estimation
Given the specification of the model, the vector of parameters to be estimated is:

           Φ ≡ α, β θ , κθ , pθ , µθ,1 , µθ,2 , σθ,1
                                                 2      2
                                                            , β w , κw , β a , σa2 , ρ, δ y , δ w , σy,ν
                                                                                                     2      2
                                                                                                               
                                                     , σθ,2                                              , σw,ν   .

This section describes identification and estimation of Φ. We also discuss how we incorporate
socio-emotional skill, using multiple scores from personality tests to identify latent factors
purged of measurement error.


5.1    Identification of Model Parameters
For each individual, conditional on expected earnings differences across sectors, utility pa-
rameters are identified from sector choices. The credit constraint parameter λ is identified
from covariation in assets, self-employment entry and earnings. For example, if individuals
with similar observable characteristics, but different assets, exhibit similar entry decisions
and self-employment earnings patterns, this would suggest that credit constraints do not
play an important role, leading to higher estimates of λ.
    An important threat to identification arises because earnings parameters in each sector
are estimated from individuals sorting into that sector, potentially introducing selection bias.
To avoid bias, the model explicitly accounts for selection across sectors through earnings
differences, preferences and assets, which can affect investments in business ideas and thus
selection into self-employment. Identification relies on the assumption that our specifications


                                                             17
for the earnings processes, along with our incorporation of various selection mechanisms, are
rich enough to allow us to use earnings parameters estimated from individuals in one sector
to calculate expected earnings for individuals who are observed in the other sector.
    Regarding the earnings processes, the key identifying assumption is that once we account
for selection through credit constraints and preferences and have conditioned on observable
characteristics, including personality traits, eyi and ew
                                                        i (shocks to self-employment and paid-
employment earnings, respectively) are dependent through initial assets, assets growth and
the unobserved portion of the idea eθi . Otherwise, they are independent. If not, i.e., if there
are further omitted factors, the concern is that individuals sort into sectors because they
expect, for instance, higher νiy or lower νiw .
    Preferences are a key source of selection into employment sectors. Omitting them could
induce selection bias in estimated earnings parameters. For example, strong preferences
for self-employment would lead to entry despite relatively low expected earnings. Failing
to account for preferences in modeling sector choices implies that earnings estimates would
be upwardly biased to rationalize observed entry decisions. To help to separately identify
preferences versus returns, we include variables in the utility function that shift preferences
over sectors, but which are excluded from the earnings function. These include: number
of children, spouse education and spouse employment. The assumption is that, conditional
on variables included in the earnings functions (including marriage) excluded variables do
not directly affect sector-specific pecuniary returns, but do affect sector preferences. These
exclusion restrictions may be problematic if, for example, children help out in the family
business, thus raising earnings. We cannot rule out this possibility, though argue that the
first-order effect of variables capturing family structure is on selection into self-employment
versus earnings. See Rees and Shah (1986) for an earlier discussion on family variables and
selection into self-employment.32
   Asset holdings are another factor affecting selection into sectors and we incorporate this
possibility into the model. For a given business idea and expected paid-employment earnings,
individuals with higher asset holdings are able to invest more in high-quality businesses,
which affects the entry decision. A problem incorporating assets is that they are potentially
endogenous to the earnings shocks. For example, individuals who tend to generate high
quality business ideas may accumulate more assets over time. Failing to account for this
  32
    Other possible exclusions include parents’ education and variables indicating whether parents owned their
own business. Not surprisingly, fathers’ self-employment status is predictive of self-employment. However, we
choose to omit it from our structural analysis. The reason is that personality may have a genetic component
and so it is possible that father’s self-employment captures an individual’s personality. However, reduced-
form choice models suggest that main results would not change if we added these variables. See results from
reduced-form choice models (Tables S2 and S3) in the appendix.


                                                     18
possibility could bias estimates of credit constraints. For example, suppose individuals who
expect to earn less in paid employment due to unobservable factors have fewer assets to
invest in their business. If we fail to account for this correlation, higher entry due to low
paid-employment earnings would suggest that assets are not very important, leading us to
understate the importance of credit constraints. To address this potential source of bias,
as discussed, earnings shocks are a function of 1995 asset holdings and the asset shock eai .
Earnings shocks are thus specified to capture the idea that unobserved factors affecting
earnings across sectors could include factors related to 1995 assets or asset growth.


5.2     Latent Factors and Measurement Error
A key advantage of our approach is the incorporation of the Big 5 personality traits into a
model of selection into self-employment. However, assessments of socio-emotional skills are
subject to measurement error. In particular, individuals with a given underlying personality
trait could score differently on tests that measure personality, depending on their observed
characteristics, such as their age. This raises additional concerns about identification since
estimates of parameters governing how personality affects earnings or utility would capture
the impact of these other characteristics.
    Fortunately, for each personality trait, the MIDUS data set includes two assessment scores
for each individual. We use the two assessments to identify five latent personalty traits fij ,
which enter earnings and the utility functions and which are purged of measurement error.
This approach reduces standard errors, improving inference. It also has the advantage of
providing a natural way to incorporate multiple assessments into the analysis.33
   Personality test scores are modeled as a function of latent factors, along with observ-
able characteristics and random measurement error. For J = 5 latent factors, an observed
measurement of skill j ∈ {1, . . . , J} for person i at time t is denoted Cijt and specified as:

                                      Cijt = Mit ρjt + dC         C
                                                        jt fij + ijt                                  (20)

where Mit is a row-vector of observed characteristics with the accompanying vector of co-
efficients ρjt , fij is the value of latent skill j for person i, dC
                                                                   jt is the period-t factor loading

  33
    A related concern in linking personality to self-employment is reverse causality, the idea that self-
employment decisions might affect personality. We cannot directly test this hypothesis using latent factors.
However, we can test whether there is evidence for this type of reverse causality by examining personality
assessment scores for individuals over time. In Table S4 in the appendix, we show that personality scores
exhibit strong within-individual persistence over time. However, conditional on 1995 assessments for each of
the five traits, 2004 assessments are not related to 1995 self-employment, 1995 assets or 1995 earnings.



                                                    19
on trait j and C   ijt is an error term capturing mis-measurement.
                                                                     34
                                                                         Mit includes age and
education at time t as well as the individual’s fluid cognitive ability test. Including these
variables allows them to partially explain measurement error, which is the difference between
the latent factor and the personality assessment. To fix ideas, conditional on a latent per-
sonality trait fij , an individual may exhibit a different score on the personality assessment
Citj due to age, education or cognitive ability. The latent and stable personality traits that
we recover and which enter into the utility and earnings functions are therefore purged of
average differences across the sample that are attributed to these observable factors. Latent
factors fij are drawn from a multivariate joint distribution.35
    To achieve identification, a number of assumptions are required. First, we assume that
cov(fij , C
           ijt ) = 0 ∀t (latent traits are independent of measurement error) and that latent trait
                                                    0                                0
j does not affect the measured value of trait j : cov(Cij 0 t , fijt ) = 0 for j 6= j , ∀t. The latent
traits are also assumed independent of the observables (age and cognition); i.e., age and cog-
nition are treated as observable components of the measurement error affecting personality
scores, but are not related to the underlying personality traits. Identification of parameters
of the measurement system also requires normalizations. In particular, we set the first factor
loading for each personality trait to 1. Moreover, we assume dedicated measurements, which
means that functions of measurements for each trait (e.g., extraversion) only contain the
corresponding underlying factor, i.e., we do not allow the factor “agreeableness” to explain
the measurement of extraversion. Further details along with a proof of identification are in
the Appendix.
   Parameters of the measurement system are jointly estimated with all model parameters,
which is reflected in the likelihood function derived in the Appendix.36 Moreover, we augment
the set of parameters due to joint estimation, which now includes Ξf , where Ξf includes all
    34
         Here, t refers to calendar time and is used to distinguish data collected in different years: 1995 and 2004.
    35
         In particular,
                                                                                      
                               fiO           µiO        σO     σO,C σO,E σO,A σO,N
                              fiC        µiC   σO,C       σC    σC,E σC,A σC,N         
                                                                                      
                              fiE  ∼ N  µiE  ,  σO,E σC,E        σE     σE,A σE,N                       (21)
                                                                                        
                              fiA        µiA   σO,A σC,A σE,A            σA     σA,N 
                               fiN           µiN       σO,N σC,N σE,N σA,N             σN
.
    36
    We have experimented with alternative approaches, including assuming independence across factors
(which also permits estimation of the measurement system in a separate first step), introducing more flexible
function forms for factors (e.g., mixed normals) and omitting age and cognition from the measurement system.
In general, our key qualitative results are not sensitive to these different assumptions on the measurement
system, though some magnitudes change. Results are also robust to simply ignoring measurement error and
using 1995 or 2004 measurements of personality, though standard errors are larger, which is expected.




                                                           20
parameters of the measurement system of the latent factors fij :

                   Ξf ≡ ρjt , dC     C    C
                                                  , j, j 0 ∈ {1, . . . , 5}, t ∈ {1995, 2004}
                                               
                               jt , µj , σj,j 0



5.3       Estimation Procedure Using Simulated Maximum Likelihood
We estimate the parameters of the model described in the previous section via simulated
maximum likelihood. There are three main steps to the estimation procedure. First, at each
set of parameter value suggestions, indexed by g and denoted Φ(g) , and for each individual
i, we simulate earnings, personality traits and sector choice K times, where K represents
the number of draws of unobservables for each individual.37 Second, we compute each
individual’s average likelihood contribution, where the average is taken over the K draws.
Third, we sum over average likelihood contributions from each individual and compute the
log, which yields the value of the simulated log likelihood function, the negative of which is
then maximized as with standard likelihood functions. In this procedure, the business idea
is “integrated out” in that it is assumed observed by each simulated agent prior to the entry
decision and entry decisions are then averaged across simulated agents for each individual
in the sample. Further details on the algorithm and the likelihood function are found in the
appendix.


6       Parameter Estimates and Earnings Distributions

6.1       Sector-Specific Earnings Parameters
Earnings equations estimates are found in the first two columns of Panel A of Table 4.
Beginning with personality traits, a contrast emerges regarding returns to the trait “openness
to new experiences”. Though marginally profitable in paid employment, it lowers the quality
of business ideas and therefore entrepreneurial earnings. Earlier work shows mixed results
on returns to openness. Barrick and Mount (1991) show that open individuals are eager
trainees though not better employees and Barrick and Mount (1993) find no evidence that
open individuals fare better in jobs with greater autonomy. In some contexts, openness has
been shown to predict a lack of commitment to an organization and a higher willingness
to leave for a better opportunity (Moss et al., 2007). Openness may undermine business
success if it means that individuals are less committed to a new business venture once it has
 37
      During estimation, we set K =2,500.




                                                      21
been started.38 In such cases, a more rigid focus on the new business may lead to greater
success compared to imaginative thinking. We return to these points in the following section,
when we discuss how openness to new experiences, despite being relatively unproductive in
self-employment, also predicts a strong preference for it.
    The second trait we examine, conscientiousness, is profitable in paid employment, though
costly in self-employment. This latter finding is somewhat surprising as one would expect
characteristics such as an attention to detail to be helpful in running a successful business.
However, lacking conscientiousness is also related to self-indulgence or a tendency for ignor-
ing rules for personal gain. This possibly links conscientiousness to a high disutility from
breaking rules even if doing so will improve business performance. Consistent with this
finding, Levine and Rubinstein (2017) find that deviant behaviors can be profitable in en-
trepreneurship. Further, a literature in personnel and organizational psychology has studied
pro-social rule-breaking, also known as “constructive deviance,” whereby individuals break
rules when it makes a business run better (Dahling et al., 2012). This research and our
findings suggest that conscientious people could earn less in self-employment since they are
inflexible or overly concerned with following rules even when doing so harms their business.
    Extraversion is profitable in self-employment, which is consistent with previous work
on personality and the labor market (Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne, 2001; Viinikainen et al.,
2010; Caliendo, Fossen, and Kritikos, 2014). The impact of extraversion on paid-employment
earnings is smaller and marginally significant. In contrast, agreeableness carries an earnings
penalty in both sectors, though more strongly so in self-employment. In fact, earnings
penalties for agreeableness have been shown in several studies (Heineck, 2010; Nyhus and
Pons, 2005; Mueller and Plug, 2006). A key component of agreeableness is a lack of selfish
behavior. Laboratory evidence has confirmed this. Ben-Ner, Kong, and Putterman (2004)
relate behavior in dictator games to measurements of personality and find that agreeable
individuals who are assigned the role of the dictator are more likely to offer higher amounts
of money. Our results suggest that agreeableness may capture other-regarding or social
preferences, altruism or a high psychic cost of profit-seeking at the expense of others.39 It
should therefore not be surprising that a trait capturing social preferences would carry an
earnings penalty.
    Neuroticism is profitable in both sectors, though the impact in self-employment is nois-
ier, insignificant and smaller. Previous results on neuroticism are similarly mixed. Whereas
Mueller and Plug (2006) and Heineck (2010) find a negative impact of neuroticism on earn-
ings, Viinikainen et al. (2010) do not once they have controlled for work experience, which
 38
      A bit more bluntly, Oldham, Skodol, and Bender (2009) suggest that openness may reflect “flakiness”.
 39
      For a relatively early contribution on social preferences, see Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1986).


                                                     22
they offer as evidence that neuroticism leads to a less stable work history. This thinking is in
line with the idea that neuroticism is linked to depression, which like other chronic illnesses
can lead to gaps in work history (Artazcoz et al., 2004).
    Turning to remaining earnings parameters, we find that in self-employment, individuals
earn more when they are more highly educated and younger. Marriage also has a positive
impact on earnings, but the parameter is insignificant. Fluid cognitive ability has a negative
impact on earnings, which is not the expected sign. One possible explanation is that fluid
cognitive ability is a mis-measurement of true cognition. Previous research has shown that
the measure peaks around age 30 and declines thereafter.40 Hence, the coefficient may
capture avenues through which aging encourages less productive entrepreneurs to start a
business. Assets tend to rise with age, in which case the coefficient could reflect how older
agents face relaxed credit constraints, which could encourage entry with less lucrative ideas.41
In paid employment, education has a positive effect, which is weaker than its impact on self-
employment earnings.42 Moreover, age, marriage and cognition lead to higher earnings in
paid employment.


6.2     Preference Parameters
Utility parameters are found in the third column of Panel A in Table 4. These param-
eters capture relative utility in self-employment versus paid employment and can help to
explain why individuals choose sectors in which they expect to earn relatively little. We
find that openness to new experiences, though it generates relatively low-quality business
ideas, captures a strong preference for running a business. Openness to new experiences is
characterized by an attraction to new ideas and novel experiences. A new business venture
might therefore be enticing for individuals with this personality trait. However, when cou-
pled with earlier results about performance in self-employment, this finding suggests that the
relationship between openness and business ownership is more nuanced. Open individuals
may perform poorly once the novelty of a new venture wears off and the drudgery of running
a business sets in. As discussed earlier, Moss et al. (2007) report an inverse relationship
between openness and commitment to an organization. They also find that this negative
  40
     See, for example Horn and Cattell (1967) and Bugg et al. (2006).
  41
     The negative coefficient is also present in the reduced-form earnings regressions; see Table 3. It is also
worth noting that fluid cognitive ability is only measured once in the MIDUS data, which means we do not
have enough data to separately identify a latent cognitive factor separately from a mis-measurement that
we can allow to be a function of age to explicitly test this hypothesis. These types of problems underscore
the value of applying methods that isolate latent, potentially mis-measured factors, which is what we do in
the case of personality traits.
  42
     Our finding that education has high returns in self-employment in the U.S. accords with results from a
meta-analysis reported in Van der Sluis, Van Praag, and Vijverberg (2008).

                                                      23
relationship is stronger when organizational resources are limited, which likely characterizes
new businesses. Remaining estimates suggest that conscientiousness, extraversion and agree-
ableness capture preferences for paid employment, while neuroticism captures a preference
for self-employment.
   Results on openness and extraversion illustrate the added value of our approach. Both
predict self-employment, but for different reasons. Open individuals start businesses because
they enjoy it and not because they are good at it. Extraverted individuals do so because
they generate high-value ideas. These distinctions would be difficult to identify absent the
type of choice model we estimate. Moreover, this distinction will have implications for the
impact of policies.
   Turning to other sociodemographic variables, we find that educated individuals face
lower relative utility in self-employment, which may arise if highly educated individuals
who are paid employees have some of the benefits of self-employment, such as flexibility or
autonomy. Age and marriage also predict higher relative utility as an entrepreneur, though
the parameter for marriage is not significant. Fluid cognitive ability predicts a stronger
preference for entrepreneurship. This finding suggests that intelligent people are more likely
to be entrepreneurs, but parameter estimates in the earnings equations suggest they may
not be particularly successful in terms of earnings.
    The next parameters in Column [3] are for variables excluded from the earnings equa-
tion, but which play a role in the decision to enter self-employment. For example, spousal
employment in 1995, which is a noisy measure of spousal employment in 2004, induces men
to choose self-employment. This may be a signal that self-employment entails a lower cost
in families with a second, steady income. Having more children seems to lower the desire to
enter self-employment, but this parameter is insignificant. The second-to-last parameter in
the panel converts utils to dollars.
    One concern is that we do not model dynamics, so that preference parameters could
capture future earnings. For example, among individuals who are open to new experiences,
what we interpret as a strong taste for self-employment might instead capture expectations
over future success in business, which is omitted from the model. Using data from 1995, we
find little evidence that this is the case. Among individuals who are entrepreneurs in 1995,
we would be concerned if openness predicted continued self-employment in 2004. Instead, we
find that 2004 self-employment is negatively related to openness among individuals who were
self-employed in 1995, though the parameter is insignificant. Thus, there is no evidence that
openness leads to longer survival in self-employment. We would also be concerned that utility
captures differences in earnings profiles if, among individuals who are self-employed in 1995


                                             24
and in 2004, we found that openness predicted higher earnings in 2004. This would suggest
that open individuals start out earning little as entrepreneurs, but foresee higher future
returns, which our static model captures as utility. However, we find that openness has
no relationship to 2004 earnings in self-employment for individuals who are self-employed
in 1995.43 In general, these findings suggests that our results on personality, preferences
and sector choices are not driven by first-year earnings being un-representative of future
entrepreneurial success.44


6.3     Additional Structural Parameters
6.3.1    Business Ideas, Technology, Credit Constraints and Assets

Panel B of Table 4 presents estimates of additional structural parameters. Column [1]
contains parameters describing the mixed normal distribution of business ideas. The long
right tail of the distribution of self-employment earnings is captured by a relatively low
probability (21%) of a high mean draw. The first estimate in Column [2] of Panel [B] is the
technology parameter, α, which maps business ideas into earnings. It is estimated at 0.14
and is statistically significant. The credit constraint parameter λ is 1.94, which means that
individuals can invest roughly twice their reported assets in a business venture (Evans and
Jovanovic, 1989). The estimate is noisy, with a standard error of 1.67. This is not surprising
given the weak empirical relationship between 1995 assets and self-employment earnings in
2004. The finding also foreshadows results from policy simulations showing that relaxing
credit constraints does relatively little to change which ideas enter the market, which is
a key finding of our study. In other words, although we cannot reject less binding credit
constraints, even if we take the low point estimate at face value, relaxing credit constraints
does very little to affect entry.
   The remaining two parameters in Column [2] of Panel C suggest that unobserved 2003
assets Ai (which enter the decision problem) are expected to be slightly higher than 1995
assets and that the error term has a large variance (4.60).45
  43
     These findings are presented in Tables S7 and S8 in the appendix.
  44
     Some recent papers on self-employment model dynamics (Humphries, 2017; Dillon and Stanton, 2018;
Hincapié, 2018). While these papers can focus on aspects of self-employment that we do not (e.g., learning),
our model handles both information about business ideas and credit constraints more formally, which means
our model is well-suited for the types of counterfactuals we perform below.
  45
     Similar parameter estimates are obtained by regressing observed 2004 assets onto 1995 assets, even
though we do not explicitly match 2004 assets in our estimation procedure.




                                                     25
6.3.2   Earnings Shocks

Panel C of Table 4 presents estimates of parameters governing the distribution of post-entry
earnings shocks ew and ey . These shocks are correlated through joint correlation with the
realized business idea eθ , starting assets Ã and the asset shock ea . We find that higher
starting assets, higher asset growth and better business ideas are all associated with higher
earnings shocks in both sectors. In other words, assets accumulated by 2003 are endogenous
to unobserved factors affecting expected sector-specific earnings. Intuitively, individuals with
high-quality ideas and high levels of accumulated assets by 2003 (through higher 1995 assets
or faster asset growth between 1995 and 2003) also expect relatively high post-entry earnings
shocks in both employment sectors.


6.3.3   Measurement of Latent Traits

Estimated coefficients of the measurement system that relates latent, stable personality traits
to scores from personality assessments are presented in Tables S5 and S6. We begin with a
discussion of correlation among factors, coefficients for which are presented in the first part
of Table S5. We find that, in the population, underlying personality traits are correlated.
Openness is positively correlated with conscientiousness, extraversion and agreeableness and
is negatively correlated with neuroticism. Conscientious individuals tend to be more ex-
traverted and agreeable, but less neurotic. Extraversion and agreeableness exhibit a strong
positive correlation. Finally neuroticism is negatively correlated with all other traits. It
is important to account for these correlations. For example, ignoring the correlation could
lead to over-estimation of the utility open individuals gain from self-employment if we ignore
that open individuals tend to be extraverted, which raises expected self-employment earnings
through better business ideas.
    Means for each personality trait are not very far from raw data means of the personality
assessments though variance is significant, implying that measurement error could be a con-
cern if we simply included both 1995 and 2004 measurements (or some combination of the
two) in our earnings and utility equations. Factor loadings tend to be near one. In general,
the education parameters are negative, small and often insignificant. The interpretation is
that, for a given latent personality trait, individuals who are more highly educated exhibit
lower measures of each trait on the assessments, the exception being openness. Cognition
also exhibits weak and generally insignificant relationships with departures of personality
assessments from the latent personality trait. Coefficients are positive for openness, ex-
traversion and agreeableness, but negative for the other traits. Some interesting patterns
emerge as individuals age. For example, the age parameter in the measurement equation

                                              26
for openness is -0.012 in 1995 and -0.007 in 2004. This means that, for a given underlying
openness factor, individuals would be assessed as less open as they age, though this effect
is small in 2004 versus 1995. Another example is extraversion. In 1995, the age parameter
is negative, but it is positive in 2004, which means that older individuals are assessed to be
more extraverted than they actually are in 2004. Generally, parameters in Tables S5 and S6
suggest that measurement error exists, which means that inference is improved if we exploit
multiple measures of personality to identify the distribution of latent traits, which are then
used in the choice and earnings equations.


6.4    Model Fit and Earnings Distributions
We simulate earnings distributions to assess model fit and to illustrate the skewed distribution
of self-employment earnings. In particular, for each of the 896 individuals in our sample,
we simulate 2500 observations, which amounts to simulating roughly 2.2 million workers
with the same distribution of observable characteristics as individuals in our sample. For
each observation, we then draw business ideas, utility, expected earnings, sector choice and
then sector-specific shocks. The predicted probability of self-employment is 19%, which
corresponds to the observed probability from the data. We also plot histograms of sector
specific earnings for individuals observed in each sector in Figures 2(a) and 2(b) where,
for comparison, we also plot observed earnings. Notice that in both sectors earnings are
considerably skewed, which is captured quite well by the estimated model.
    Next, in Figure 3, we plot earnings differentials (self versus paid) for each tenth of a
percentile. The x-axis is the percentile tenth and the y-axis is the expected earnings dif-
ferential. Figure 3 shows that our model captures earnings patterns that are important for
understanding entrepreneurship. First, simple comparison of average earnings across sectors
can be misleading (Hamilton, 2000). Roughly 82% of draws plotted in Figure 3 are below
zero. In other words, if each draw is interpreted as a simulated worker, 82% of simulated
workers would earn less by choosing self-employment.46 Second, there is a small probability
of earning substantial returns in entrepreneurship. For example, a draw in the top 0.1%
generates an earnings differential up to $5,000,000. These exceedingly high, and exceedingly
rare, draws are enough to drive up within-individual averages considerably. The figure es-
sentially illustrates the observation that if Bill Gates walks into a bar, the average individual
in the bar is a multi-millionaire. The typical individual, however, is not. Figure 3 therefore
illustrates why a model using average earnings as an additional regressor in a choice model
 46
   Of the remaining 18% who would earn more, some would still opt for paid employment due to the
opportunity cost of investing assets in their business rather than investing it elsewhere.



                                               27
(e.g., a “structural probit”) to explain entry could be highly misleading. The skewed distri-
bution means that using average earnings to compute expected earnings in self-employment
could lead to an upward bias. To rationalize low entry probability, utility would thus be
biased downwards. This would in turn suggest that there is a large group of “reluctant
entrepreneurs,” those with high expected earnings, but low utility from running a business.
If so, policies attracting individuals into entrepreneurship could appear to be more beneficial
than they are.


6.5     Misaligned Preferences and Performance in Self Employment
A strength of our modeling approach we illustrate next, and which distinguishes this paper
from earlier work linking socio-emotional skill to entrepreneurial behavior, is that it allows
us to identify characteristics that predict strong preferences for sectors in which they are
relatively unproductive. Here, we highlight estimates where preferences and productivity are
misaligned, driving agents toward a sector in which they will earn less. Next, we examine
the relationship between extraversion, openness and self-employment more closely since both
predict entry, but — as parameter estimates suggest — for very different reasons.
    Table 5 lists the characteristics affecting both earnings and utility, indicating those
where a misalignment exists. According to Table 5, higher education is associated with
a stronger preference for paid employment even though higher education leads to higher
relative earnings in self-employment. Age works the opposite way. Older agents may pre-
fer self-employment despite earning more in paid employment in part since self-employment
offers greater flexibility as agents move towards semi-retirement.47 Turning to personality
traits, consider the distinction between openness and agreeableness. Both generate higher
relative earnings in paid employment. However, while agreeable individuals prefer paid em-
ployment, individuals who are open to new experiences prefer self-employment. In other
words, there is a misalignment because open individuals prefer a sector in which they are
relatively unproductive.


6.6     Externalizing, Openness and Entry: An Illustration
To further highlight the value of our approach, we examine in more depth the various ways in
which two personality traits, extraversion and openness, affect the entry decision. Previous
literature has recognized their association with self-employment. A benefit of our approach is
  47
     Alternatively, older self-employed agents would not have to contend with the risk of being replaced by
younger employees with lower tenure who are therefore cheaper to employ.



                                                    28
that it allows us to show that the the mechanisms underlying these relationships are different.
While extraverted individuals are attracted to self-employment because they generate high-
quality business ideas, open individuals start businesses because they enjoy it.
    To illustrate these mechanisms, we compute deciles of extraversion and openness. Then,
for each of the resulting possible one hundred combinations, we set traits to these levels
for each individual in the sample. Finally, we simulate optimal earnings and decisions to
illustrate the labor market impact of latent, stable personality traits. Figure 4(a) plots
earnings in self-employment for different combinations of values of extraversion and openness
applied to all individuals in the sample regardless of their optimal choice. We see that
low levels of extraversion combined with high levels of openness have the starkest income
penalties in self-employment. Introverted individuals who are open to new experiences can
expect the lowest returns to opening their own business. The differences are not small,
with average earnings ranging between about $22,000 and $50,000. In paid employment,
the highest wage penalties accrue to those who are neither extraverted nor open to new
experiences (Figure 4(b)). Here, the range of earnings is smaller: about $70,000 to $84,000.
Figure 4(c) plots utility uSE
                           i  (converted to dollars using the estimated multiplier). Utility of
self-employment ranges from about $10,000 to about $40,000. This range helps to explain
why many individuals choose to run a business that will not be particularly lucrative: the
enjoyment of doing so is worth thousands of dollars.
    Misalignment suggests that the relationship between personality traits and sorting into
self-employment is complex and that average entry for different combinations of traits can
also be non-monotonic. According to Figure 4(d), higher levels of extraversion encourage
entry at low levels of openness. As openness increases, entry rises. At high levels of openness,
extraversion can even reduce entry. The interpretation is that at low levels of openness,
extraversion encourages entry through better business ideas, while at high levels of openness,
extraversion discourages entry through its impact on utility.


7    Credit Constraints, Preferences and Subsidies
This section uses the estimated model to perform several experiments. The first set examines
impediments to high-quality businesses by assessing the role of preferences and constraints in
sector choices. Next, we consider a counterfactual subsidy of $25,000 for business owners. For
each experiment, we simulate earnings differentials and entry decisions for each individual
in the sample 2500 times. Earnings differentials are one measure of business quality, but are
also affected by capital investment decisions and credit constraints, which depend on agent


                                              29
assets. Thus, to measure the impact of policies on business quality, rather than individual
returns, we also examine changes to the value of business ideas θi , which provide an arguably
better measure of the social benefits of businesses.48


7.1     Credit Constraints, Preferences and Starting a Business
Table 6 provides results from counterfactuals, in particular removing credit constraints and
the role of preferences. Recall that average entry probability predicted by the model is 19%,
which aligns with observed entry probability. The second row shows that when we simulate
the removal of liquidity constraints, self-employment entry increases to 22%. Moreover,
average self-employment earnings rise slightly (by about 0.2%). This could be due to better
ideas or higher investments in high quality ideas. By simulating the value of realized ideas,
we show that the increase in earnings is due to the latter. In fact, the average value of
realized ideas is slightly lower. This means that credit constraints, rather than obstructing
the realization of good business ideas generated by agents with few assets, instead lead some
firms to operate at sub-optimal scale (and perhaps also exert a screening effect, which is
however very small).
    In the third row of Table 6 we assume that agents choose the sector that maximizes
earnings (liquidity constraints are imposed). The goal is to assess whether self-employment
is driven by reluctant entrepreneurs with good ideas who would otherwise prefer paid em-
ployment or, alternatively, it is dominated by individuals who enjoy opening a business
despite low relative returns. We find clear evidence for the latter. In the absence of the non-
pecuniary benefits of entrepreneurship, self-employment entry declines to 13%, which reflects
the reduction in entry of lower-quality business ideas. Earnings rise by 30% and the value
of ideas rises by 19%. When we assume earnings maximization and remove liquidity con-
straints, the impact on entry is slightly reduced, but again we find that individuals deterred
from entrepreneurship due to credit constraints tend to be less productive entrepreneurs. To
further illustrate these patterns, in Figures 5(a) and 5(b) we show the distributions of simu-
lated relative earnings and the value of business ideas, respectively, under the baseline model
and the two counterfactuals. Average income from self-employment is slightly higher absent
credit constraints due to larger investments in very high-quality businesses, but eliminating
a role for preferences shifts both distributions markedly to the right.
   Overall, the simulations show that credit constraints play a limited role in preventing
lower-quality businesses from reaching the market. This is consistent with Hurst and Lusardi
  48
    Given that business ideas map into earnings according to the production function, it is not clear that
the level of the value of θi is meaningful, so we only report changes resulting from each policy experiment.


                                                    30
(2004), who show that liquidity constraints may force some entrepreneurs to operate at sub-
optimal scale, but do not appear to affect the distribution of realized ideas. The logic is
that if potential business owners have a very valuable idea, they may not be able to invest
in it at an optimal level due to credit constraints. However, they will still start the business.
Yet, given the noisiness of the estimated credit constraint parameter, we interpret this result
with caution.
    To further illustrate the roles of utility and credit constraints in selection into self-
employment, we plot openness and the value of business ideas in Figures 5(c) and 5(d).
The solid line at the bottom of Figure 5(c) shows the unconditional average value of busi-
ness ideas for different levels of openness. The dashed line conditions on entry and, because
it sits well above the solid line, shows positive selection at entry across the distribution of
openness. The degree of this selection, though, appears to decrease as openness increases, as
the conditional and unconditional average values are closer together at higher levels of open-
ness. Removing credit constraints has very little effect on the average value of business ideas.
However, eliminating the role of preferences (the dot-dashed line) further increases positive
selection, particularly at high levels of openness. That is, if individuals’ preferences are not
permitted to affect whether they enter self-employment, selection into self-employment by
the value of business ideas operates more strongly and to a more similar degree across the dis-
tribution of openness. This last point is made clearer by Figure 5(d), in which we normalize
average business idea value to 1 at the lowest decile of openness under each counterfactual.
This facilitates comparison of proportional changes; the degree to which increased openness
proportionally decreases the value of business ideas in each scenario is the slope of the ap-
propriate line in Figure 5(d), with the solid line representing all business ideas. The slope
is steeper if we simply condition on entry. Unconditionally, high-openness ideas are worth
70% of low-quality ideas. Conditional on entry, this number is 62%. The reason is that
conditioning on entry allows utility to play a role, and greater openness induces entry by en-
trepreneurs with lower-value ideas than would otherwise enter.49 Accordingly, if preferences
play no role, agents care only about relative earnings, and the relative decline in average idea
quality with openness is smaller than in the unconditional distribution (high-openness ideas
are now 85% the value of low-openness ideas). This is because high-openness individuals
with low-quality ideas are no longer induced into business by their preferences, which are
nullified here.
  49
    Again, according to the dot-dashed line, removing credit constraints does little to change the relationship
between openness and the value of realized ideas.




                                                      31
7.2     The Impact of Subsidies Promoting Entrepreneurship
Many policymakers have considered how best to design and implement policies that foster
successful entrepreneurship.50 The motivation appears to be the following: if good ideas
do not make it to the market, then society loses out on innovations, tax revenue, better
products and — assuming path-dependence — future innovation. However, one should be
careful in designing policies affecting self-employment. It may not be worthwhile to foster
entrepreneurship per se, but to encourage the realization of good business ideas. In this
section, we use our estimated model to assess a subsidy.51
    Before presenting results, we briefly discuss reasons why according to our model a subsidy
could change the average quality of ideas entering the market. If individuals were modeled
simply as maximizing income when choosing a sector, a subsidy could only attract ideas by
inducing individuals who earn more in paid employment to start a business. By incorporat-
ing preferences, we allow for the possibility that a subsidy could attract talented “reluctant
entrepreneurs” who would otherwise choose paid employment. If this occurs, then policies
promoting entrepreneurship could be worthwhile because they attract individuals with high-
quality business ideas but an aversion to opening their own business. On the other hand, we
would not expect a subsidy to attract individuals with extremely high-quality ideas because
they would likely enter without the subsidy even with preferences for paid employment.
Moreover, recall that our model captures the skewed distribution of self-employment earn-
ings. This means that, despite high average earnings, most individuals do not earn more
in self-employment, which means that preferences play an important role in the decision.
A subsidy could be counterproductive if it attracts “lifestyle entrepreneurs” who would en-
joy owning a business, but who refrain from doing so because they have low-quality ideas.
In summary, in our framework the impact of a subsidy on the average quality of ideas is
conceptually ambiguous and thus an empirical question. A related possibility that is worth
mentioning is that government policy could help highly productive entrepreneurs to over-
come their aversion to risk. Though we do not measure risk aversion explicitly, it is not the
case that our main results on whether subsidies are worthwhile are therefore incorrect. Risk
aversion is a preference and therefore it is captured in our utility function. Indeed, Åstebro
et al. (2014) argue that evidence on whether entrepreneurs have different risk preferences
  50
     See, for example, Lerner (2009) for a discussion of the pitfalls associated with public policies promoting
entrepreneurship and venture capital.
  51
     For example, in the U.S. city of St. Louis, there are multiple sources of funding for startups. While some
grants are for existing and profitable firms, there are also “pre-revenue,” equity-free grants aimed at funding
startups, generally ranging between $5,000 and $50,000. Often, these are in the form of a competition,
which would suggest a tournament funding only the highest-quality ideas. The implicit assumption behind
the straight subsidy we examine is that the supply of such grants is elastic.


                                                      32
than paid employees is mixed and inconclusive.
   We assess the impact of a subsidy that pays entrepreneurs $25,000 if they open their own
business.52 We also assess the effect of the policy on the distribution of realized business
ideas. We find that the subsidy encourages the realization of relatively low-quality ideas.
Rather than attracting reluctant but talented entrepreneurs — a possibility that has been
used to justify government support of small business — the subsidy attracts people with
low-quality ideas who would enjoy owning their own business. Absent the subsidy, these
individuals stay in paid employment due to low expected earnings in self-employment.
    The last two lines of Table 6 illustrate the impact of a subsidy. Entry nearly doubles from
19% to 37%. Earnings and the value of business ideas fall by 46% and 41%, respectively. We
also find that preferences exacerbate the negative impact of a subsidy on the distribution of
ideas that enter the market. If agents are assumed to be income maximizers, entry falls by 1
percentage point, with earnings and business idea value rising by 9%. This suggests that a
key mechanism of the subsidy is to attract agents with a preference for self-employment, but
low expected returns, into entrepreneurship, where they start businesses based on low-quality
ideas.
    Shifts in the distributions of entry probabilities and the value of realized ideas induced
by the subsidy are plotted in Figures 6(a) and 6(b). Here, these shifts are measured using
estimated preference parameters and again where preferences for the non-pecuniary aspects
of entrepreneurship are assumed to play no role. These figures illustrate that the shifts are
much sharper due to preferences. In Figures 6(c) and 6(d), we repeat the exercise from
Figures 5(c) and 5(d). As before, we find clear evidence of positive selection into self-
employment across the distribution of openness. Moreover, a subsidy steepens the relative
loss of value of ideas as openness increases since individuals with low-quality ideas, but high
utility from owning a business, are induced into the sector. As illustrated by the dotted line,
this effect is attenuated in the presence of a subsidy where preferences play no role.
    The notion that agents with personalities predicting low-quality ideas are being induced
into entrepreneurship is illustrated in Figure 7, where the distribution of each personality
trait in self-employment is plotted according to model parameters and again assuming the
counterfactual subsidy. The subsidy attracts individuals who are open and agreeable. In-
terestingly, it also induces extraverted individuals, who tend to have higher-quality ideas
but also prefer paid employment, a fact which should mitigate the negative impact of the
subsidy on average ideas in general. On balance, however, an across-the-board subsidy for
  52
    For each draw, once an agent has solved the maximization problem conditional on the realization of his
business idea, $25,000 is added to his self-employment earnings. The linear structure of consumption utility
means that the subsidy does not affect the optimal capital investment.


                                                    33
entrepreneurship seems ill-advised as it simply encourages less productive ventures, having
the most dramatic effect on individuals who have low-quality ideas, but who nonetheless
reveal a strong preference for entrepreneurship.


8     Conclusion
We provide a framework which captures how multiple dimensions of non-cognitive skill (as
measured by the Big 5 personality traits) affect selection into entrepreneurship. Our frame-
work allows the same personality traits to have different effects on sector-specific earnings
and preferences. We also take explicit account of credit constraints along with the skewed
distribution of earnings, the latter implying that the typical potential entrepreneur does not
expect to earn a lot, but might start a business if it is enjoyable. We find that in many
cases the same personality trait can predict both strong preferences for and poor perfor-
mance in self-employment. Using the estimated model, we also find evidence that credit
constraints do not appear to prevent high quality ideas from entering the market, though
they might lead to sub-optimally low investments. Moreover, rather than attracting tal-
ented, reluctant entrepreneurs, a subsidy instead attracts individuals with personalities that
generate low-quality ideas. While our model does not account for dynamics, we show that
low self-employment income in the first year is not associated with steeper income profiles,
which suggests that first-year earnings are an adequate proxy for the pecuniary returns to
self-employment given the types of policies we use the model to evaluate.
   A typical justification for policies aimed at encouraging small business ownership, such
as subsidies (financed largely through taxation), is that society as a whole would benefit
from unrealized ideas. Such arguments may be an artifact of using mean earnings from a
highly skewed distribution to characterize the median potential entrepreneur’s entry choice.
We show that a subsidy attracts low-quality ideas.
    Our findings suggest that subsidies may therefore require a different justification, one that
is not rooted in the idea that there is a mass of productive potential entrepreneurs with an
aversion to self-employment. One potential alternative justification is that entrepreneurship
has positive externalities. For example, small businesses provide jobs and could thus help
low-income communities where large corporations find it unprofitable to locate or provide
value as an amenity if consumers enjoy enterprises that are independently owned. In other
words, from a social welfare perspective, individual earnings are but one factor to consider.
Indeed, Åstebro et al. (2014) suggests that 90% of the benefits of breakthrough innovation go
to society as a whole rather than to the individual inventor, their partners, or their financial


                                               34
backers. Assessing whether pricing this externality justifies tax-funded subsidies is beyond
the scope of our model, which focuses on individual earnings. Thus, a fruitful — but by
no means simple — direction for future research would examine an expanded set of social
returns to entrepreneurship, such as positive externalities or spillover effects, which are not
captured by individual earnings.


References
Almlund, Mathilde, Angela Lee Duckworth, James Heckman, and Tim Kautz. 2011. “Personality Psychology
  and Economics.” Handbook of the Economics of Education 4 (1).

Artazcoz, Lucı́a, Joan Benach, Carme Borrell, and Immaculada Cortès. 2004. “Unemployment and Mental
  Health: Understanding the Interactions among Gender, Family Roles, and Social Class.” American
  Journal of Public Health 94 (1):82–88.

Asoni, Andrea. 2010. “What Drives Entrepreneurship?” Mimeo, University of Chicago.

Åstebro, Thomas, Holger Herz, Ramana Nanda, and Roberto A Weber. 2014. “Seeking the Roots of En-
   trepreneurship: Insights from Behavioral Economics.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (3):49–69.

Åstebro, Thomas and Peter Thompson. 2011. “Entrepreneurs, Jacks of All Trades or Hobos?” Research
   Policy 40 (5):637–649.

Barón, Juan D and Deborah A Cobb-Clark. 2010. “Are Young People’s Educational Outcomes Linked to
  their Sense of Control?” IZA Working Paper.

Barrick, Murray R and Michael K Mount. 1991. “The Big Five Personality Dimensions and Job Performance:
  A Meta-Analysis.” Personnel Psychology 44 (1):1–26.

———. 1993. “Autonomy as a Moderator of the Relationships Between the Big Five Personality Dimensions
 and Job Performance.” Journal of Applied Psychology 78 (1):111.

Becker, Gary S. 1965. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” Economic Journal 75 (299):493–517.

Ben-Ner, Avner, Fanmin Kong, and Louis Putterman. 2004. “Share and Share Alike? Gender-Pairing, Per-
  sonality, and Cognitive Ability as Determinants of Giving.” Journal of Economic Psychology 25 (5):581–
  589.

Borghans, Lex, Angela Lee Duckworth, James J Heckman, and Bas Ter Weel. 2008. “The Economics and
  Psychology of Personality Traits.” Journal of Human Resources 43 (4):972–1059.

Borghans, Lex, Bart HH Golsteyn, James Heckman, and John Eric Humphries. 2011. “Identification Prob-
  lems in Personality Psychology.” Personality and Individual Differences 51 (3):315–320.

Bowles, Samuel, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne. 2001. “Incentive-Enhancing Preferences: Personality,
  Behavior, and Earnings.” The American Economic Review 91 (2):155–158.

Brandstätter, Hermann. 2011. “Personality Aspects of Entrepreneurship: A Look at Five Meta-Analyses.”
  Personality and Individual Differences 51 (3):222–230.

Bugg, Julie M, Nancy A Zook, Edward L DeLosh, Deana B Davalos, and Hasker P Davis. 2006. “Age
  Differences in Fluid Intelligence: Contributions of General Slowing and Frontal Decline.” Brain and
  Cognition 62 (1):9–16.


                                                   35
Caliendo, Marco, Frank Fossen, and Alexander S Kritikos. 2014. “Personality Characteristics and the Deci-
  sions to Become and Stay Self-Employed.” Small Business Economics 42 (4):787–814.

Caspi, Avshalom. 2000. “The Child is Father of the Man: Personality Continuities from Childhood to
  Adulthood.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 78 (1):158.

Cattan, Sarah. 2011. “The Role of Workers Traits in Explaining the Early Career Gender Wage Gap.”
  Mimeo, University of Chicago.

Cobb-Clark, Deborah A and Stefanie Schurer. 2012. “The Stability of Big-Five Personality Traits.” Eco-
  nomics Letters 115 (1):11–15.

Cubel, Maria, Ana Nuevo-Chiquero, Santiago Sanchez-Pages, and Marian Vidal-Fernandez. 2016. “Do
  Personality Traits Affect Productivity? Evidence from the Laboratory.” The Economic Journal
  126 (592):654–681.

Cunha, Flavio, James J Heckman, and Susanne M Schennach. 2010. “Estimating the Technology of Cognitive
  and Noncognitive Skill Formation.” Econometrica 78 (3):883–931.

Cutler, David M. and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2010. “Understanding Differences in Health Behaviors by
  Education.” Journal of Health Economics 29 (1):1–28.

Dahling, Jason J, Samantha L Chau, David M Mayer, and Jane B Gregory. 2012. “Breaking Rules for
  the Right Reasons? An Investigation of Pro-Social Rule Breaking.” Journal of Organizational Behavior
  33 (1):21–42.

Dillon, Eleanor W. and Christopher T. Stanton. 2018. “Self-Employment Dynamics and the Returns to
  Entrepreneurship.” Mimeo, HBS.

Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2008. “Representative Trust and Reci-
  procity: Prevalence and Determinants.” Economic Inquiry 46 (1):84–90.

———. 2010. “Are Risk Aversion and Impatience Related to Cognitive Ability?”          American Economic
 Review 100 (3):1238–1260.

Evans, David S and Boyan Jovanovic. 1989. “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice under Liquidity
  Constraints.” The Journal of Political Economy 97 (4):808–827.

Fairlie, Robert W and William Holleran. 2012. “Entrepreneurship Training, Risk Aversion and other Per-
  sonality Traits: Evidence from a Random Experiment.” Journal of Economic Psychology 33 (2):366–378.

Fairlie, Robert W, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. “Behind the GATE Experiment: Evidence
  on Effects of and Rationales for Subsidized Entrepreneurship Training.” American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 7 (2):125–161.

Fréchette, Guillaume R, Andrew Schotter, and Isabel Trevino. 2017. “Personality, Information Acquisition,
   and Choice under Uncertainty: An Experimental Study.”

Gensowski, Miriam, James Heckman, and Peter Savelyev. 2011. “The Effects of Education, Personality, and
  IQ on Earnings of High-Ability Men.” Mimeo, University of Chicago.

Goldberg, Lewis R. 1971. “Five Models of Clinical Judgment: An Empirical Comparison between Linear
  and Nonlinear Representations of the Human Inference Process.” Organizational Behavior and Human
  Performance 6 (4):458–479.

Goldberger, Arthur S. 1972. “Structural Equation Methods in the Social Sciences.” Econometrica 40 (6):979–
  1001.


                                                   36
Hamilton, B.H. 2000. “Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of the Returns of Self-
  Employment.” Journal of Political Economy 108 (3):604–631.

Hartog, Joop, Mirjam Van Praag, and Justin Van Der Sluis. 2010. “If You Are So Smart, Why Aren’t You
  an Entrepreneur? Returns to Cognitive and Social Ability: Entrepreneurs versus Employees.” Journal of
  Economics & Management Strategy 19 (4):947–989.

Heckman, James, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter Savelyev. 2013. “Understanding the Mechanisms Through
  Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes.” The American Economic
  Review 103 (6):1–35.

Heckman, James J. 2012. “The Developmental Origins of Health.” Health Economics 21 (1):24–29.

Heckman, James J and Bo E Honore. 1990. “The Empirical Content of the Roy Model.” Econometrica
  58 (5):1121–1149.

Heckman, James J and Tim Kautz. 2012. “Hard Evidence on Soft Skills.” Labour Economics 19 (4):451–464.

———. 2013. “Fostering and Measuring Skills: Interventions that Improve Character and Cognition.” NBER
 working paper.

Heckman, James J and Paul A LaFontaine. 2010. “The American High School Graduation Rate: Trends
  and Levels.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (2):244–262.

Heckman, James J and Yona Rubinstein. 2001. “The Importance of Noncognitive Skills: Lessons from the
  GED Testing Program.” The American Economic Review 91 (2):145–149.

Heckman, James J, Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. “The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive
  Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” The Journal of Labor Economics 24 (3):411.

Heineck, Guido. 2010. “Does It Pay to Be Nice-Personality and Earnings in the United Kingdom.” Industrial
  and Labor Relations Review 64:1020–1047.

Hincapié, Andrés. 2018. “Entrepreneurship over the Life Cycle: Where are the Young Entrepreneurs?”
  Mimeo, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Hisrich, Robert, Janice Langan-Fox, and Sharon Grant. 2007. “Entrepreneurship Research and Practice: A
  Call to Action for Psychology.” American Psychologist 62 (6):575.

Horn, John L and Raymond B Cattell. 1967. “Age Differences in Fluid and Crystallized Intelligence.” Acta
  Psychologica 26:107–129.

Humphries, John Eric. 2017. “The Causes and Consequences of Self-Employment over the Life Cycle.”
  Mimeo, Yale University.

Hurst, Erik and Annamaria Lusardi. 2004. “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and Entrepreneur-
  ship.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (2):319–347.

Hurst, Erik and Benjamin Pugsley. 2014. “Wealth, Tastes, and Entrepreneurial Choice.” Mimeo, University
  of Chicago.

Hurst, Erik and Benjamin Wild Pugsley. 2011. “What Do Small Businesses Do?” Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity 2011 (2):73–118.

Jöreskog, Karl G and Arthur S Goldberger. 1975. “Estimation of a Model with Multiple Indicators and Multi-
   ple Causes of a Single Latent Variable.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 70 (351a):631–639.



                                                     37
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. 1986. “Fairness as a Constraint on Profit Seeking:
  Entitlements in the Market.” The American Economic Review :728–741.

Lazear, Edward P. 2004. “Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Labor Economics 23 (4):pp. 649–680.

Lerner, Josh. 2009. Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Why Public Efforts to Boost Entrepreneurship and Venture
  Capital Have Failed–and What to Do about It. Princeton University Press.

Levine, Ross and Yona Rubinstein. 2017. “Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes an Entrepreneur and Do They
  Earn More?” uarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2):963–1018.

Lundberg, Shelly. 2011. “Psychology and Family Economics.” Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik 12 (s1):66–
  81.

———. 2012. “Personality and Marital Surplus.” IZA Journal of Labor Economics 1 (1):1–21.

———. 2013. “The College Type: Personality and Educational Inequality.” Journal of Labor Economics
 31 (3):421–441.

Lundborg, Petter. 2013. “The Health Returns to Schooling—What Can We Learn from Twins?” Journal
  of Population Economics 26 (2):673–701.

McCrae, Robert R, Paul T Costa, Margarida Pedroso de Lima, Ant onio Simões, Fritz Ostendorf, Alois
  Angleitner, Iris Marušić, Denis Bratko, Gian Vittorio Caprara, Claudio Barbaranelli et al. 1999. “Age
  Differences in Personality across the Adult Life Span: Parallels in Five Cultures.” Developmental Psy-
  chology 35 (2):466.

MIDMAC. 1999. “Methodology of the National Survey of Midlife Development in the United States
  (MIDUS).” The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.

Moss, Simon A, Janis McFarland, Simon Ngu, and Anna Kijowska. 2007. “Maintaining an Open Mind to
  Closed Individuals: The Effect of Resource Availability and Leadership Style on the Association between
  Openness to Experience and Organizational Commitment.” Journal of Research in Personality 41 (2):259–
  275.

Mueller, Gerrit and Erik Plug. 2006. “Estimating the Effect of Personality on Male and Female Earnings.”
 Industrial and Labor Relations Review :3–22.

Nyhus, Ellen K and Empar Pons. 2005. “The Effects of Personality on Earnings.” Journal of Economic
  Psychology 26 (3):363–384.

Oldham, John M, Andrew E Skodol, and Donna S Bender. 2009. Essentials of Personality Disorders.
  American Psychiatric Pub.

Papageorge, Nicholas W, Victor Ronda, and Yu Zheng. 2016. “The Economic Value of Breaking Bad :
  Schooling, Misbehavior and the Labor Market.” Mimeo, The Johns Hopkins University.

Paulson, Anna L, Robert M Townsend, and Alexander Karaivanov. 2006. “Distinguishing Limited Liability
  from Moral Hazard in a Model of Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Political Economy 114 (1):100–144.

Prada, Marı́a F. and Sergio Urzúa. 2016. “One Size Does Not Fit All: Multiple Dimensions of Ability,
  College Attendance, and Earnings.” Forthcoming, Journal of Labor Economics.

Rauch, Andreas and Michael Frese. 2007. “Let’s Put the Person Back into Entrepreneurship Research: A
  Meta-Analysis on the Relationship between Business Owners’ Personality Traits, Business Creation, and
  Success.” European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 16 (4):353–385.



                                                   38
Rees, Hedley and Anup Shah. 1986. “An Empirical Analysis of Self-Employment in the UK.” Journal of
  Applied Econometrics 1 (1):95–108.

Roberts, Brent, Joshua J Jackson, Angela L Duckworth, and Katherine Von Culin. 2011. “Personality
  Measurement and Assessment in Large Panel Surveys.” Forum for Health Economics and Policy 14 (3):9.

Roy, Andrew Donald. 1951. “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Economic Papers
  3 (2):135–146.

Rustichini, Aldo, Colin G DeYoung, Jon E Anderson, and Stephen V Burks. 2016. “Toward the Integra-
  tion of Personality Theory and Decision Theory in Explaining Economic Behavior: An Experimental
  Investigation.” Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics 64:122–137.

Savelyev, Peter A. 2010. “Conscientiousness, Education, and Longevity of High-Ability Individuals.” Mimeo,
  University of Chicago.

Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1949. Change and the Entrepreneur: Postulates and Patterns for Entrepreneurial
  History. Harvard University Press.

Shane, S, N Nicolaou, L Cherkas, and T Spector. 2010. “Openness to Experience and Opportunity Recog-
  nition: Evidence of a Common Genetic Etiology.” Human Resource Management 29:291–303.

Shane, Scott and Nicos Nicolaou. 2013. “The Genetics of Entrepreneurial Performance.” International Small
  Business Journal 31 (5):473–495.

Störmer, Susi and René Fahr. 2013. “Individual Determinants of Work Attendance: Evidence on the Role
   of Personality.” Applied Economics 45 (19):2863–2875.

Urzua, S. 2008. “Racial Labor Market Gaps The Role of Abilities and Schooling Choices.” Journal of Human
  Resources 43 (4):919–971.

Van der Sluis, Justin, Mirjam Van Praag, and Wim Vijverberg. 2008. “Education and Entrepreneurship Se-
  lection and Performance: A Review of the Empirical Literature.” Journal of Economic Surveys 22 (5):795–
  841.

Vandenberghe, Christian, Sylvie St-Onge et al. 2008. “An Analysis of the Relation Between Personality and
  the Attractiveness of Total Rewards Components.” Relations Industrielles/Industrial Relations 63 (3):425–
  453.

Viinikainen, Jutta, Katja Kokko, Lea Pulkkinen, and Jaakko Pehkonen. 2010. “Personality and Labour
   Market Income: Evidence from Longitudinal Data.” Labour 24 (2):201–220.

Wichert, Laura and Winfried Pohlmeier. 2009. “Female Labor Force Participation and the Big Five.” Mimeo,
  University of Konstanz Department of Economics.

Willis, Robert J. and Sherwin Rosen. 1979. “Education and Self-Selection.” Journal of Political Economy
  87 (5):S7–S36.

Zhang, Zhen, Michael J Zyphur, Jayanth Narayanan, Richard D Arvey, Sankalp Chaturvedi, Bruce J Avolio,
  Paul Lichtenstein, and Gerry Larsson. 2009. “The Genetic Basis of Entrepreneurship: Effects of Gender
  and Personality.” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2):93–107.

Zhao, Hao and Scott E Seibert. 2006. “The Big Five Personality Dimensions and Entrepreneurial Status: A
  Meta-Analytical Review.” Journal of Applied Psychology 91 (2):259.

Zhao, Hao, Scott E Seibert, and G Thomas Lumpkin. 2010. “The Relationship of Personality to En-
  trepreneurial Intentions and Performance: A Meta-Analytic Review.” Journal of Management 36 (2):381–
  404.

                                                    39
9     Tables and Figures

                                Table 1: The Big 5 Personality Traits


                  Personality Trait                       Associated With Being:
             Openness to New Experiences         Creative, imaginative, intelligent, curi-
                                                ous, broad-minded, sophisticated and ad-
                                                venturous.
             Conscientiousness                   Organized, responsible, hardworking
                                                and not careless.
             Extraversion                        Outgoing, friendly, lively, active and
                                                talkative.
             Agreeableness                       Helpful, warm, caring, softhearted and
                                                sympathetic.
             Neuroticism                         Moody, worrying, nervous and not calm.
                               Description of the big 5 personality traits.

                                   Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                   Analysis         Paid          Self              ∆
                                    Sample      Employment    Employment      (Self−Paid)     p-values
    Earnings (2004)               $78,328.06     $74,687.57    $93,988.64      $19,301.07      0.008
    Median Earnings (2004)        $57,500.00      $58,500       $58,402         $1,000.00      0.757
    Assets in 1995               $ 119,748.30   $100,274.40   $203,520.70     $103,246.30      0.000
    High school degree                0.19          0.19          0.20             0.01        0.674
    Some college                      0.27          0.27          0.26            -0.01        0.835
    College graduate                  0.25          0.25          0.25             0.00        0.931
    Age                              50.09         49.35         53.25             3.90        0.000
    Married                           0.79          0.78          0.83             0.05        0.136
    No. of children                   2.19          2.19          2.19             0.00        0.989
    Spouse educ. (years)             14.46         14.53         14.17            -0.36        0.082
    Spouse employed (1995)            0.66          0.64          0.72            0.07         0.110
    Fluid Cognitive Ability           0.35          0.36          0.32            -0.04        0.618
    Openness (1995)                   3.07          3.06          3.13             0.07        0.083
    Openness (2004)                   2.97          2.95          3.06             0.12        0.008
    Conscientiousness (1995)         3.40           3.40          3.44             0.04        0.232
    Conscientiousness (2004)          3.46          3.46          3.48             0.02        0.580
    Extraversion (1995)               3.14          3.12          3.25            0.14         0.004
    Extraversion (2004)               3.04          3.02          3.16            0.14         0.005
    Agreeableness (1995)             3.29           3.28          3.31             0.02        0.602
    Agreeableness (2004)             3.24           3.23          3.30             0.07        0.102
    Neuroticism (1995)                2.16          2.18          2.10            -0.08        0.152
    Neuroticism (2004)                2.02          2.03          1.99            -0.04        0.453

    Summary statistics for the analytic sample of 896 individuals, of whom 167 (19%) are
    self-employed.




                                                   40
                  Table 3: Sector Earnings and Sector Choice
                                                   Earnings         Sector
                                                  SE     PE         Choice
                  Openness (2004)                -0.27 0.06          0.25
                                                 (0.34)   (0.05)     (0.12)

                  Conscientiousness (2004)       -0.1     0.13      -0.07
                                                 (0.3)    (0.06)     (0.12)

                  Extraversion (2004)            0.3      0.06       0.13
                                                 (0.31)   (0.05)     (0.11)

                  Agreeableness (2004)           -0.38    -0.18     -0.03
                                                 (0.29)   (0.05)     (0.11)

                  Neuroticism (2004)             0.02     0.05       0.03
                                                 (0.21)   (0.04)     (0.09)

                  Cognition                      -0.14    0.12       0.04
                                                 (0.14)   (0.03)     (0.06)

                  Years of education             0.18     0.07      -0.004
                                                 (0.06)   (0.01)     (0.03)

                  Age                            -0.02    0.008      0.04
                                                 (0.02)   (0.003)   (0.007)

                  Married                        0.18     0.21       0.58
                                                 (0.34)   (0.06)     (0.27)

                  Number of kids                   .         .      -0.06
                                                                     (0.04)

                  Spouse education                 .         .      -0.03
                                                                     (0.02)

                  Spouse employed (1995)           .         .       0.22
                                                                     (0.11)

                  Observations                   169       727       896

OLS regressions of log earnings by sector (where [SE] refers to self-employment and [PE]
refers to paid employment) along with probit estimates for sector choice, where the out-
come variable is an indicator for 2004 self-employment. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                            41
            Table 4: Structural Parameter Estimates
Panel A:                                   Earnings                Self Utility
Relative Returns             Self Emp.            Paid Emp.        Parameters
Openness                       -0.24                 0.07              0.79
                                (0.10)              (0.05)             (0.22)

Conscientiousness               -0.13                0.10             -0.10
                                (0.11)              (0.05)             (0.19)

Extraversion                    0.26                 0.05             -0.20
                                (0.07)              (0.04)             (0.18)

Agreeableness                   -0.32               -0.16             -0.12
                                (0.09)              (0.03)             (0.20)

Neuroticism                     0.02                 0.09              0.23
                                (0.04)              (0.04)             (0.24)

Years of education              0.13                 0.06             -0.07
                                (0.01)              (0.01)             (0.04)

Age                             -0.02                0.01              0.06
                                (0.01)              (0.003)            (0.01)

Married                         0.18                 0.18              0.51
                                (0.16)              (0.06)             (0.40)

Cognition                       -0.19                0.08              0.41
                                (0.06)              (0.03)             (0.18)

Number of kids                    .                    .              -0.10
                                                                       (0.10)

Spouse education                  .                    .              -0.04
                                                                       (0.02)

Spouse employed (1995)            .                    .               0.19
                                                                       (0.24)

Utility Weight                    .                    .            4.84e-05
                                                                     (9.13e-06)

Constant                          .                  8.68             -2.72
                                                    (0.09)             (0.70)

Panel B:
Business Ideas, Technology, Credit Constraints and Assets
Business Idea Constant 1        6.67        Technology                 0.14
                                (1.29)                                 (0.04)

Business Idea Constant 2       10.17          Credit Constraints       1.94
                                (0.20)                                 (1.67)

Business Idea Variance 1        0.94          1995 Assets              1.01
                                (0.62)                                 (0.24)

Business Idea Variance 2        0.19          Assets Variance          4.60
                                (0.12)                                 (1.39)

Mixture Probability             0.79
                                (0.01)

Panel C:
Earnings Shocks            Self Emp. (ey )     Paid Emp. (ew )
eθ                               0.05               0.06
                                (0.05)              (0.02)

Ã                              0.04                 0.03
                                (0.03)              (0.01)

ea                              0.07                 0.05
                                (0.04)              (0.02)

Variance                        1.25                 0.58
                                (0.11)              (0.02)


     Parameter estimates along with standard errors in parentheses.
                                      42
                       Table 5: Preferences versus Earnings

                                   Highest Relative Payoff
                                     in Self or Paid?
             Characteristic        Earnings      Utility        Misalignment?
            Education               Self         Paid                 X
            Age                     Paid         Self                 X
            Married                 Same         Self
            Cognition               Paid         Self                  X
            Openness                Paid         Self                  X
            Conscientiousness       Paid         Paid
            Extraversion            Self         Paid                  X
            Agreeableness           Paid         Paid
            Neuroticism             Paid         Self                  X

For individual characteristics, we identify whether the marginal payoff (earnings and util-
ity) is higher in paid or self-employment and then add a checkmark if there is a mis-
alignment. For example, openness to new experiences leads to higher relative earnings in
paid-employment, but higher utility in self-employment, leading to a misalignment.




   Table 6: Policy Simulations and Self Employment Entry and Earnings

                                                       % Change:            % Change:
             Counterfactual                  Entry     Average SE          Average Val.
           Policy Simulation               Probability  Earnings           of Bus. Ideas
    Baseline                                  0.19         0.00                 0.00
    No Credit Constraints                     0.22         0.02                <0.00
    Preferences Do Not Affect Entry           0.13         0.30                 0.19
    Both                                      0.15         0.26                 0.18
    Subsidy                                   0.37        -0.46                -0.41
    No Preferences and Subsidy                0.18         0.09                 0.09

This table shows percent changes in entry probability, average self-employment earnings
and the average value of realized business ideas (θi ) under counterfactuals where: (i) there
are no credit constraints, (ii) preferences do not affect entry (agents maximize earnings),
(iii) there are no credit constraints and preferences do not affect entry, (iv) there is a
blanket subsidy of $25,000 for any individual who starts a business and (v) there is a
blanket subsidy of $25,000 for any individual who starts a business and preferences do
not affect entry. In computing the percent change in self-employment earnings due to a
counterfactual subsidy, we use earnings net of the subsidy.




                                             43
1                                                        1000000


.8                                                        800000


.6                                                        600000


.4                                                        400000


.2                                                        200000


0                                                                 0
     0   200000   400000    600000    800000   1000000                 0      200000 400000 600000 800000 1000000

               95% CI                                                                 95% CI
               lpoly smooth: Self-employment                                          lpoly smooth: Earnings
               Self-employment                                                        Earnings
           (a) 1995 Assets and Self Employment                    (b) 1995 Assets and Self Employment Earnings




1
                                                          1




.5
                                                          0




0                                                        -1


     1            2               3               4           1                   2                3                4

               95% CI                                                      95% CI
               lpoly smooth: Self-employment                               lpoly smooth: Relative log SE Earnings
               Self-employment                                             Relative log SE Earnings
            (c) Openness and Self Employment                          (d) Openness and Self Employment Earnings


         Figure 1: Empirical Patterns. Panel 1(a) shows that self-employment rises with
         1995 assets. Panel 1(b) shows that earnings rise with assets at high asset levels. Panel
         1(c) shows a positive relationship between self-employment and openness; and Panel 1(d)
         depicts a negative relationship between openness and self-employment earnings.


                                                         44
             0.2                                                                                                           0.2

                                                                      Paid Earnings [Model]                                                                                Self Earnings [Model]
            0.18                                                                                                          0.18
                                                                      Paid Earnings [Data]                                                                                 Self Earnings [Data]
            0.16                                                                                                          0.16


            0.14                                                                                                          0.14
Frequency




                                                                                                              Frequency
            0.12                                                                                                          0.12


             0.1                                                                                                           0.1


            0.08                                                                                                          0.08


            0.06                                                                                                          0.06


            0.04                                                                                                          0.04


            0.02                                                                                                          0.02


              0                                                                                                             0
                   0       1    2             3              4          5        6        7        8                                  0        2        4        6           8      10      12
                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                   10                                                                                            10 5


                           (a) Paid Employment Model Fit                                                                                       (b) Self Employment Model Fit

                       Figure 2: Model Fit. Earnings histograms from the data and predicted using estimated
                       model parameters for individuals in paid employment and in self-employment.

                                                      10 6
                                           4.5


                                             4


                                           3.5


                                             3
                                Earnings




                                           2.5


                                             2


                                           1.5


                                             1


                                           0.5


                                             0


                                           -0.5
                                                  0              10         20       30       40             50                  60       70       80       90       100

                                                                                              Percentiles
                       Figure 3: Percentiles of Simulated Expected Earnings Differentials. For
                       each individual in the sample, expected self- and paid-employment earnings are drawn
                       2,500 times. All draws are ordered and plotted against their corresponding percentile.
                       The x-axis is the tenth-percentile and the y-axis is earnings (in levels). The figure shows
                       that most simulated workers (80%) would expect to lose money in self-employment. The
                       simulation also illustrates why average earnings are high in self-employment: there is the
                       possibility of an extremely high business idea draw.


                                                                                                            45
10 4                                                      10 4
5.5                                                       8.6

 5                                                        8.4

                                                          8.2
4.5
                                                              8
 4
                                                          7.8
3.5
                                                          7.6
 3
                                                          7.4
2.5                                                       7.2

 2                                                            7
 5                                                            5

       4.5                                              4.5       4.5                                             4.5

                4                                   4                     4                                   4

                    3.5                 3.5                                     3.5               3.5

                          3     3                                                     3   3

                                     Extraversion                                              Extraversion
              Openness                                                  Openness


                 (a) Self Employment Earnings                             (b) Paid Employment Earnings



10 4
4.5                                                     0.25

 4                                                      0.24

3.5                                                     0.23

 3                                                      0.22

2.5                                                     0.21

 2                                                        0.2

1.5                                                     0.19

 1                                                      0.18
 5                                                         5

       4.5                                              4.5       4.5                                             4.5

                4                                   4                     4                                   4

                    3.5                 3.5                                     3.5               3.5

                          3     3                                                     3   3

                                     Extraversion                                              Extraversion
              Openness                                                  Openness


                    (c) Relative SE Utility                                   (d) Self Employment Entry

             Figure 4: Personality and Self Employment: We simulate expected earnings for
             self- and paid employment, utility and entry probability where Openness to New Experi-
             ences and Extraversion are set equal to each combination of deciles for the sub-sample of
             individuals used in our analysis




                                                          46
                                  10 -5                                                                                                                       10 -5
                           1                                                                                                                           9

                                                                          Model                                                                                                        Model
                          0.9                                                                                                                          8
                                                                          No Constraint                                                                                                No Constraint
                          0.8                                             No Constraint or Preferences                                                 7
                                                                                                                                                                                       No Constraint or Preferences
                          0.7
                                                                                                                                                       6

                          0.6
                                                                                                                                                       5
                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                       4
                          0.4

                                                                                                                                                       3
                          0.3

                                                                                                                                                       2
                          0.2


                          0.1                                                                                                                          1


                           0                                                                                                                           0
                            -1            0       1         2         3           4    5     6       7         8                                        -1            0   1     2         3         4      5      6        7
                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                   10                                                                                                  10 4




                                                                          (a)                                                                                                          (b)

                                  10 4
                           2
                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                  Unconditional                                                                                                Unconditional
                          1.8
                                                                                  Conditional on Entry                                                                                         Conditional on Entry
                                                                                                                                                      0.9
                          1.6
                                                                                  No Credit Constraints                                                                                        No Credit Constraints
Value of Business Ideas




                                                                                                                            Value of Business Ideas




                                                                                  No Constraints or Utility                                                                                    No Constraints or Utility
                          1.4                                                                                                                         0.8


                          1.2

                                                                                                                                                      0.7
                           1


                          0.8                                                                                                                         0.6


                          0.6
                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                          0.4


                          0.2                                                                                                                         0.4
                            2.8               3       3.2       3.4         3.6       3.8        4       4.2        4.4                                 2.8           3   3.2   3.4      3.6       3.8     4     4.2       4.4

                                                                      Openness                                                                                                        Openness



                                                                           (c)                                                                                                         (d)

                                          Figure 5: Counterfactual Simulations — Removing Impediments. Panels 5(a)
                                          and 5(b) show simulated relative earnings and values of realized business ideas, respectively
                                          (i) using estimated model parameters (ii) absent a credit constraint and (iii) absent the
                                          credit constraint and where preferences play no role. Panel 5(c) plots the simulated rela-
                                          tionship between openness and business ideas using model parameters (i) unconditionally,
                                          (ii) conditional on entry, (iii) absent credit constraints and (iv) absent credit constraints
                                          if preferences play no role. Panel 5(d) repeats the exercise of Panel 5(c) normalizing the
                                          value of business ideas to 1 at the lowest decile of Openness for ease of comparison.




                                                                                                                                                      47
                                                                                                                                                                   10 -4
                          30                                                                                                                               1.2

                                                                          Model                                                                                                                       Model
                                                                          Subsidy                                                                                                                     Subsidy
                          25                                                                                                                                1
                                                                          Subsidy & No Preferences                                                                                                    Subsidy & No Preferences

                          20                                                                                                                               0.8




                          15                                                                                                                               0.6




                          10                                                                                                                               0.4




                           5                                                                                                                               0.2




                           0                                                                                                                                0
                           -0.2              0         0.2         0.4          0.6         0.8       1      1.2                                             -1                0         1            2             3       4            5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10 4




                                                                         (a)                                                                                                                        (b)

                                  10 4
                           2
                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                      Unconditional                                                                                                         Unconditional
                                                                                                                    Value of Business Ideas (Normalized)




                          1.8
                                                                                      Conditional on Entry                                                                                                  Conditional on Entry
                                                                                                                                                           0.9
                          1.6                                                         Subsidy                                                                                                               Subsidy
Value of Business Ideas




                                                                                      Subsidy, No Utility                                                                                                   Subsidy, No Utility
                          1.4
                                                                                                                                                           0.8
                          1.2


                           1                                                                                                                               0.7


                          0.8

                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                          0.6


                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                           0.5

                          0.2


                           0                                                                                                                               0.4
                            2.8          3       3.2         3.4          3.6         3.8         4   4.2    4.4                                             2.8           3       3.2       3.4      3.6     3.8       4       4.2     4.4

                                                                   Openness                                                                                                                        Openness



                                                                         (c)                                                                                                                        (d)

                                         Figure 6: Counterfactual Simulations — Subsidy. Panels 6(a) and 6(b) show
                                         simulated entry probability and values of realized business ideas, respectively (i) using
                                         estimated model parameters (ii) under a subsidy and (iii) under a subsidy and where
                                         preferences play no role Panel 6(c) plots the simulated relationship between openness
                                         and business ideas using model parameters unconditionally, conditional on entry, in the
                                         presence of a subsidy and with a subsidy if preferences play no role. Panel 6(d) repeats
                                         the exercise normalizing the value of business ideas to 1 at the lowest decile of Openness
                                         for ease of comparison.




                                                                                                                   48
    16                                                                        30

                                                      Model                                                                       Model
    14                                                Subsidy                                                                     Subsidy
                                                                              25

    12

                                                                              20
    10



     8                                                                        15



     6
                                                                              10

     4

                                                                               5
     2



     0                                                                         0
      3.3   3.4     3.5   3.6            3.7         3.8           3.9          3.5          3.55     3.6     3.65   3.7   3.75   3.8       3.85




                    (a) Openness                                                                    (b) Conscientiousness

    20                                                                        14

                                                      Model                                                                       Model
    18
                                                      Subsidy                 12                                                  Subsidy
    16


    14                                                                        10


    12
                                                                               8

    10

                                                                               6
     8


     6                                                                         4

     4
                                                                               2
     2


     0                                                                         0
      3.7   3.75    3.8   3.85           3.9         3.95          4            3.6          3.7      3.8      3.9   4     4.1    4.2       4.3




                   (c) Extraversion                                                                   (d) Agreeableness

                                 25

                                                                                                    Model
                                                                                                    Subsidy
                                 20




                                 15




                                 10




                                  5




                                  0
                                  2.85         2.9          2.95          3           3.05          3.1       3.15




                                                            (e) Neuroticism

Figure 7: Personality and Subsidies. We plot the distribution of personality traits
among individuals choosing self-employment simulated from the model and then under
the counterfactual where entrepreneurship is subsidized ($25,000 for all small businesses).



                                                                         49
Appendix A                    Appendix

Appendix A.1                Additional Data Analyses
Here, we provide a few additional data moments. First, we show summary statistics for a
larger sample of individuals observed in 2004, but for whom some information is missing. For
each variable, we use the maximum sample of working men available. Summary statistics for
the larger sample are found in Table S1 and are comparable to those computed for the main
analytic sample presented in Table 2. Next, we show reduced-form estimates for a variety of
sector choice models (probits). Basic patterns relating choices to personality remain largely
the same when we control for additional explanatory variables for both the analytic sample
and the aforementioned larger sample. In general, we find that openness to new experiences
predicts entry along with age, marriage and spousal employment. Sector choice estimates
are found in Table S2 for the main analytic sample and in Table S3 for the larger sample.
    In assessing the impact of personality on self-employment, a potential issue is the possi-
bility of simultaneity. The concern is that personality, like other socio-emotional skills, may
be somewhat mutable over the life-cycle, at least in comparison to other individual char-
acteristics that predict economic outcomes, such as race, gender and cognition (Heckman
and Rubinstein, 2001). Therefore, in studying personality, we must address the possibil-
ity that not only does personality drive economic decisions, but economic decisions, such
as self-employment, affect personality through the technology of skill formation (Cunha,
Heckman, and Schennach (2010)). We cannot address this assumption using a single latent
factor. However, we can indirectly assess it by considering 1995 personality scores, earnings,
assets and sector decisions along with 2004 personality scores. For each personality trait,
we regress the 2004 score onto 1995 score, age, self-employment in 1995, log assets in 1995
and log earnings in 1995. We would be concerned if self-employment or earnings affected the
2004 score once we have conditioned on the 1995 score.
    Results for each of the five personality traits are presented in Table S4. Estimated coef-
ficients on log assets, log earnings and 1995 sector choice are insignificant (both individually
and jointly) and the increase in R2 is 0 for each additional variable.53 This provides some
evidence against concerns of simultaneity — e.g., the concern that earlier exposure to self-
employment drives personality. Moreover, we learn from this set of tests that personality
scores can change with age, a pattern consistent with previous research on personality as-
sessments (McCrae et al., 1999). In particular, we find that older people score more highly
on openness, extraversion and agreeableness and perhaps slightly lower on neuroticism. In
 53
      These findings hold if we restrict attention to individuals who were not self-employed in 1995.


                                                      50
our structural estimation, we therefore account for the possible impact of age on personality
scores. In particular, and given evidence that personality is mostly stable in adulthood, we
treat both personality scores (measured in 1995 and 2004) as possible mis-measurements of
an underlying, stable factor and permit age to explain some of the measurement error.


Appendix A.2               Identification
We are interested in identifying the distributions of five latent personality traits, as measured
by the Big 5.54 The aim is to show that we can use observed measurements of personality to
identify the joint distribution of the latent factors along with the parameters mapping latent
factors to observed outcomes.
    To simplify exposition, suppose there are only two personality traits, each with two
measurements (scores on personality assessments). Express the measurement of trait j ∈
{1, 2} for agent i at time t ∈ {95, 04} as follows:

                                       Ci1,95   =   fi1 + C i,95,1
                                       Ci1,04   =   d1,04 fi1 + C
                                                     C
                                                                    i,04,1
                                                             C
                                                                           .                (22)
                                       Ci2,95   =   fi2 + i,95,2
                                       Ci2,04   =   dC              C
                                                     2,04 fi2 + i,04,2


These expressions reflect two assumptions. One, each personality assessment is dedicated
to a single underlying trait. Two, for each underlying trait, we normalize the 1995 factor
loading (the parameter linking the underlying trait to the observed assessment) to 1.
  For every individual in the sample, we also observe earnings (in either paid or self-
employment.) To further simplify exposition, write log earnings as:

                                       ln(yi ) = η1 fi1 + η2 fi2 + νiy .                    (23)

Finally, we assume that the  are independent of each other and of νiy . However, we do not
assume that fi1 ⊥ fi2 — i.e., we permit underlying latent traits to be correlated.
    The aim is to show that we can identify the κ, which requires identification of the joint
distribution of the underlying factors fi1 and fi2 . Under stated assumptions (independence
of error terms, dedicated measurements and the normalizations), it holds that:

                                                     Cov(Ci1,04 ,ln(yi ))
                                        dC
                                         1,04 =      Cov(Ci1,95 ,ln(yi ))
                                                     Cov(Ci2,04 ,ln(yi ))                   (24)
                                        dC
                                         2,04 =      Cov(Ci2,95 ,ln(yi ))

 54
      We adapt identification arguments presented, for example, in Urzua (2008).

                                                      51
This allows us to obtain the variance and covariance of each factor:
                                                   Cov(Ci1,95 ,Ci1,04 )
                                   V ar(fi1 ) =         dC1,04
                                                   Cov(Ci2,95 ,Ci1,04 )
                                   V ar(fi2 ) =         dC
                                                                                                 (25)
                                                          2,04

                               Cov(fi1 , fi2 ) = Cov(Ci1,95 , Ci2,95 )

Finally, η1 and η2 are identified from the covariance of ln(yi ) and Ci1,95 and Ci2,95 , respectively.
    Identification of the remaining unobservables in the model is less straightforward. Self-
employment and paid-employment earning shocks are dependent on both the business idea
and asset growth disturbances (eθ and ea ). As a result, it follows that both disturbances
also influence the individual’s sector choice. Identification of the model relies on the identi-
fication of the asset disturbance. To see that, note that the model without the asset growth
disturbance (ea ) is a modified version of the Roy model (Roy, 1951) and standard identi-
fication arguments would apply (see e.g., Heckman and Honore (1990)). Identification of
the asset equation is less straightforward and is only possible since the asset disturbance
enters non-linearly in the credit constraint equation (see especially equations (16) and (19)).
Otherwise it would not be possible to distinguish between the two disturbance shocks.
    To assess robustness, we have tried some alternatives, which includes estimating the asset
growth equation outside of the model using average asset growth from 1995 to 2004, though
this may induce endogeneity through reverse causality, which is what we aim to avoid. We
can also use 1995 assets as a noisy measure of 2004 assets. These alternatives do not change
main qualitative results appreciably. One important exception is that using 1995 assets leads
to a noisier estimate of the credit constraint parameter λ. This likely occurs because 1995
assets are too low relative to predicted 2003 assets. This leads to an under-estimation of
the importance of credit constraints in reducing entry. Finally, it is worth mentioning that,
similar to predicted 2003 assets, observed 2004 assets exhibit far higher variance than 1995
assets, which is noteworthy since we do not use 2004 assets as a moment to be matched, i.e.,
the rise in asset variance over time is matched “out-of-sample.”


Appendix A.3             Estimation Algorithm and Likelihood
The simulation procedure begins as follows: we draw a block matrix (denoted B) of size
K × I × (J + 2) from a standard normal distribution. Recall that J is the number of
personality traits and K is the number of draws per individual. We need a block matrix
of size J + 2 since we draw not only J personality traits, but also unobservables for the
mixed-normal distribution of business ideas. We draw B once. Next, at each parameter


                                                  52
suggestion Φ(g) and for each individual i, we compute expected earnings in paid employment
           (g)                                                   (g)
(denoted wik ), expected earnings in self-employment (denoted yik ) and the resulting sector
                  (g)
choice (denoted dik ). For earnings and choices, the superscript (g) indexes the parameter
suggestion and the subscript ik refers to the k-th draw of individual i.
    The simulation of earnings and sectoral choice occurs in several steps. Using parameters
 (g)                                          (g)
Ξf ,  we simulate vectors of latent factors fikj , j ∈ {1, . . . , J} for each individual i and draw
                                        (g)  (g)    2(g)     2(g)
k. Similarly, we use the parameters µθ,1 , µθ,2 , σθ,1 , σθ,2 and pθ to simulate a business draw
                                                         (g)
for each individual i and draw k, which we denote θik . From here, we can determine whether
or not each individual-draw pair is credit-constrained using equation (3) suitably modified
to permit multiple draws. In particular, individual i with draw k and at parameters (g) is
credit-constrained if:
                                  (g) (g)     r              1−α(g)
                                 θik ψik > (g) λ(g) Ai                .                          (26)
                                            α
Note that the k subscript is omitted from α, which remains constant across all K draws.
Moreover, assets Ai , which are data, and the interest rate r (set to 1.1 for this analysis) do
                                                                     (g)
not change with draws or with suggested parameters (g). θik , however, is different for each
individual i, draw k and parameter suggestion (g).
                                                                                        (g)
     Once it is clear which individuals are credit-constrained, we can compute yik for each
individual, using r, Ai , α(g) and λ(g) when the credit constraints are binding and r, α(g) and
 (g)                                                               SE(g)                      (g)
θik when they are not binding. Similarly, we compute utility ui          and paid earnings wi
using parameter suggestions. Then, using equation (19), we compute a sector choice for each
                                        (g)                            (g)  (g)  (g)      (g)
individual-draw pair, denoting this dik . In what follows, we use fikj , wik , yik and dik to
construct the likelihood.
    The likelihood function consists of several components. Given the assumption that earn-
ings shocks are normally distributed, we form the earnings portion of the likelihood using
the normal density function, which for individual i, draw k and parameter suggestion g
               (g)          (g)
we denote h(yik ) and h(wik ) for self-employment wage density and paid employment wage
density respectively. Next, given assumptions on the normality of the measurement error in
latent traits, we can also derive the density function for personality measurements for each
                                                                   (g)
individual i, draw k and parameter vector g, denoting this h(Mik ). Then, we must average
these, though these averages are conditional on the relevant sector being chosen for a given
draw:
                                     (g)
                                    Ki,SE
                      y(g)      1   X     h  
                                              (g)
                                                      
                                                          (g)
                                                              
                                                                (g)
                                                                        i
                    Li ≡ (g)               h yik × h Mik |dik = SE)                     (27)
                              Ki,SE k=1




                                                 53
and
                                            (g)
                                          Ki,P E
                    w(g)             1    X h  (g)  
                                                        (g)
                                                            
                                                              (g)
                                                                     i
                   Li      ≡      (g)
                                             h wik × h Mik |dik = PE) .                    (28)
                                 Ki,P E    k=1

                               (g)
In the above equations, Ki,SE denotes the number of draws for which individual i at param-
                                                       (g)
eter draw (g) chooses self-employment. Similarly, Ki,P E denotes the number of draws for
                                                                       y(g)      w(g)
which individual i at parameter draw (g) chooses paid employment. Li and Li           are the
product of average earnings densities for each sector and average personality trait densities,
conditional on a sector being chosen. Therefore, they are a weighted average of each indi-
vidual’s likelihood contribution, where the average is taken over the subset of the K draws
where the individual chooses the relevant sector at draw k.
    Next, we weight likelihood contributions by the probability that the model predicts that
a sector is chosen by a given individual. We denote this probability P̃i , defined as the number
of times that the individual chooses self-employment given K draws:

                                                                      (g)
                                                             Ki,SE
                                                       P̃i =       .                       (29)
                                                              K

Then, the likelihood contribution for individual i and draw k will be given by:
                            h           id =SE h                  id =PE
                     (g)        (g) y(g) it              (g)    w(g) it
                    Li     = P̃i × Li             1 − P̃i      Li          ,               (30)

where dit is the observed sector choice so that, for each individual, the contribution to the
likelihood is only a function of the probability the model predicts their observed sector is
chosen, multiplied by the average of the product of the earnings density in that sector and
personality traits density, where the average is conditional on the model predicting that
sector.
                           (g)
   After constructing Li for each individual i, we take the log of each individual’s contri-
bution and then sum over individuals to obtain the log-likelihood:

                                                           I
                                                           X             
                                                 (g)                  (g)
                                             l         =         log Li .                  (31)
                                                           i=1


We evaluate l(g) at different values in the parameter space, indexing these suggestions by (g)
and, using both simplex and gradient methods, search until a maximum is found.




                                                                 54
Appendix A.4          Additional Parameter Estimates and Robustness
Tables S5 and S6 provide structural parameter estimates for parameters of the measure-
ment system, including distributions of latent traits and measurement error, coefficients on
unobservables and factor loadings. In Tables S7 and S8, we exploit two periods of data
to assess the relationship between experience in self-employment and 1995 self-employment
and earnings. First, for the 170 individuals who were self-employed in 1995, we ask if self-
employment in 2004 is predicted by personality or other observable factors, such as openness
to new experiences. The concern would be that openness predicts a lower failure rate, which
could encourage entry, but is interpreted as utility in our static model. Estimates in Ta-
ble S7 show no evidence that personality traits, including openness, predict remaining in
self-employment. Second, among the 104 individuals who are self-employed in both 1995
and 2004, we ask whether openness predicts higher earnings in 2004 once we have controlled
for 1995 earnings. This would suggest that open individuals are drawn into self-employment
because they expect steeper earnings profiles compared to paid employment, which would be
treated as strong preferences for self-employment. Estimates in Table S8 show no evidence
for this concern. This holds if we do not control for 1995 log earnings as well.




                                            55
Appendix Tables and Figures

              Appendix Table S1: Summary Statistics - Full Sample

                                  Full           Paid            Self              ∆
                                Sample       Employment      Employment      (Self−Paid) p-values
Earnings in 2004               $77,267.99     $73,610.47      $92,908.23      $19,297.76  0.002
Median Earnings (2004)          $57,500        $57,500         $57,500          $00.00    0.812
Assets in 1995                $117,259.80     $95,808.60      $210,178.6     $ 114,370.00 0.000
High school degree                0.20           0.20            0.20             0.00    0.902
Some college                      0.26           0.27            0.24            -0.03    0.431
College graduate                  0.25           0.25            0.26             0.01    0.739
Age                              49.29          49.29           52.82             3.53    0.000
Married                           0.79           0.78            0.80             0.02    0.586
Number of children                2.22           2.21            2.27             0.06    0.634
Spouse’s education (years)       11.44          14.47           14.30            -0.17    0.385
Spouse employed in 1995           0.66           0.65            0.70            0.05     0.237
Fluid Cognitive Ability           0.34           0.34            0.31            -0.03    0.670
Openness (1995)                   3.07           3.05            3.12            0.07     0.076
Openness (2004)                   2.97           2.95            3.05            0.10     0.012
Conscientiousness (1995)          3.40           3.39            3.42            0.03     0.353
Conscientiousness (2004)          3.46           3.46            3.46            0.00     0.951
Extraversion (1995)               3.14           3.12            3.23             0.11    0.013
Extraversion (2004)               3.05           3.03            3.13             0.10    0.025
Agreeableness (1995)              3.29           3.29            3.32            0.03     0.457
Agreeableness (2004)              3.25           3.24            3.28            0.04     0.312
Neuroticism (1995)                2.17           2.19            2.10            -0.09    0.082
Neuroticism (2004)                2.04           2.05            2.00            -0.05    0.309

  Summary statistics for all 1,108 working men (age 25-64, of whom 210 are self-employed)
  who are observed in the second wave of MIDUS data collection (MIDUS II) The num-
  ber of observations varies for each variable since we include individuals who are missing
  some information. For example, all five personality traits are available in 2004 for 1,099
  individuals in the sample.




                                             56
                 Appendix Table S2: Sector Choice (Analytic Sample)

                            [1]       [2]      [3]       [4]        [5]      [6]       [7]       [8]
Openness (2004)            0.18      0.2∗     0.21∗     0.22∗     0.25∗∗    0.24∗     0.23∗     0.23∗
                           (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.13)    (0.13)    (0.13)

Conscientiousness (2004)   -0.03     -0.03     -0.03     -0.04     -0.07     -0.06     -0.06     -0.08
                           (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.13)

Extraversion (2004)        0.17      0.15      0.15      0.14      0.13      0.15      0.2∗     0.21∗
                           (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.12)    (0.12)

Agreeableness (2004)       -0.002    -0.04     -0.04     -0.03     -0.03     -0.03     -0.05     -0.06
                           (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)

Neuroticism (2004)         -0.006    0.05      0.04      0.04      0.03      0.04      0.05      0.05
                           (0.08)    (0.08)    (0.08)    (0.08)    (0.09)    (0.09)    (0.09)    (0.09)

Cognition                  -0.04     0.03      0.04      0.04      0.04      0.04      0.03      0.03
                           (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)

Age                          .      0.04∗∗∗   0.04∗∗∗   0.04∗∗∗   0.04∗∗∗   0.04∗∗∗   0.04∗∗∗   0.04∗∗∗
                                    (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)

Years of education           .         .       -0.01     -0.02    -0.004     -0.01     -0.01     -0.01
                                               (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.03)

Married                      .         .         .      0.24∗     0.58∗∗    0.58∗∗    0.58∗∗    0.58∗∗
                                                         (0.14)    (0.27)    (0.27)    (0.28)    (0.28)

Number of kids               .         .         .       -0.06     -0.06     -0.06    -0.07∗    -0.07∗
                                                         (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)

Spouse employed (1995)       .         .         .         .      0.22∗∗    0.22∗∗    0.21∗     0.21∗
                                                                   (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)

Spouse education             .         .         .         .      -0.03∗    -0.03∗    -0.03∗    -0.03∗
                                                                   (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)

Father education             .         .         .         .         .      0.02∗     0.03∗      0.02
                                                                             (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)

Mother education             .         .         .         .         .      -0.007     -0.01     -0.01
                                                                             (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)

Father self-employed         .         .         .         .         .         .      0.43∗∗∗   0.44∗∗∗
                                                                                       (0.12)    (0.12)

Mother self-employed         .         .         .         .         .         .       0.12      0.11
                                                                                       (0.19)    (0.19)

Live for today               .         .         .         .         .         .         .       -0.02
                                                                                                 (0.09)

Observations                896      896       896       896       896       896       896       895

   Probit estimates for the analytic sample of 898 individuals where the outcome variable
   is an indicator for self-employment (as opposed to paid employment) reported in 2004.
   Standard errors are in parentheses and significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are
   indicated with one, two and three stars, respectively.




                                               57
                   Appendix Table S3: Sector Choice (Larger Sample)

                              [1]      [2]       [3]       [4]       [5]       [6]       [7]       [8]
Openness (2004)              0.2∗    0.25∗∗    0.26∗∗    0.27∗∗     0.3∗∗    0.28∗∗    0.27∗∗    0.28∗∗
                            (0.11)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)

Conscientiousness (2004)    -0.08     -0.04     -0.04     -0.06     -0.08     -0.08     -0.08        -0.1
                            (0.11)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)    (0.12)

Extraversion (2004)          0.12     0.14      0.13      0.12      0.11      0.13      0.18     0.19∗
                             (0.1)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)

Agreeableness (2004)        -0.05     -0.06     -0.06     -0.05     -0.05     -0.05     -0.06     -0.07
                             (0.1)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)

Neuroticism (2004)          -0.03     0.03      0.03      0.03      0.02      0.02      0.03      0.04
                            (0.07)    (0.08)    (0.08)    (0.08)    (0.08)    (0.08)    (0.08)    (0.08)

Cognition                      .      0.03      0.03      0.04      0.04      0.03      0.03      0.02
                                      (0.05)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)

Age                            .     0.03∗∗∗   0.04∗∗∗   0.04∗∗∗   0.03∗∗∗   0.04∗∗∗   0.03∗∗∗   0.03∗∗∗
                                     (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)

Years of education             .        .      -0.008     -0.01    0.0001     -0.01    -0.008     -0.01
                                                (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.03)

Married                        .        .         .      0.26∗      0.6∗∗     0.6∗∗    0.61∗∗     0.6∗∗
                                                          (0.14)    (0.27)    (0.27)    (0.27)    (0.27)

Number of kids                 .        .         .       -0.05     -0.05     -0.05    -0.06∗    -0.06∗
                                                          (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)

Spouse employed (1995)         .        .         .         .       0.2∗      0.2∗     0.19∗     0.19∗
                                                                    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.11)

Spouse education               .        .         .         .      -0.03∗    -0.03∗    -0.04∗    -0.03∗
                                                                    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)

Father education               .        .         .         .         .      0.02∗     0.02∗     0.02∗
                                                                              (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)

Mother education               .        .         .         .         .      -0.002    -0.006    -0.006
                                                                              (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)

Father self-employed           .        .         .         .         .         .      0.41∗∗∗   0.42∗∗∗
                                                                                        (0.11)    (0.11)

Mother self-employed           .        .         .         .         .         .       0.09      0.08
                                                                                        (0.18)    (0.18)

Live for today                 .        .         .         .         .         .         .       -0.03
                                                                                                  (0.08)

Observations                1099      952       952       952       952       952       952          951

   Probit estimates for the “full sample” of 1,108 working men observed in the second wave of
   data collection (MIDUS II), where the outcome variable is an indicator for self-employment
   (as opposed to paid employment) reported in 2004. The number of observations varies for
   each variable since we include individuals who are missing some information. For example,
   all five personality traits are available in 2004 for 1,099 individuals in the sample. Standard
   errors are in parentheses and significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are indicated with
   one, two and three stars, respectively.



                                                 58
             Appendix Table S4: Personality Assessments Over Time

                                                  2004 Personality Scores
                                    [O]           [C]      [E]        [A]        [N]
       Openness (1995)            0.73∗∗∗          .        .          .          .
                                   (0.03)

       Conscientiousness (1995)       .      0.64∗∗∗         .          .         .
                                              (0.03)

       Extraversion (1995)            .            .     0.71∗∗∗        .         .
                                                          (0.02)

       Agreeableness (1995)           .            .         .      0.65∗∗∗       .
                                                                     (0.03)

       Neuroticism (1995)             .            .         .          .      0.57∗∗∗
                                                                                (0.03)

       Age                        0.004∗∗     0.001      0.006∗∗∗   0.006∗∗∗   -0.003
                                   (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)

       Self-employment (1995)      0.04       -0.007       0.02      -0.01     0.005
                                   (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.04)     (0.03)     (0.04)

       Log assets (1995)           -0.004     0.002       -0.002     -0.005    -0.006
                                   (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.005)

       Log earnings (1995)         0.008      -0.001      -0.01      0.007     -0.005
                                   (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.02)

       Observations                896            896      896       896        896
       R2                          0.45           0.4      0.49      0.43       0.37

OLS regression coefficients where the outcome variables are 2004 personalty trait scores
(Openness to New Experiences [O], Conscientiousness [C], Extraversion [E], Agreeableness
[A] and Neuroticism [N]), which are regressed onto 1995 scores along with 1995 labor
market activity and outcomes. Standard errors are in parentheses and significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels are indicated with one, two and three stars, respectively.




                                             59
          Appendix Table S5: Results: Latent Personality Traits.

              Variable                               Coefficient   Std. Error
              Factor Covariances:
               Openness and conscientiousness           0.052        0.006
               Openness and extraversion                0.145        0.010
               Openness and agreeableness               0.130        0.009
               Openness and neuroticism                -0.058        0.010
               Conscientiousness and extraversion       0.059        0.007
               Conscientiousness and agreeableness      0.060        0.007
               Conscientiousness and neuroticism       -0.041        0.007
               Extraversion and agreeableness           0.164        0.010
               Extraversion and neuroticism            -0.057        0.011
               Aggreableness and neuroticism           -0.017        0.011
              Openness to New Experiences:
               Mean                                     3.580        0.127
               Variance                                 0.183        0.013
               Factor loading                           0.922        0.040
               Meas. error variance (1995)              0.267        0.012
               Meas. error variance (2004)              0.341        0.014
               Age parameter (1995)                    -0.012        0.002
               Age parameter (2004)                    -0.007        0.002
               Education parameter (1995)              -0.002        0.007
               Education parameter (2004)              -0.000        0.008
               Cognition parameter (1995)               0.052        0.018
               Cognition parameter (2004)               0.066        0.019
              Conscientiousness:
               Mean                                     3.780        0.124
               Variance                                 0.124        0.009
               Factor loading                           0.991        0.038
               Meas. error variance (1995)              0.328        0.012
               Meas. error variance (2004)              0.302        0.015
               Age parameter (1995)                    -0.002        0.002
               Age parameter (2004)                    -0.001        0.002
               Education parameter (1995)              -0.018        0.007
               Education parameter (2004)              -0.014        0.007
               Cognition parameter (1995)               0.008        0.016
               Cognition parameter (2004)              -0.028        0.017

Coefficients: distribution of latent personality traits (Openness, Conscientiousness and
Extraversion).




                                           60
   Appendix Table S6: Results: Latent Personality Traits (Continued).

                   Variable                       Coefficient   Std. Error
                   Extraversion:
                    Mean                             3.841        0.150
                    Variance                         0.265        0.019
                    Factor loading                   0.954        0.042
                    Meas. error variance (1995)      0.270        0.013
                    Meas. error variance (2004)      0.345        0.013
                    Age parameter (1995)            -0.009        0.002
                    Age parameter (2004)            -0.002        0.003
                    Education parameter (1995)      -0.021        0.008
                    Education parameter (2004)      -0.034        0.008
                    Cognition parameter (1995)       0.021        0.021
                    Cognition parameter (2004)       0.032        0.024
                   Agreeableness:
                    Mean                             3.995        0.145
                    Variance                         0.238        0.017
                    Factor loading                   0.897        0.040
                    Meas. error variance (1995)      0.275        0.013
                    Meas. error variance (2004)      0.412        0.020
                    Age parameter (1995)            -0.007        0.002
                    Age parameter (2004)            -0.000        0.002
                    Education parameter (1995)      -0.026        0.008
                    Education parameter (2004)      -0.021        0.008
                    Cognition parameter (1995)       0.019        0.021
                    Cognition parameter (2004)       0.026        0.021
                   Neuroticism:
                    Mean                             2.969        0.177
                    Variance                         0.260        0.022
                    Factor loading                   0.929        0.047
                    Meas. error variance (1995)      0.288        0.016
                    Meas. error variance (2004)      0.397        0.018
                    Age parameter (1995)            -0.007        0.003
                    Age parameter (2004)            -0.006        0.003
                    Education parameter (1995)      -0.035        0.010
                    Education parameter (2004)      -0.029        0.009
                    Cognition parameter (1995)       0.004        0.025
                    Cognition parameter (2004)      -0.020        0.026

Coefficients: distribution of latent personality traits (Agreeableness and Neuroticism) and
factor covariances.




                                            61
   Appendix Table S7: Openness and 2004 Entry for 1995 Self-Employed

                                         [1]      [2]      [3]       [4]
            Openness (2004)             -0.13    -0.15    -0.13     -0.13
                                        (0.28)   (0.28)    (0.3)     (0.31)

            Conscientiousness (2004)    -0.17    -0.19    -0.28     -0.25
                                        (0.26)   (0.26)    (0.27)    (0.28)

            Extraversion (2004)          0.09    0.11      0.08      0.08
                                        (0.23)   (0.23)    (0.24)    (0.25)

            Agreeableness (2004)         0.23     0.2      0.2       0.22
                                        (0.21)   (0.21)    (0.22)    (0.23)

            Neuroticism (2004)           0.12    0.12      0.19      0.17
                                        (0.18)   (0.18)    (0.18)    (0.18)

            Cognition                   -0.14    -0.17∗   -0.13     -0.12
                                         (0.1)    (0.1)    (0.12)    (0.13)

            Log earnings (1995)            .     0.12      0.09      0.12
                                                 (0.07)    (0.08)    (0.08)

            Years of education             .        .     -0.001    -0.02
                                                           (0.05)    (0.05)

            Age                            .        .     0.04∗∗∗   0.05∗∗∗
                                                           (0.01)    (0.02)

            Married                        .        .     -0.45     0.009
                                                           (0.29)    (0.63)

            Number of kids                 .        .        .      -0.09
                                                                     (0.07)

            Spouse education               .        .        .      -0.03
                                                                     (0.04)

            Spouse employed (1995)         .        .        .       0.31
                                                                     (0.23)

            Observations                 170      170      170       170

Probit estimates of 2004 self-employment conditional on 1995 self-employment (170 in-
dividuals). Standard errors are in parentheses and significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
levels are indicated with one, two and three stars, respectively.




                                         62
Appendix Table S8: Earnings for Individuals Self-Employed in 1995 and 2004

                                                  [1]      [2]      [3]
                  Log earnings (1995)           0.24∗∗   0.23∗∗    0.21∗
                                                (0.11)    (0.11)   (0.12)

                  Openness (2004)                 .       0.14     0.04
                                                          (0.42)   (0.46)

                  Conscientiousness (2004)        .       0.23     0.27
                                                          (0.34)   (0.34)

                  Extraversion (2004)             .       0.03     0.04
                                                          (0.39)   (0.41)

                  Agreeableness (2004)            .      -0.68∗∗   -0.56
                                                          (0.33)   (0.35)

                  Neuroticism (2004)              .      -0.12     -0.11
                                                          (0.24)   (0.24)

                  Cognition                       .       0.16     0.05
                                                          (0.16)   (0.17)

                  Years of education              .         .       0.1
                                                                   (0.08)

                  Age                             .         .      -0.02
                                                                   (0.02)

                  Married                         .         .      0.11
                                                                   (0.38)

                  Observations                   104      104      104

OLS regressions for individuals who are self-employed in 1995 and 2004 (105 individuals).
Standard errors are in parentheses and significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels are
indicated with one, two and three stars, respectively.




                                           63
