                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           EMPLOYER CREDIT CHECKS:
                   POVERTY TRAPS VERSUS MATCHING EFFICIENCY

                                          Dean Corbae
                                         Andrew Glover

                                       Working Paper 25005
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25005


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2018




We wish to thank Briana Chang, Christoffer Koch, and Rasmus Lentz for very useful comments
on an earlier version of this paper. We also thank participants at Goethe University, University of
Pennsylvania, Ohio State University, University of Colorado - Boulder, as well as the NBER
Microeconomic Data and Macro Models Group, Texas Monetary Conference, North American
Econometric Society, Society for Economic Dynamics, Society for the Advancement of
Economic Theory, Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Markets Group, and the 2018
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Research conference. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Dean Corbae and Andrew Glover. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Employer Credit Checks: Poverty Traps versus Matching Efficiency
Dean Corbae and Andrew Glover
NBER Working Paper No. 25005
September 2018
JEL No. E24,E44

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a framework to understand pre-employment credit screening through adverse
selection in labor and credit markets. Workers differ in an unobservable characteristic that
induces a positive correlation between labor productivity and repayment rates in credit markets.
Firms therefore prefer to hire workers with good credit because it correlates with high
productivity. A poverty trap may arise, in which an unemployed worker with poor credit has a
low job finding rate, but cannot improve her credit without a job. In our calibrated economy, this
manifests as a large and persistent wage loss from default, equivalent to 2.3% per month over ten
years. Banning employer credit checks eliminates the poverty trap, but pools job seekers and
reduces matching efficiency: average unemployment duration rises by 13% for the most
productive workers after employers are banned from using credit histories to screen potential
hires.


Dean Corbae
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
corbae@ssc.wisc.edu

Andrew Glover
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
andrew.glover@austin.utexas.edu
   “We want people who have bad credit to get good jobs. Then they are able to pay
their bills, and get the bad credit report removed from their records. Unfortunately, the
overuse of credit reports takes you down when you are down.” Michael Barrett (State
Senator, D-Lexington, MA).


1         Introduction
The three largest consumer credit agencies (Equifax Persona, Experian Employment
Insight, and TransUnion PEER) market credit reports to employers, which include credit
histories and public records (such as bankruptcy, liens and judgments). According to a
Survey by the Society for Human Resource Management (2010), 60% of human resource
representatives who were interviewed in 2009 indicated that their companies checked the
credit of potential employees. Furthermore, a report by the policy think tank DEMOS
found that 1 in 7 job applicants with bad credit had been denied employment because
of their credit history (Traub [36]).
    Until recently, pre-employment credit screening (PECS) was largely unregulated and
remains so at the federal level – the FTC writes “As an employer, you may use consumer
reports when you hire new employees and when you evaluate employees for promotion,
reassignment, and retention as long as you comply with the Fair Credit Reporting Act
(FCRA).”1 However, since 2005, numerous state and federal laws have been introduced
with the goal of limiting or banning employer credit checks and, as of 2018, eleven states
have enacted such laws.2 Legislators often express concern of a “poverty trap” arising
due to employer credit checks: a worker loses her job and cannot pay her debts, which
negatively impacts her credit report and thereby makes her unable to find a job. We
build a model of unsecured credit and labor market search with adverse selection in which
such poverty traps arise endogenously, which we use to assess the welfare consequences
of policies to ban PECS.
    A growing empirical literature seeks to estimate the effects of PECS on labor market
outcomes. Examples include Ballance, Clifford and Shoag [2], Bartik and Nelson [3],
and Cortes, Glover and Tasci [12], which is most directly related to this paper. Cortes,
Glover and Tasci estimate a fall in posted vacancies following the implementation of
employer credit check bans, but not in occupations that are exempted (jobs with access
to financial or personal information). We reproduce their plots in Figure 1, showing
    1
        http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/pubs/business/credit/bus08.shtm
    2
        The states with bans are CA, CO, CT, DE, HI, IL, MD, NV, OR, VT, WA.


                                                 2
                              (a)                                                                           (b)
Notes: Regressions estimated for occupations o ∈ {exempt, af f ected}. Estimated equation is


                                                           5
                                                                   o
                                                           X
                                    log vacanciesc,o,t =          βk BANc,o,t−k + FEt + FEo,c + εc,o,t ,
                                                           k=−4


where BANc,o,t = 1 if county c has a PECS ban in quarter t and occupation o is affected. Lead-lags are in quarters, with 5 representing
more than one year post ban. Blue boxes are 90% confidence intervals. Exempt occupations are two-digit SOC codes representing Business
and Financial (SOC-13), Legal (SOC-23), and Protective Services (SOC-33).




                              Figure 1: Effect of PECS Ban on Log-Vacancies


that affected occupations experience a significant decline in posted vacancies following
the ban, which persists even after a year, whereas exempt occupations are unaffected.
They also estimate an increase in delinquencies by subprime borrowers living in counties
affected by employer credit check bans, which occurs in our model due to weakened
repayment incentives. Their labor market estimates are directly related to the demand
effect of our theory and their delinquency estimates confirm the possibility of a feedback
from labor to credit markets.
    Given the above empirical work on PECS, we develop a dynamic equilibrium model
in order to understand the positive and normative implications of PECS. Our model
features four key components: an unobservable characteristic that we model through
hetregeneous time preferences (which creates adverse selection), an initial human cap-
ital investment (which is subject to moral hazard), labor search frictions, and unse-
cured credit with endogenous default. Employers value the PECS process because credit
records are an externally verifiable and inexpensive signal about a residual component



                                                                       3
of labor productivity that is not observable before the worker is hired.3 This component
of productivity is the outcome of an unobserved investment in human capital, the cost
of which is borne in disutility when young (i.e. studying at the library rather than go-
ing out with friends), but provides benefits later in life through higher wages. Patient
workers therefore invest more in this human capital than do impatient. In equilibrium,
patient (high productivity) workers are also less likely to default in response to unex-
pected expenditure shocks (health care bills, for example) since they value favorable
future credit terms more than impatient types. This means that workers with higher
credit scores have a higher expected match surplus and therefore generate higher profits
post match, which in turn generates a tighter labor market for workers with good credit.
     We make two assumptions to keep the labor market model tractable. First, we as-
sume that all matches have positive surplus, so low-score matches generate low, but
still positive, expected profits. Since our results depend on the job finding rate’s sen-
sitivity to the score rather than the exact point in the matching process at which the
job finding rate is determined, we find this assumption innocuous.4 Second, we assume
that productivity is immediately learned by employers once a match is made. We view
this as a technical assumption to retain tractability by avoiding asymmetric information
during wage bargaining.5 If learning was more gradual post-match, then we expect the
job finding rate for job seekers with bad credit would be even lower than in our model,
since their wages would begin higher; by symmetric reasoning, we expect job seekers
with good credit would have higher job finding rates than in our model. This would
only magnify the results in the paper.
     Given that there appear to be interactions between labor and credit markets, we
develop a rich model of credit markets with adverse selection. We model the credit
market as a sequence of short-term loans, linked by the worker’s score, which enters as a
state variable representing the market belief that a worker is patient (and therefore low
risk) given her history of repayments. Our short-term credit market equilibrium concept
is from Netzer and Scheuer [31], which determines both interest rates and credit supply
as the unique equilibrium of an extended form game played between lenders competing
   3
     In our model, a credit record contains the borrower’s history of debt repayment. This will map into
a worker’s ex-ante probability of being a patient type, which coincides with a higher ex-ante probability
of repaying debt. We will therefore refer to the worker’s “score” rather than report since it is this
probability of being patient that is relevant for employers and lenders.
   4
     If the surplus from an impatient worker was negative, then they would not be hired at all. With a
positive surplus, they simply face a longer expected duration of unemployment.
   5
     Jarosch and Pilossoph [22] make the same assumption in a model of bargaining with pre-match
asymmetric information.


                                                   4
to make loans to borrowers with private information about their default rates.6 This
framework allows us to rationalize the credit market effects of credit scores and to study
how the credit market responds to a PECS ban. First, the equilibrium contracts posted
by lenders depend on the borrower’s score because high-risk borrowers may be cross
subsidized through lower interest rates, while higher scores relax credit constraints for
low-risk borrowers. Second, the PECS ban affects individual repayment incentives and
therefore the equilibrium credit market contracts (both interest rates and credit supply).
    We then use this model as a laboratory to assess the effect of a policy that bans
PECS (i.e. forces employers to ignore applicants’ credit histories in the hiring decision).
A PECS ban has both direct and indirect effects on the equilibrium. First, as expected
by policy makers, there is a redistribution of labor market opportunity (and therefore
welfare) from high to low credit score workers, which in equilibrium also translates into a
redistribution from high to low productivity workers. However, there is also an indirect
effect on repayment that lowers welfare for everyone. When credit scores are not used
in the labor market, workers lose some of their incentives to repay debts. This leads to
higher interest rates and less borrowing. This general equilibrium cost of PECS bans has
not been considered by policy makers, even by those who advocate on behalf of lower
income households with bad credit.
    We proceed as follows. In Section 2, we place our paper in the context of the
literatures on private information in both credit and labor markets. In Section 3 we
describe the economic environment and in Section 4 we define, prove existence, and
characterize equilibrium for our adverse selection environment as well as compare it to a
full information version. In Section 5 we calibrate the economy and describe properties
of the adverse selection equilibrium such as a poverty trap and quantify labor market
inefficiencies. In Section 6 we study the welfare consequences of a ban on using credit
checks in the labor market.


2       Related Literature
As discussed above, there is a growing empirical literature studying the effect of PECS
bans on labor market outcomes in the U.S. Bartik and Nelson [3] use a statistical dis-
crimination model to study the impact of PECS bans on different racial groups. They
    6
     The first key feature of this game is that an equilibrium always exists. This would not be the case
for low scores (i.e. when there are few high risk borrowers) in the competitive framework of Rothschild
and Stiglitz [32].



                                                   5
find that the bans significantly reduce job-finding rates for blacks but that the results
for Hispanics and whites are less conclusive. Their findings are consistent with PECS
bans reducing the match quality of newly hired black job applicants (more high match-
quality applicants are rejected and more low match-quality applicants are hired after
the ban). Bos, Breza and Liberman [4] provide empirical evidence on the effect of credit
history on labor market outcomes. They estimate a large negative effect of delinquen-
cies on employment and earnings in Sweden and argue that their results are driven by
pre-employment screening on the part of employers. Similarly, Friedberg, Hynes and
Pattison [15] estimate an increase in job-finding rates for financially distressed house-
holds following PECS bans, which highlights the distributional effect of these laws and
provides a key elasticity that our quantitative model matches.
    Our paper contributes to the literature on asymmetric information in unsecured
consumer credit markets with default. Some closely related papers include Athreya, Tam
and Young [1], Chatterjee, et. al. [7], Chatterjee, et. al. [8], Livshits, MacGee and Tertilt
[27], and Narajabad [30] so we briefly describe how our approach differs from theirs.7
First, we include labor market search frictions as in Mortensen and Pissarides [29].
Second, we employ a different equilibrium concept in the credit market. This equilibrium,
studied by Netzer and Scheuer [31], is the robust sub-game perfect equilibrium of a
sequential game between firms competing to make short term loans to borrowers with
private information about their default propensities. The salient assumption is that
competitive lenders endogenously choose both the level of debt and the price at which it
is offered as opposed to offering a risk adjusted competitive (break even) price for each
given level of debt as in, for instance, Chatterjee, et. al. [8]. The equilibrium allocation
of this game solves a constrained optimization problem with incentive compatibility
constraints and the equilibria may feature cross-subsidization or even pooling.8 We make
a methodological contribution to the static model of Netzer and Scheuer by introducing
a dynamic Bayesian type score upon which contracts are conditioned every period so
that an individual’s credit access varies over time in response to past behavior.
    Our paper is also related to the literature on the effect of asset markets on labor
markets. These papers focus on how financial status (i.e. ability to borrow or dis-save
to fund current consumption) affect job-finding rates. Lentz and Tranaes [25] study
   7
     The paper is also related to the reputation based model of Cole and Kehoe [9], who demonstrate
how an exogenous utility loss in the labor market can incentivize sovereigns not to default in the credit
market.
   8
     We discuss the relationship between our allocations and the fully separating equilibria in Guerrieri,
Shimer and Wright [17] in Section 4.3 where we present the programming problem.


                                                    6
the effect of precautionary savings on workers’ search intensity and job-finding rates in
partial equilibrium. Krusell, Mukoyama and Sahin [23] extend the Diamond-Mortensen-
Pissarides general equilibrium model with random search and ex-post bargaining to
include risk aversion and precautionary savings. While workers do not accumulate wealth
in our model, credit access has a similar effect because it controls the worker’s ability to
smooth consumption and therefore their valuation of a job, which in turn affects finding
rates and wages.
    While we model the effect of credit histories on labor demand, a related literature
uses changes in an individual’s credit score to instrument for credit access in order to
estimate labor supply response to credit. In a series of papers, Herkenhoff, Phillips
and Cohen-Cole ([20], [21]) show that increased credit access leads workers to become
more selective in their job search (accept longer unemployment durations in order to
obtain higher post-employment wages) and more likely to start their own business. We
do not model the search decision of unemployed workers, but note that in our model
an unemployed worker with bad credit would have a strong incentive to find a job in
order to begin rebuilding her credit history. Furthermore, a worker with bad credit has
a weaker bargaining position, which is reflected in lower equilibrium wages (although
quantitatively this effect is small).
    Finally, we contribute to the literature on labor market discrimination and screening
based on observable characteristics of workers. There are far too many papers to discuss
fully so we simply relate our paper to one of the most relevant. Jarosch and Pilossoph
[22] build a labor search model with ex-ante private information about worker produc-
tivity that is correlated with unemployment duration and therefore used to screen job
seekers ex-ante. As in our paper, they also assume that the worker’s type is revealed
after matching, so that bargaining is under full information. We abstract from unem-
ployment duration as a signal (since all matches have positive surplus in our model,
duration provides no additional information about type beyond the credit report), but
our model is also more general in some dimensions. Most importantly, our signal is
directly affected by a worker’s credit market decisions and the information context of
the signal endogenously responds to labor market policies.


3    Environment
Time is discrete and infinite. Each period is split into two subperiods (i.e. a beginning
and end of the month). The economy is composed of a large number of workers, firms,

                                             7
lenders, and the credit reporting agency.
    A newborn starts life unemployed and draws a discount factor βi , which determines
her type i ∈ {H, L}. The probability the agent draws βH > βL is given by πH . We
call a worker “patient” if her discount factor is βH . A worker keeps her discount factor
throughout her life and dies with probability δ. A newborn worker of type i makes a
one-time choice of her human capital hi ∈ {h, h} at cost φ × hi where h < h.9 The
human capital choice is observed only by the agent and her eventual employer, but not
by the eventual employer during the PECS hiring decision nor by lenders or the credit
reporting agency. Since the cost of the human capital choice is born today and payoffs
come in the future, patient workers will tend to accumulate more human capital in the
equilibrium we consider.
    In any period t, workers have one unit of time in the first subperiod and zero in
the second subperiod. They can either be unemployed (nt = 0) or employed (nt = 1),
which means they work for a firm. Worker preferences are represented by the function
U(c1,t , c2,t , nt ) = c1,t + z(1 − nt ) + ψc2,t with the unemployed getting U(0, 0, 1) and the
employed getting U(c1,t , c2,t , 0) (i.e. the employed derive disutility from work). We
assume that ψ < 1 so that workers prefer consumption in the first subperiod to the
second. Since an unemployed worker does not receive income with which to repay debt,
she cannot borrow, and hence her flow utility is simply z.
    Once employed, a worker’s human capital is observable to the firm. Production
takes place in two stages: the worker puts in effort (nt = 1) in the first subperiod which
generates output yt = hi nt in the second subperiod. The worker and firm Nash bargain
over her wage wt in the first subperiod to be paid when her effort yields output in the
second subperiod. The worker’s bargaining weight is λ and her outside option is to
walk away, receive z utility from leisure in this period, and to search for another match
tomorrow. The outside option for the firm is to produce nothing this period and post
another vacancy at cost κ (in equilibrium the firm’s outside option will be zero due to
free entry). The firm sells its second subperiod output, yielding period t profits of the
firm given by hi − wt , which are valued as ψ(hi − wt ) in the first subperiod of t. After
production, the worker and firm may exogenously separate with probability σ.
   9
     Under our parametric assumptions, a patient household will choose h and an impatient will choose
h in equilibrium, which generates a lower match surplus (and therefore lower job finding rate) for low-
score workers. Other mechanisms could generate such a difference in match surpluses, such as impatient
workers providing less effort or having higher separation rates. Direct moral hazard in the form of theft
is also a possible reason for employers to check credit reports, but laws restricting PECS explicitly
exempt jobs for which embezzlement is a concern, so this mechanism is less relevant for our policy
experiment.


                                                   8
    Since an employed worker is paid at the end of the period, if she wants to consume at
the beginning of the period and has no savings, she can borrow Qt from a lender.10 When
an employed worker borrows in the first subperiod, she is expected to repay the unsecured
debt bt once she is paid in the second subperiod, provided she does not default. In the
second subperiod, however, an employed worker receives an expenditure shock, τ , drawn
from a distribution with CDF F (τ ). The expenditure shock is unobservable to anyone
but the worker. Her choice of whether to repay in the second subperiod dt ∈ {0, 1} is
recorded by a credit reporting agency. If the worker does not repay (i.e. dt = 1) we
say she is delinquent at time t and defaults at t + 1. Default bears a bankruptcy cost
 in the second subperiod at t + 1, which corresponds to both direct costs (legal fees),
but is also a reduced form for higher costs borne in other markets due to bad credit (for
example, higher insurance premiums, as explored in Chatterjee, Corbae and Rios-Rull
[7]).
    A credit reporting agency records the history of repayments by a worker, which is
summarized by a score st . This score is the probability that a given worker is type H
with discount factor βH at the beginning of any period t. Given the prior st and the
repayment decision dt , the credit reporting agency updates the assessment of a worker’s
type st+1 via Bayes Rule.11 Since a patient worker cares about their future ability to
borrow more than an impatient worker, repayment is a signal to a scorer that the worker
is more likely to be a high type. Our type score st is therefore not directly comparable
to empirical credit scores such as FICO, which orders repayment likelihood on an index
from 300 to 850. However, we can rank people by their expected repayment rate within
the model, which allows us to group them into credit ratings (subprime, prime, and
super prime) based on their ordering in the population, as in the data.
    Since a worker’s type influences her human capital and default decisions, a worker’s
score may be used in hiring and lending decisions. We assume that matches between
job seekers with score st , denoted u(st ), and firms posting vacancies for such work-
ers, denoted v(st ), are governed by a constant returns to scale matching function,
                
M u(st ), v(st ) . Therefore, an unemployed       worker with score st matches with a firm
                              M u(st ),v(st )          v(st ) 
with probability f θt (st ) =      u(st )
                                                 = M 1, u(st )
                                                                 . We will assume that a tighter
  10
     We will develop the model without intertemporal savings, but will assume that βH ≤ R−1 which,
along with the linearity of preferences, ensures that households do not want to save.
  11
     We assume that unemployed workers do not receive the expenditure shock since they have no income
with which to pay it. If an unemployed worker received an i.i.d. expenditure shock, she would default
with probability one, which would not provide any new information and their score would remain the
same.


                                                 9
labor market (higher θ(st )) increases the job finding rate for workers (i.e. f 0 θt (st ) > 0).
                                                                                            

The cost to a firm of posting a vacancy for workers with score st is denoted κ and the
job filling rate is denoted q(θt (st )), which is decreasing in tightness (i.e. q 0 θt (st ) < 0).
                                                                                            

Future profits of the firm are discounted at rate R−1 .
    There are a large number of competitive lenders who have access to consumption
goods in the first subperiod, for which they must pay an exogenously given worldwide
interest rate of R in the second subperiod. Lenders observe each potential borrower’s
type score st and post a menu of contracts Ct (st ) = {(Qjt (st ), bjt (st ))}Jj=1 which specifies
an amount to be lent in the first subperiod (i.e. at the beginning of the month), Qjt ,
and a promised repayment in the second subperiod (i.e. at the end of the month), bjt .
Lenders realize that households may default on their debt and the probability may differ
by worker type, which affects their expected profits for a given contract. As in Netzer
and Scheuer [31], after posting these menus the lenders observe all other menus posted
and then may withdraw from the market at a cost k.12
    Specifically, a large number of lenders play a game against one another by posting
menus of contracts (including (0, 0) so that a worker need not borrow) for each observable
credit score Ct (st ). The game has three stages, all of which occur in the beginning of
the first subperiod of t:

       Stage 1: Lenders simultaneously post menus of contracts.

       Stage 2: Each lender observes all other menus from stage 1. Lenders simultane-
       ously decide whether to withdraw from the market or remain. Withdrawal entails
       removing the lender’s entire menu of contracts with a payoff of −k (i.e. it is costly
       to withdraw).

       Stage 3: Workers simultaneously choose the contract they most prefer.

    To summarize the information structure, workers observe everything (i, h, st , τt ).
Before hiring a worker, a firm only observes the worker’s score st , which we refer to
as pre-employment credit screening. After hiring a worker, a firm observes her type i
and human capital h. Lenders only observe the worker’s score st . The credit reporting
agency observes a worker’s current score st and default decision dt . Credit and labor
markets are segmented in the sense that lenders and scorers cannot communicate with
firms who know the worker’s type after the hiring decision.
  12
    The ability to withdraw contracts after observing all others posted is key to ensuring that an
equilibrium exists, counter to purely competitive models with adverse selection. That the withdrawal
of contracts is costly ensures that the equilibrium is unique.

                                                10
    Having described the environment for workers, firms, lenders, and credit reporting
agencies, we now describe the timing of actions. Under the assumption that workers do
not start the period with assets (which we will show is optimal by setting βL ≤ βH <
R−1 ), a worker of type i with credit score st and human capital h begins the period
either unemployed or employed.
    For an unemployed worker:

    1. Enjoy utility zt from leisure nt = 0.

    2. Die with probability δ.

    3. Surviving workers with score st are matched with a firm in labor sub-market st
                                  
       with probability f θt (st )

    For an employed worker:

    1. First Subperiod:

 1.1 Determine earnings wt via Nash Bargaining and work nt = 1.
                                              
 1.2 Choose debt contract Qjt (st ), bjt (st ) and consume Qjt .

    2. Second Subperiod:

 2.1 Output yt = hi · nt is created, from which earnings wt are paid.

 2.2 Draw expenditure shock τt from CDF F (τt )

 2.3 Choose whether to default dt ∈ {0, 1} and pay (1 − dt )(bjt + τt ).

 2.4 Type score updated st+1 (st , dt ).

 2.5 Separate from employer exogenously with probability σ and die with probability
     δ.


4      Equilibrium
We now provide the decision problems for all agents in recursive form. To that end, we
let variable xt be denoted x and xt+1 be denoted x0 . Further, to save on notation we
denote st+1 (st , dt ) as s0d and will use xi∗ in place of xi,h∗i whenever we are evaluating an
equilibrium variable at the optimal human capital choice of an i type worker.

                                               11
4.1    Worker Decisions
The value function for an unemployed worker of type i with human capital h and score
s is given by
                                                                        
                                            ∗                      ∗
            Ui,h (s) = z + (1 − δ)βi f θ(s) Wi,h (s) + 1 − f θ(s) Ui,h (s)            (1)

          ∗           ∗
where Wi,h  (s) and Ui,h (s) are the value functions evaluated at equilibrium credit con-
tracts and wages, as described below. The unemployed worker receives current flow
utility z and survives until the next period with probability 1 − δ. She then transits to
employment next period with probability f (θ(s)) and remains unemployed with proba-
bility 1 − f (θ(s)). Note that, with no credit market activity, the unemployed worker’s
score remains constant. Furthermore, since job-finding rates are identical for both worker
types conditional on score and all matches have positive surplus, scores are independent
of the length of an unemployment spell or total number of spells.
    The value function for an employed worker of type i with human capital h and score
s who has chosen contract (Q, b) and wage w is given by

 Wi,h (Q, b, w, s) = Q + ψw                                                      (2)
                       Z ∞                                             
                           max βi (1 − δ) Vi,h s0d − dψ − (1 − d)(b + τ ) dF (τ ),
                                                  
                   + ψ
                          0    d


where we have introduced the intermediate value function:
                                                             
                           0               ∗  0        ∗  0
                                                          
                     Vi,h sd = (1 − σ)Wi,h sd + σUi,h sd .                            (3)


The first line in (2) reflects borrowing Q(s) to pay for first subperiod consumption and
the second subperiod wage w payment. The second line in (2) reflects the strategic
decision of whether to go delinquent to avoid paying off b + τ in the second subperiod
followed by default which bears bankruptcy cost  the following period. Note that the
scorer updates s0d his assessment of the agent’s type given the worker’s default decision
d.
    Working backwards, we start by characterizing the worker’s default choice, taking
all other objects (in particular their contract choice) as given. The worker defaults if
and only if:                                                           
                        ∗                                 0         0
                                                                     
                  τ > τi,h (s, b) ≡ βi (1 − δ) ψ + Vi,h s0 − Vi,h s1 − b             (4)


                                           12
Thus, higher debt and higher expenditure shocks make default more likely. Furthermore,
a lower discount factor and value from a good reputation (i.e. Vi,h s00 − Vi,h s01 ) make
                                                                                   

default more likely. Using τ ∗ , after integrating by parts and some cancelation, this allows
us to evaluate the integral in Wi,h for given values of (Q, b, w):
                                                Z     ∗ (s,b)
                                                     τi,h                                         
                                                                                             0
                                                                                               
      Wi,h (Q, b, w, s) = Q + ψw + ψ                            F (τ )dτ + ψβi (1 − δ) Vi,h s1 − ψ                  (5)
                                                 0


We can then write the worker’s surplus (i.e. utility when employed versus unemployed)
evaluated at the equilibrium contracts (Q∗i,h (s), b∗i,h (s)) as the difference:

                                 Wi,h Q∗i,h (s), b∗i,h (s), w, s − Ui,h (s).
                                                                
                                                                                                                     (6)

  Finally, since a newborn begins life unemployed and there are only two values for
human capital, her human capital choice must satisfy:
                                                                                 
                               h∗i   = argmaxh∈{h,h}            βi Ui,h (πH ) − φh .                                 (7)


In Theorems 1 and 2 below, we will assume that βL , βH , φ, h, and h are such that patient
workers (i = H) choose a high level of human capital h while impatient workers choose
the low level of human capital h.


4.2    Firm’s Problem and Wage Determination
Recall that after a firm and worker are matched, the worker’s type and human capital
choice is observed by the firm. The value function for a firm matched with a worker of
type i with human capital h and current type score s for a given wage w is:
                           Z   ∞                                                                     
                                                    −1                          ∗
                                                                                    (s0d ), s0d
                                                                                                  
         Ji,h (w, s) = ψ                 h − w + R (1 − σ)(1 −          δ)Ji,h wi,h                       dF (τ ).   (8)
                           0


While s does not add information for the firm’s inference about worker type, it influences
the worker’s bargaining position since it determines their credit contract and hence the
worker’s flow surplus from being employed. Since Nash Bargaining ensures that the firm
receives a constant fraction of the match surplus as in (10) below, the firm’s surplus
will also depend on s even though the firm knows i during bargaining. Since free entry
ensures that the firm’s value of posting a vacancy is zero, the firm’s surplus from a match


                                                         13
is simply Ji,h (w, s).
    The wage is then determined by generalized Nash Bargaining in which the worker’s
bargaining weight is λ. The wage solves:
                                                                       λ
            ∗                         ∗         ∗                ∗
                      = argmaxw Wi,h Qi,h (s), bi,h (s), w, s − Ui,h (s) Ji,h (w, s)1−λ
                                                             
           wi,h (s)                                                                                  (9)


Given that worker utility and firm profits are linear in earnings, (9) amounts to a simple
splitting rule for the total surplus so that firms receive fraction 1 − λ, i.e.
                                                                                     
                                      ∗         ∗                              ∗
                                                             
          Ji,h (w, s) = (1 − λ) Wi,h Qi,h (s), bi,h (s), w, s + Ji,h (w, s) − Ui,h (s) ,            (10)

and the worker’s surplus is fraction λ of the total. Note that the current wage does
not directly affect the repayment decision or optimal debt choice of a household due
to the linearity of preferences. If these choices were to depend on the wage, then the
wage would affect both the size of the worker’s surplus and the split of the total surplus,
creating a nonconvexity that would complicate the analysis.
    Firms post vacancies in labor “sub-markets” indexed by an unemployed worker’s
score s so that labor “sub-market” tightness is given by θ(s).13 The expected profits
from posting a vacancy must be equal to the cost of the vacancy in equilibrium:
                                                                        
                          −1     ∗   ∗                    ∗   ∗
                                                                     
                 κ = R q θ(s) sJH ∗ wH ∗ (s), s + (1 − s)JL∗ wL∗ (s), s                             (11)


where, remember, xi∗ = xi,h∗i and h∗i is chosen in (7).14


4.3     Lender’s Problem and Credit Contract Determination
Invoking Proposition 2 from Netzer and Scheuer [31], for sufficiently small k > 0 (i.e.
k → 0), the unique equilibrium to the lending game for credit sub-markets with score
s is the two-contract menu {(QH (s), bH (s)), (QL (s), bL (s))} that solves the following
  13
     Our sub-markets are indexed by score rather than contract terms as in the models of directed
search. A form of block recursivity, as in Menzio and Shi [28], exists when firms can screen using scores
because the score corresponds to the fraction of good types with that score and hence firms do not
need to know the entire distribution of workers over scores to evaluate the expected value of posting a
vacancy in that sub-market.
  14
     We write the free entry condition for a symmetric equilibrium in which individuals of each type
choose the same h at birth. This simplifies exposition considerably and will be true in equilibrium.




                                                   14
constrained optimization problem:
                                                      Z        ∗ (s,b )
                                                              τH ∗   H
                 max{QH ,bH ,QL ,bL } QH + ψ                              F (τ )dτ        (12)
                                                          0


                                       s.t.

                                            
                 −1
   s − QH + R         F (τH∗ ∗ (s, bH ))bH       +                                        (13)
                                                                                      
                                                                     −1  ∗
                                                                                    
                                                     (1 − s) − QL + R F τL∗ (s, bL ) bL ≥ 0
                      Z    ∗ (s,b )
                          τL                                      Z    ∗ (s,b )
                                                                      τL
                            ∗    L                                      ∗    H
          QL + ψ                 F (τ )dτ ≥ QH + ψ                   F (τ )dτ             (14)
                   0                                    0
                 Z τ ∗ ∗ (s,bH )                     Z τ ∗ ∗ (s,bL )
                     H                                    H
          QH + ψ                 F (τ )dτ ≥ QL + ψ                   F (τ )dτ             (15)
                  0                                    0
                 Z τ ∗∗ (s,bL )
                     L
          QL + ψ                 F (τ )dτ ≥                                               (16)
                   0
                                             Z τ ∗∗ (s,b)
                                                L
                    −1        ∗
                                       
             max R F τL∗ (s, b) b + ψ                     F (τ )dτ.
                 b                                        0


This problem says that the credit contract for a worker whose score is s is designed to
maximize the utility of the type H (low-risk) borrower subject to profitability, incen-
tive compatibility, and participation constraints. The first constraint (13) says that the
lender must make non-negative profits on the contract for each score. The first term
is the profit (or loss) per type H borrowers’ contract times the number of patient bor-
rowers with score s. The second term is profit (or loss) for type L borrowers’ contract
times the number of impatient borrowers with score s. Note that (13) does not rule
out cross-subsidization. The second and third inequalities ((14) and (15)) are incentive
compatibility constraints. For instance, (14) says that impatient borrowers must choose
the contract designed for them rather than the one designed for patient borrowers. The
final constraint (16) says that an impatient borrower must get at least the utility from a
credit contract that breaks even and maximizes her utility. That is, the equilibrium con-
tract must give the impatient borrower at least her utility from her least cost separating
contract, and will deliver strictly more utility if the contract cross subsidizes impatient
borrowers.
    We note some special properties of this game and its solution. First, we need a well
defined solution for all credit scores, which would not be the case in the competitive

                                                     15
model of Rothschild and Stiglitz [32]. In that model there would be no equilibrium for
a score close enough to one, whereas in this model an equilibrium always exists.15 The
Netzer and Scheur equilibrium contract can be one of three types: least cost separating
(denoted LCS), cross-subsidized separating (denoted CSS), or pooling (denoted PC).
Unlike Rothschild and Stiglitz, cross-subsidization can occur in a Netzer and Scheuer
equilibrium because lenders can withdraw their contracts. If another lender posted
a contract that cream-skimmed (ie, attracted only patient borrowers) then the lender
posting the cross-subsidizing contract would make losses and withdraw for sufficiently
low k. Impatient households would then choose the cream-skimming contract, which
would then cease to make profits. Second, we want a model in which workers care
about their future scores because their score improves credit contract terms (lower rates
or looser constraints) and the fact that credit contracts are cross-subsidizing or pooling
for high scores ensures this. This would not be the case in a model in which the credit
contracts were always least-cost separating, such as the competitive search model of
Guerrieri, Shimer and Wright [17].16 In that case, absent PECS, an individual’s credit
score would have no affect on their credit contract in equilibrium, which is inconsistent
with data.17 Finally, the Netzer and Scheuer equilibrium concept ensures that credit
market allocations are always statically constrained efficient. In our calibration, most
workers are patient and have scores in the region where the LCS contract is dominated
by either the CSS or PC contracts, so the welfare gains from using the Netzer and
Scheuer equilibrium can be substantial.
    In order to understand how type score s affects the credit contract, we first con-
sider the full-information allocation and then demonstrate the general form of optimal
constrained allocations that arise for different scores. The full-information allocation is
shown in Figure 2.18 The patient worker chooses more debt and receives a lower inter-
  15
     Non-existence follows from the standard argument of Rothschild and Stiglitz: the competitive
equilibrium cannot include a pooling contract, since lenders could “cream skim” the patient borrowers
by posting a contract with a slightly tighter borrowing constraint but lower interest rate. On the other
hand, if there were very few impatient borrowers and all other lenders were offering separating contracts
with borrowing limits then a lender could post a pooling contract and attract the entire market at a
profit. Hence, there would be no competitive equilibrium.
  16
     Their equilibrium concept also has search frictions and contract posting in the credit market and
hence an extra endogenous variable. Their framework is directly comparable with the least-cost sepa-
rating contracts in our work if the cost of posting credit contracts was taken to zero.
  17
     For instance, in states with PECS bans, interest rates on debt would be independent of credit
scores.
  18
     The full information contract maximizes an employed borrower type i’s utility subject to zero
                                                                                         R τ ∗ (s,b )
expected profits on the type i contract. This corresponds to maximizing Qi + ψ 0 i∗ i F (τ )dτ
(as in (12)) for each type i, subject to Qi ≤ R−1 F (τi∗∗ (s, bi ))bi (as in (13)). Graphically, this


                                                   16
                                                                         Full Info Contracts
                                                    Zero Profit, - H
                                                    Indiff. Curve, - H
                                        QFI         Zero Profit, - L
                                         H
                                                    Indiff. Curve, - L



                           Credit - Q




                                        QFI
                                         L




                                         0
                                              0                            b FI              b FI
                                                                             L                 H

                                                                                  Debt - b

                                                  Figure 2: Full Information Example


est rate on this debt since she is less likely to default. But then, if type was private
information, an impatient worker would choose the patient worker’s contract, violating
incentive compatibility in (14).
    Figure 3 compares two different types of allocations under private information. In this
case the impatient worker’s incentive compatibility constraint (14) is binding (as well as
their participation constraint (16)). The least cost separating (LCS) contracts are shown
in the left box Figure 3a. These types of contracts arise for low scores (in our calibrated
model, they arise for s < 0.28, whereas the median score is 0.69). The impatient borrower
receives the same amount of debt as under full information and pays the risk-adjusted
break-even interest rate. On the other hand, the patient borrower’s contract is distorted
because of the binding incentive compatibility constraint of the impatient worker. In
particular, the patient borrower receives less debt than the impatient borrower, although
her interest rate is still equal to the risk-adjusted break even rate on her loan. This puts
the patient worker on a lower indifference curve than in Figure 2.
gives us indifference curves with slopes dQ              = ψF τi∗∗ (s, bi ) ≥ 0 and isoprofit curves with slopes
                                                       i
                                                                           
                                                    dbi
dQi       −1
              F τi∗∗ (s, bi ) − F 0 τi∗∗ (s, bi ) bi . Since for a given (s, b), τL∗∗ (s, b) < τH
                                                                                                ∗
                                                
 dbi = R                                                                                          ∗ (s, b), the slope of

the type H indifference curve is greater than the slope of the type L. Furthermore, since the interest
rate on these contracts is given by Qbii , the interest rate can be seen as the inverse of the slope of a ray
from the origin to the contract point. This is analogous to the continuous asset version of Chatterjee,
et. al. [6].



                                                                                  17
                                                 LCS Contracts (Low Score)                                    CSS Contracts (Intermediate Score)
                            Zero Profit, - H                                                         Zero Profit Given (QL,b L)
                            Indiff. Curve, - H                                                       Indiff. Curve, - H
                            Zero Profit, - L                                                         Zero Profit, - L
                            Indiff. Curve, - L                                                       Indiff. Curve, - L
Credit - Q




                                                                              Credit - Q
                                                                                           QCS
                                                                                            L

                                                                                           QCS
                                                                                            H
              QFI
               L


             QLCS
              H




                0                                                                            0
                    0      b LCS                       b FI                                      0             b CS               b FI
                            H                           L                                                        H                 L

                                                              Debt - b                                                                   Debt - b
                                                                 (a)                                                                        (b)

                          Figure 3: Least Cost (LCS) vs. Cross-Subsidized Separating (CSS) Contracts


                 As a worker’s score rises the optimal contract switches from LCS to CSS. For CSS
             contracts, the impatient worker’s participation constraint (16) is slack, because she still
             receives the full-information level of debt but pays a lower interest rate (illustrated
             by QL being above the impatient zero profit curve in Figure 3b). This moves the
             impatient borrower to a higher indifference curve, while shifting the effective zero-profit
             curve for patient borrowers downward by the total subsidy to impatient borrowers.
             The patient borrower’s contract is given by the intersection of the impatient borrower’s
             new indifference curve and the patient borrower’s effective zero-profit curve. The CSS
             contract delivers more debt to the patient borrower than the LCS contract for the same
             score, but carries a higher interest rate than the LCS contract. The CSS contract
             dominates the LCS for intermediate scores (0.28 ≤ s < 0.42 in our calibration) because
             the extra interest paid per patient worker to subsidize impatient workers is more than
             offset by the patient worker’s utility gains from receiving more debt (e.g. loosening her
             credit limit).
                 The third contract type is pooling (PC), which can arise as s increases further (above
             0.42 in our calibrated model) as the interest rate cross-subsidy to impatient workers be-
             comes extremely generous. In this case, unlike the previous two, the patient household’s
             incentive constraint (15) binds.19 That this constraint binds can be seen in Figure 4a,
                    19
                         In some settings, such as the constant risk model in Netzer and Scheuer, the high-type incentive



                                                                             18
                         IC Constraint Violation for - H (High Score)                                                 PC (High Score)
                       Zero Profit Given (QL,b L)                                                Pooled Zero Profit
                       Indiff. Curve, - H                                                        Indiff. Curve, - H

                       Zero Profit, - L                                                          Indiff. Curve, - L

             QCS
              H
                       Indiff. Curve, - L
             QCS
              L



                                                                                     QPOOL
Credit - Q




                                                                        Credit - Q
               0                                                                        0
                   0                                b CS       b FI                          0                                b POOL
                                                     L          H

                                                           Debt - b                                                       Debt - b
                                                              (a)                                                            (b)

                       Figure 4: Violation of Incentive Compatibility in CSS Vs. Pooling Contracts


         where the interest rate paid by an impatient borrower in the CSS is so low that a patient
         borrower would prefer the impatient contract to the one prescribed to her. With so few
         impatient borrowers with a high score, the subsidy per impatient contract is too gen-
         erous and the patient borrower would rather have the impatient borrower’s subsidized
         rate, even though this gives her less credit. Therefore both incentive compatibility con-
         straints bind, which means that the contract must be pooling (i.e. each type receives
         the same debt and interest rate). We find this contract by maximizing the utility of
         the patient borrower subject to the pooled zero-profit condition. Graphically, this is
         given by the tangency between the patient worker’s indifference curve and the pooled
         zero-profit curve, as in Figure 4b.20
         compatibility constraint never binds. This is not the case in our model because of our interaction
         of adverse selection and moral hazard, which means that default rates (and therefore the indifference
         curves and zero-profit curves) depend on debt for each borrower.
           20
              The formula for the patient borrower’s indifference
                                                                curve is the same as before. The  slope of the
                                              dQ   d     −1       ∗                     ∗
                                                                                                
         pooled zero-profit curve is given by db = db R      sF τH ∗ (s, b) + (1 − s)F τL∗ (s, b) b .




                                                                        19
4.4      Type Scoring
Given the prior probability s that a worker is type H, the credit reporting agency forms
a Bayesian posterior s0 the worker is type H conditional on seeing whether she repays d:
                                                                                
                                                      τH∗ ∗   s, b∗H ∗ (s)
                                                                             
                                             Fd                                      s
                 s0d (s)   =                                                 ,                       (17)
                                   ∗       ∗
                                                          ∗      ∗
                                                                        
                               Fd τH ∗ s, bH ∗ (s) s + Fd τL∗ s, bL∗ (s) (1 − s)


where the probability of receiving a shock lower than τ is given by F0 (τ ) ≡ F (τ ) and
the probability of receiving a shock larger than τ is given by F1 (τ ) ≡ 1 − F (τ ).
    Typically a credit score is a measure of how likely the borrower is to repay. In the
context of our model, s is a “type” score. In equilibrium we can map s to a credit score
(i.e. the probability of repayment given s) as follows:21
                                                                    
                                ∗       ∗               ∗      ∗
                                                                   
               Pr d = 0|s = F0 τH ∗ s, bH ∗ (s) s + F0 τL∗ s, bL∗ (s) (1 − s).                           (18)


4.5      Distributions
We denote the measure of workers of type i over employment status n ∈ {0, 1} (where 1
denotes employed and 0 denotes unemployed) and score s in period t as µi,n (s). Given
µi,n (s), we can compute t + 1 measures (denoted µ0i,n (S) for some set of scores S) using
decision rules and the updating function (recalling that h∗i is constant over time). For
the employed we have:
                                   Z   s0
       µ0i,1 (s0 )
                                    
            = (1 − δ)     f θ(s) dµi,0 (s)                                                            (19)
                      0
                   Z 1                                                                            
                                           ∗       ∗                            ∗       ∗
                                                                                                
  + (1 − δ)(1 − σ)      I{s00 (s)≤s0 } F0 τi∗ (s, bi∗ (s)) + I{s01 (s)≤s0 } F1 τi∗ (s, bi∗ , (s)) dµi,1 (s).
                               0


where I{s0d (s)≤s0 } is an indicator function which takes the value one if s0d (s) ≤ s0 and zero
otherwise.
  21
     Our score is consistent with credit scoring in reality, in that past actions in the credit market are used
to forecast the likelihood of an individual defaulting on her debt (though her type). In our model, this is
reflected by interest rates falling with credit rating, which we calibrate to be consistent with the data, as
seen in Figure 9a. This is true even if the score is not highly predictive of a borrower’s future likelihood
of default after conditioning on other variables observed by an econometrician; since unobservable type
does not change across an agent’s lifetime, all that matters is that the score encapsulates something
about the workers’s type revealed by his history.


                                                              20
    For the unemployed we have two regions. For scores lower than the population share
of patient workers (i.e., for s < πH ):
                               Z   s0
          µ0i,0 (s0 )
                                                
               = (1 − δ)           1 − f θ(s) dµi,0 (s)                                               (20)
                             0
                 Z 1                                                                          
                                         ∗       ∗                            ∗       ∗
                                                                                            
      + (1 − δ)σ      I{s00 (s)≤s0 } F0 τi∗ (s, bi∗ (s)) + I{s01 (s)≤s0 } F1 τi∗ (s, bi∗ (s)) dµi,1 (s).
                        0


For scores above πH we must add the newborns who start unemployed with s = πH .
That is, for s ≥ πH :
                                        Z   s0
          µ0i,0 (s0 )
                                                     
               = δ + (1 − δ)            1 − f θ(s) dµi,0 (s)                                          (21)
                                   0
                 Z 1                                                                          
                                          ∗      ∗                            ∗       ∗
                                                                                            
      + (1 − δ)σ      I{s00 (s)≤s0 } F0 τi∗ (s, bi∗ (s)) + I{s01 (s)≤s0 } F1 τi∗ (s, bi∗ (s)) dµi,1 (s).
                        0


4.6      Definition of Equilibrium
A steady-state Markov equilibrium consists of the following functions:

                              ∗          ∗
  1. Worker value functions, Ui,h (s), Wi,h (s), satisfy (1) and (2).
                                   ∗
  2. Default threshold functions, τi,h (s, b), satisfies (4).

  3. Human capital investment, h∗i , satisfies (7).

  4. Firm value functions, Ji,h (s), satisfies (8).
                      ∗
  5. Wage functions, wi,h (s), satisfies (9).

  6. Market tightness functions, θ∗ (s), satisfies the free entry condition (7).

  7. Credit market contracts, {(Q∗i,h (s), b∗i,h (s))}i∈{H,L} , satisfy (12)-(16).

  8. The updating function, s0d , satisfies (17).

  9. Stationary measures of each worker type over human capital levels and scores,
     µ∗i,1 (s), µ∗i,0 (s) that satisfy (19) through (21) with µ0i,n (s) = µi,n (s) = µ∗i,n (s) for
     n ∈ {0, 1} and i ∈ {L, H}.




                                                    21
4.7     Full Information Equilibrium Characterization
We will define a poverty trap relative to the equilibrium outcomes of a full information
model, so we provide a characterization. We first make parametric assumptions to
guarantee that workers borrow within a period and do not save across periods (A.1),
that the match surplus of both workers is positive (A.2), that credit contracts are unique
(A.3), and that patient workers choose a high level of human capital while impatient
workers choose a low level (A.4). We also ensure that all workers would repay some
positive level of debt (A.5) and that all workers default with positive probability (A.6).

Assumption 1 .

 A.1 ψ < (ωR)−1 , βL < βH ≤ R−1

 A.2 z < h

 A.3 F 00 (τ ) ≤ 0

 A.4 φ and βL are sufficiently small.
                   
 A.5 F βL (1 − δ)ψ > 0

 A.6 The support of τ is unbounded above.

   In Appendix A we define a full-information equilibrium and prove the following:

Theorem 1 Under Assumption 1, there exists a full information steady-state Markov
equilibrium where i and h are publicly observable that is characterized by the following
equations:

                                             h∗H = h, h∗L = h                        (22)
                             ∗
                            θH > θL∗ → f (θH
                                           ∗
                                             ) > f (θL∗ )                            (23)
                                             wH > wL                                 (24)
                            F0 τH∗ (b∗H ) > F0 τL∗ (b∗L )
                                                        
                                                                                     (25)

Importantly, with full information under the parametric restrictions in Assumption 1,
patient workers choose higher human capital than impatient workers, have higher job
finding rates (in (23)), have higher wages (in (24)), and have lower default rates ((25))
implies higher repayment rates for patient workers).


                                             22
4.8        Existence of Private Information Equilibrium
We build an equilibrium in which patient households choose high human capital (i.e.
h), impatient households choose low human capital (i.e. h), and repayment leads to a
higher future score than does default due to Bayesian updating (i.e. updating function
s00 (s) ≥ s01 (s) (with equality only when s = 0 or s = 1). Existence is complicated by the
scoring functions, which are not contractions, and the programming problem generating
credit contracts. We must therefore make additional technical assumptions to guarantee
existence.

Theorem 2 Under the restrictions in Assumption 1 as well as additional conditions on
F (τ ), ψ, ω, R, βL , βH , f (θ), q(θ), and the programming problem in (12) through (16),
there exists an equilibrium as defined in Section 4.6 with h∗L = h and h∗H = h.

The proof and additional conditions are in the appendix. The idea is to define a contin-
uous operator mapping Lipschitz functions into themselves using the equilibrium con-
ditions defined in Section 4.6. In the appendix in Section B, we define this operator,
show how to find a Lipschitz space of functions for which the operator is a continuous
self mapping, and then apply Schauder’s fixed point theorem.
    Economically speaking, existence requires that the marginal effect of default or re-
payment is sufficiently small so that the updating functions do not change rapidly across
scores. This in turn requires that the odds-ratios for default and repayment are suffi-
ciently independent of changes in score and continuation utilities, which in turn requires
the same for the optimal contracts of each household type. We accomplish this by as-
suming that expenditure shocks are sufficiently volatile (i.e. supτ ≥0 F 0 (τ ) is small) and
that the slope of each Qi and bi with respect to s and Vi∗ (s00 (s))−Vi∗ (s01 (s)) is sufficiently
small.


5        Quantitative Exercise
To demonstrate how a poverty trap may arise and how markets respond to a policy
banning PECS, we compute an equilibrium of the economy and then change the deter-
mination of market tightness so that it is independent of type score (consistent with a
ban).22
  22
       The algorithm for computing an equilibrium is available upon request.




                                                   23
5.1     Calibration
A model period is taken to be a month. We use a Cobb-Douglas matching technology
so that the job-finding and filling rates are given by f (θ) = θα and q(θ) = θα−1 . We
assume that expenditure shocks have an exponential CDF: F (τ ) = 1 − e−γτ .23 Once
these functional forms are set, we must choose parameter values. Some values we set
externally, while the remainder we choose to match data and model moments. The
parameter values are listed in Table 1.

                                    Table 1: Parameter Values

                                Externally Calibrated Parameters
        Parameter Value                     Source or Informative Moment
           βH     0.997                  No inter-temporal savings condition
          R−1     0.33%                            Risk free rate 4%
            δ     0.21%                           45 Years in Market
            α      0.50                          Matching Elasticity24
            λ      0.50                            Hosios Condition
            σ      2.6%                     Separation Rate, Shimer (2005)
           hH        1                               Normalization
            z       0.4                              Shimer (2005)
                                Internally Calibrated Parameters
             πH        55.0%     Sub-prime through super prime rates, CFPB (2015)
                      0.670     Sub-prime through super prime rates, CFPB (2015)
             βL        0.672     Sub-prime through super prime rates, CFPB (2015)
              ψ        0.982             Debt to Labor Income, CFPB (2015)
             hL        0.572         Residual Earnings 50 − 10, Lemieux (2006)
              κ         1.45                Job-finding rate, Shimer (2005)
              γ          13                Delinq. debt share, CFPB (2015)


    Many of our parameters are taken from previous papers or otherwise calibrated
externally. We choose the bargaining weight for workers so that the Hosios condition
(λ = α) holds. In a full information environment, the Hosios condition implies that
total vacancies created is efficient. We will use that fact when comparing our results to
a full information model of the labor market. While we cannot guarantee that the data
represents a constrained efficient allocation, this ensures that our welfare results are not
  23
     In order to guarantee model convergence, we include a small fixed probability of a shock that is too
large to pay for any borrower. See the computational appendix for details.
  24
     Hall [18] uses a value of α = 0.24. Shimer [33] uses α = 0.72. Other authors have used values in
between, with many settling on 0.5. See Gertler and Trigari [16].


                                                   24
                                    Table 2: Model Fit

                         Moment            Data Value Model Value
              Super Prime CC Rate, top 49%   0.87%      0.88%
                Prime CC Rate, 34 − 50%      1.17%      1.20%
               Sub-Prime CC Rate, 0 − 33%    1.60%      1.61%
                  Debt to Labor Income      21.24%      21.34%
                       Delinq. Rate          0.95%      0.92%
                Residual Earnings 50 − 10     0.57       0.57
                Monthly Job Finding Rate     45.0%      45.1%

                      Note: Appendix 2 has definitions of model moments.


amplified due to beginning with an inefficient labor market equilibrium.
    We have chosen moments on credit card debt from various sources, some of which
are new to the quantitative household credit literature (to our knowledge). The average
credit card rate and share of borrowers in each credit bracket are from the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau’s “Consumer Credit Card Market” report [10]. The interest
rates are “total costs of credit” for each credit bracket in 2015, less 2% for inflation, and
reported as monthly rates. These are the most comparable numbers to the model interest
rates, since some people pay all balances monthly in the data (and therefore do not pay
interest) whereas everyone pays interest in the model.
    We also use the CFPB’s data to compute credit card debt to income and the share
of debt that is defaulted upon. Total credit card debt was $779 Billion in 2015, which
we divide by labor’s share of average monthly GDP, which was 0.60 × $6.108 Trillion.
Finally, we use the CFPB’s reported share of accounts that are more than three months
past due as our measure of the delinquency rate.
    Our moments on labor market outcomes are taken from economy wide reports since
we do not have merged data with credit scores and earnings or job-finding rates. For the
residual earnings 50 − 10 ratio, we use the log of median earnings minus the log of the
earnings of the tenth percentile, which is reported by Lemieux [24]. For the job finding
rate we use the monthly rate implied by Shimer [33].


5.2    Properties of Stationary Equilibrium
The equilibrium stationary distribution of workers over “type” scores and employment
status is determined by the relative solvency and default rates of patient versus impatient
workers, as well as job-finding rates. Since type scores are not directly observable, we


                                             25
construct a data comparable distribution by sorting borrowers by their default probabil-
ity and then assigning credit ratings consistent with the empirical shares of households
within each rating. This means that as in the data, the bottom third are labeled “sub
prime”, the next 15% are “prime” and the top 50% are “super prime”. Figure 5a plots
the histogram of workers over credit ratings constructed in this way.
    While the population shares over credit ratings are defined to match the data, the
share of workers of each type within each credit rating is endogenous – it depends on
the relative default rates of each worker type in equilibrium. We plot these distributions
in Figure 5b, where it is clear that the most impatient workers have sub prime credit,
while less than 1% of patient workers have such poor credit since they only default due
to extremely large expenditure shocks. Likewise, nearly 90% of patient workers have
scores in the super prime range.
    The composition of types over ratings determines the gradient of interest rates, de-
fault rates, and debt-to-income ratios with respect to credit rating. This can be under-
stood by considering the average and type-specific default rates by credit rating, which
we report in red text in Figures 5a and 5b. The average default rate is falling with
credit rating, from 1.34% to 0.64%, but this is because the composition of borrowers in
each group is changing, not because an individual always defaults less when her score
is higher. For example, the average super-prime patient borrower actually defaults four
times more than the average subprime patient borrower. This is because she receives
much less credit when subprime and because she has a strong incentive to repay. In
fact, a patient borrower in the prime category has the strongest incentive to repay and
therefore the lowest average default rate because default generates the largest drop in
score in the updating function in Figure 6b.25
    The stationary distribution is derived from the law of motion for a worker’s em-
ployment status and score, which depends on the job-finding rate for unemployed and
the average change in score for employed workers. Figure 6a plots the job-finding rate
f (θ(s)), which is bounded below by the impatient worker’s full information rate and
above by the patient worker’s (both of which are efficient under the Hosios condition).
The finding rate rises monotonically for scores between zero and one, reflecting the rising
surplus associated with patient (and more productive) workers. Since most unemployed
patient workers have scores above 0.80 while most impatient are below 0.014, patient
workers find jobs at a substantially higher rate than impatient on average. Of course,
  25
    We plot all theoretical functions over the score range 0.01 − 0.99 because these scores are never
reached in theory.


                                                 26
        0.6                                                                           0.9
                                                                                                                                           Patient
                                                                                                                                           Impatient
                                                                                      0.8
        0.5
                                                                                      0.7


        0.4                                                                           0.6


                                                                                      0.5
Share




                                                                              Share
        0.3
                                                                                      0.4


        0.2                                                                           0.3


                                                                                      0.2
        0.1
                                                                                      0.1
                      1.34%            0.94%               0.64%                            0.13%   1.35%   0.1%      1.42%      0.54%   2.89%

         0                                                                             0
                     Sub Prime          Prime             Super Prime                        Sub Prime             Prime          Super Prime
                                    Credit Rating                                                           Credit Rating



                                                (a)                                                                        (b)
              Notes: Unconditional shares are constructed to match the data, type-conditional are inferred from model. Red numbers are average
              default rates for workers in each rating, unconditional on type in Figure 5a and conditional on type in Figure 5a.




                                                      Figure 5: Histograms over Credit Ratings


              some unlucky patient workers have substantially lower scores than average and therefore
              experience lower job-finding rates due to being pooled with the impatient. The median
              unemployed worker, marked by p50     U on the graph, has a score of 0.55 and therefore a job
                                            26
              finding rate of nearly 47%.
                  The score updating functions are plotted in Figure 6b, the shape of which can be
              understood by the relative solvency and default rates of the two worker types. Because
              both worker types repay with a high probability at all scores, there is very little infor-
              mation revealed by repayment.27 The score therefore updates very slowly in the positive
              direction, with s00 (s) just slightly above the forty-five degree line. However, the default
              rate for impatient workers is up to ten times times that of the patient. Therefore, ob-
              serving a borrower default leads to a dramatic downward update of her score, thus s01 (s)
              is much lower than s for most scores. The median employed borrower has a score of
                26
                   Throughout, we use px to denote the xth percentile of scores. If we condition on type or status
              then we use a subscript, so that the notation pxU is the score held by xth percentile of the unemployed
              and pxH is the score held by the xth percentile of high (patient) types. Likewise, pxHU is the score held
              by the xth percentile of the patient unemployed.
                27
                   These rates are implied by the interest rate targets, which are relatively low relative to the risk-free
              rate.



                                                                                27
                             Job Finding Rates                                               Score Updating Functions
0.52                                                                      1
            Private Info                                                           s 00(s)
            Full Info, - L                                               0.9       s 01(s)
 0.5        Full Info, - H

                                                                         0.8

0.48                                                                     0.7


                                                                         0.6
0.46

                                                                         0.5

0.44
                                                                         0.4


0.42                                                                     0.3


                                                                         0.2
 0.4
                                                                         0.1


0.38                                                                      0
       0                             p 50=0.55                1                0                                  p 50=0.7         1
                                      U                                                                            E

                                Type Score                                                          Type Score


                                          (a)                                                               (b)
       Notes: Vertical hashed lines mark median scores for unemployed workers in Figure 6a and for employed in Figure 6b. Functions are
       plotted on score range 0.01 − 0.99.




                                          Figure 6: Job Finding Rates and Score Updates


       0.69, implying that a default would reduce her score to 0.11 (the bottom third of scores
       in the stationary distribution).
           Our model also generates life-cycle profiles of credit ratings, which determines a
       worker’s lifecycle of labor and credit market outcomes. Figure 7a plots the unconditional
       average credit score percentile by age, starting from s = πH for households entering the
       labor market at age 20, as well as the one standard-deviation spread around this aver-
       age.28 On average, older workers find themselves higher in the credit rating distribution
       than do younger workers. This occurs because workers separate by type the longer they
       survive, with patient workers’ scores converging towards one and impatient towards zero.
       This separation is clear in Figure 7b, which shows that the share of patient workers who
       are super prime is rising with age while the share of impatient workers who are at least
       prime is falling. This tendency generates the rising spread in Figure 7a which implies
       a rising average of the rating in Figure 7a, since the cumulative distribution function is
       convex and our calibration has more patient types than impatient (πH = 0.55). This
         28
            Credit percentiles are averaged over ten year intervals. While newborns enter with s = πH = 0.55
       in our calibration, since the stationary distribution of scores is more heavily weighted to high scores,
       newborns only enter above 45% of the population.



                                                                        28
results in a declining average finding rate, as shown in Figure 7c, since the job-finding
curve is concave and the pool of unemployed becomes disproportionately populated by
the low-productivity impatient over time.




                                                Lifecycle Dynamics of Score Distribution                                                                             Lifecycle Dynamics of Rating Shares
                                     1.1                                                                                                          100
                                             Avg + 1 SD                                                                                                       Patient Super Prime
                                             Average                                                                                                          Impatient Prime/Super Prime
                                      1                                                                                                           90
                                             Avg - 1 SD


                                     0.9                                                                                                          80
  Percentile of Score Distribution




                                     0.8                                                                                                          70


                                     0.7                                                                                                          60




                                                                                                                                     Percentage
                                     0.6                                                                                                          50


                                     0.5                                                                                                          40


                                     0.4                                                                                                          30


                                     0.3                                                                                                          20


                                     0.2                                                                                                          10


                                     0.1                                                                                                           0
                                        20                30       40                                     50            60                          20                    30                40     50      60
                                                                  Age                                                                                                                       Age



                                                                   (a)                                                                                                                       (b)




                                                                                                               Lifecycle Dynamics of Finding Rate
                                                                                                   52
                                                                                                                                                                          Avg + 1 SD
                                                                                                                                                                          Average
                                                                                                                                                                          Avg - 1 SD
                                                                                                   50
                                                                        Monthly Finding Rate (%)




                                                                                                   48



                                                                                                   46



                                                                                                   44



                                                                                                   42



                                                                                                   40



                                                                                                   38
                                                                                                     20          30           40                         50                        60
                                                                                                                              Age



                                                                                                                                   (c)
Notes: Figures generated by simulating 10, 000 individuals from birth. At each date there is a distribution of each endogenous variable,
which we average over ten year intervals for averages in Figures 7a and 7c (i.e. mark at 20 represents average over 20 − 29). Percentages
are computed at the specific age in Figure 7b.




                                                               Figure 7: Lifecycle Dynamics In Baseline Economy




                                                                                                                                   29
5.3    Covariance Between Earnings and Credit History
Our model generates a positive covariance between earnings and credit histories through
two channels. First, unobservable heterogeneity in discount factors across types causes
differences in both average credit rating and earnings. Patient workers have higher earn-
ings than impatient workers for a given credit history and have better credit histories on
average, which creates a positive correlation between credit score and earnings “across”
types. Second, a worker of a given type with better credit has a larger threat point,
since she knows that she can walk away from a match and find another with a high
probability. This means that a better credit score causes higher wages “within” each
worker type.
    Figure 8 demonstrates these two covariances for our model calibration. On average,
prime borrowers earn 20.4% more than sub prime and super prime earn an additional
34.4% than prime. Over 98% of this total covariance is driven by the “across” component,
since patient workers earn roughly 76% more than impatient workers and represent a
larger share of workers with good credit ratings. The remainder is determined by the
“within” component, since moving from subprime to super prime increases earnings by
0.9% on average.
    While there is no direct empirical counterpart to these numbers, there is a strong neg-
ative association between adverse credit events and residual earnings. We demonstrate
this by estimating an earnings regression from the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finance, in
which respondents answered three questions: Q1) whether they were ever delinquent on
debt in 2015, Q2) whether they were ever delinquent on debt by more than two months,
and Q3) whether they were ever turned down for a loan. We use the answers to these
questions (1 = “yes”) to estimate the cross-sectional regression

                 log earningsi = β1 Q1i + β2 Q2i + β3 Q3i + controlsi + εi ,          (26)

where controls include a quadratic function of age as well as dummies for years of educa-
tion, gender, race, industry, and occupation. Table 3 reports our estimated β coefficients
across various specifications. We consistently find a significantly large negative coeffi-
cient on adverse credit terms, with a magnitude ranging from 20.3% lower earnings for
delinquency alone to 36.7% lower earnings for all three adverse events. These numbers
are of similar magnitudes as our model’s overall covariance between credit rating and
earnings, although we do not know exactly how much these events would move someone’s
credit rating.

                                             30
                                                                Specification
                                                   (1)              (2)                      (3)
                                                         ∗∗∗                 ∗∗∗
                                     Q1        −20.3                −14.7                −13.6∗∗∗
                                                (4.9)                (2.8)                (2.6)
                                     Q2                             −13.9∗               −12.7∗
                                                                     (1.9)                (1.7)
                                     Q3                                                  −10.4∗∗
                                                                                          (2.2)
                                     R2          0.332                0.333                0.333
                                     Obs         4451                 4451                 4451
Notes: Estimates from equation log earningsi = β1 Q1i + β2 Q2i + β3 Q3i + CON T ROLSi , where column (1) restricts β2 = β3 = 0 and
column (2) restricts β3 = 0. Questions are 1) were you ever delinquent on debt payments, Q2) were you ever delinquent by more than two
months, and Q3) were you ever turned down for a loan. Parenthesis report absolute values of t-statistics. Significance levels represented as
∗ ∗ ∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




                 Table 3: Cross-Sectional Regression of Earnings on Credit Events



   Finally, the fact that our “within” covariance is small is supported by estimates in
Herkenhoff, Phillips, and Cohen-Cole [21], who report the average change in annual
earnings for an individual one year before and after the removal of a bankruptcy flag
from their credit report. This effectively isolates the effect of credit above and beyond
any permanent worker type and turns out to be roughly 1% in their panel data (similar
to our model finding that moving from subprime to super prime increases earnings by
0.9% on average).




                                                                    31
                                                           Effects of Credit on Wages
                         96.60                                                                               54.80


                         96.40                                                                               54.70

                                                                                                             54.60
                         96.20
                                                                                                             54.50
                         96.00
                                                                                                             54.40
                         95.80
                                                                                                             54.30

                         95.60                                                                               54.20

                         95.40                                                                               54.10
                                         Sub Prime                      Prime                Super Prime

                                         (0-33%)                      (34-50%)               (51-100%)

                                                                  Patient        Impatient




Notes: Average earnings by credit rating and worker type. Left vertical axis corresponds to patient workers and right vertical axis to
impatient workers.




                                                     Figure 8: Credit and Wages


5.4        Fit in Other Dimensions
Our calibration is consistent with additional dimensions of the data not used to fit the
model. Figure 9a reproduces the fit of the model’s interest rates with data, while Figure
9b shows the shares of debt held by borrowers with each credit rating, both in the data
and our model.29 The fact that credit shares are increasing with rating is a success of
the Netzer and Scheuer equilibrium concept and would not be generated by models in
which credit contracts were least cost separating for all scores (since patient households
would always have less debt than impatient households in such a model) to maintain
incentive compatibility as is clear in Figure 3a.
  29
       The data is from the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s 2017 credit card report [11].




                                                                       32
                               (a)                                                                    (b)
Notes: Model generated interest rates and debt shares relative to data. Figure 9a shows fit of model to moments chosen in calibration.
Figure 9b compares model to empirical moments not used to fit model in calibration.




                    Figure 9: Average Interest Rates and Credit Usage by Rating

    Furthermore, the policy experiment in Section 6 shows that our model closely matches
the effect of PECS bans on the job finding rate of subprime workers. Friedberg, Hynes,
and Pattison [15] estimate that workers in the bottom quintile of financial health enjoy
a 25% decline in expected unemployment duration when PECS bans are enacted at the
state level, while our calibrated model predicts that the bottom quintile of borrowers
would enjoy a 27% reduction in unemployment duration. While the bottom quintile in
our model is not precisely the same as the bottom quintile of Friedberg, Hynes, and Pat-
tison [15], we are encouraged that our calibration predicts similar labor market effects
of the PECS ban for financially distressed workers.


5.5        Poverty Traps
The definition of a poverty trap is not universally agreed upon, so we discuss two possible
definitions. The first is a situation in which a worker’s experience is made worse due to
her credit score relative to an otherwise identical worker. In our case, this happens for
the patient households. A patient worker who becomes unemployed with a bad score has
a harder time finding a job than one who becomes unemployed with a good score. This
leads to further divergence between the two, since the worker with good credit will find
a job sooner and therefore have an even better credit score in the future. This is because
employed patient workers experience an increase in their credit score on average while
the unemployed do not. We say that the patient household is subject to a poverty trap
because, on average, she experiences a decrease in her score (relative to being employed)
and the decrease in score makes it harder to find a job in the next period.

                                                                   33
                         Avg. Unemployment Dur. (in Weeks)                                             Avg Relative " Score for Unemployed (x 100)
 6.3                                                                                          0
                                                             Private Information                                                                     -H
                                                             Full Information

                                                                                        -0.05

 5.8

                                                                                            -0.1



                                                                                        -0.15



                                                                                            -0.2



 4.6
                                                                                        -0.25



                                                                                            -0.3



 3.9                                                                                    -0.35
       0     p 1 =0.13                   p 10 =0.55                                1               0                        p 10 =0.55                    1
              HU                          HU                                                                                 HU

                                    Type Score                                                                         Type Score


                                        (a)                                                                                (b)
Notes: Figure 10a shows average unemployment duration as function of worker’s score, relative to the efficient full information duration
for a patient worker of 3.9 weeks. Hashed lines highlight duration for bottom 1% of the patient unemployed (5.8 weeks) and bottom 10%
(4.6 weeks). Figure 10b plots change in score for patient individuals while unemployed minus average change in score when employed.
Functions are plotted on score range 0.01 − 0.99.




                                           Figure 10: Poverty Trap for Patient Workers


    We use two figures to understand how such a poverty trap may arise. Figure 10a uses
the job-finding rates (as in Figure 6a) to compute the expected unemployment duration
of an unemployed patient household as a function of her score s. It is falling with score,
reflecting the fact that patient workers are more productive in equilibrium and tend
to have higher scores. Note that there are some patient workers who end up with low
scores, illustrated by the vertical bar at the tenth percentile. This is the first part of
the poverty trap: an unlucky patient worker with a bad credit history has a hard time
finding a job and therefore expects longer unemployment spells than if her score was
higher.
    We next look at the average change in a worker’s score when unemployed relative to
when she is employed.30 Figure 10b plots this function for patient workers. On average,
   30
           The average relative change in score is defined as:
                                                                                         
                                          ∗       ∗
                                                           0              ∗       ∗
                                                                                            0
                        ∆(s) = s − F0 τH    ∗ s, bH ∗ (s)    s0 (s) − F1 (τH ∗ s, bH ∗ (s)    s1 (s)

The change while unemployed is 0 while the average change while employed is the negative of the above
expression. Thus, the relative average change is ∆(s).



                                                                                       34
an employed patient worker experiences a rising score, while her score remains constant
during an unemployment spell. It is evident from the figure that an unlucky patient
worker with a low score therefore experiences a deterioration in her score relative to if
she was employed, which reinforces the longer unemployment duration.
    Another way of defining the poverty trap is relative to the full information equilib-
rium. The idea is that the job-finding rate for a worker with a low score may be strictly
lower than if her human capital was observable. Again, consider Figure 6a and com-
pare the finding rates between the private and full information economies. The patient
worker experiences a lower job-finding rate for all s < 1 while the opposite is true for
the impatient worker. For example, the bottom quintile of unemployed patient work-
ers have scores below 0.68 and a job-finding rate below 47.9%, which is 3% below the
full information rate of patient workers. Private information has the opposite effect for
the impatient workers, 10% of whom have scores above 0.55 and therefore finding rates
above 46.4%, which is 7.6% above their full information rate.
    The extent of the poverty trap relative to full information depends on the patient
worker’s score. Using the score percentiles in Figure 10a we can say that the poverty
trap adds just over two days to the median patient worker’s unemployment duration,
five days for the 25th percentile, and just under a week for the lowest decile of patient
job seekers.
    A useful summary of the labor market impact of default can be computed as the
present value of wages conditional on repayment minus the same value conditional on
default. We compute these measures for each worker type and employment status, as
well as the unconditional average, amortize them over 10 years, and report this measure
relative to the average wage in Table 4. Our model predicts substantial expected wage
losses from default through two mechanisms. First, the job-finding rate falls due to
a lower score. Second, the worker’s bargaining position becomes weaker and therefore
their wages fall even conditional on being employed. The average across all worker types,
scores, and employment statuses amounts to 2.34% of earnings in each month for ten
years.




                                           35
                          Table 4: Wage Losses From Default

                                    Employed    Unemployed     Overall
                   Patient (βH )      3.19%         3.07%       3.18%
                  Impatient (βL )     1.36%         0.66%       1.32%
                      Overall         1.93%         1.52%       2.34%



5.6    Labor Market Efficiency
Since we have assumed that the Hosios condition holds, we know that the full-information
finding rates are efficient. We can therefore define a measure of labor market efficiency
by considering the average difference between each worker type’s average finding rate
in the economy with private information relative to the full information economy. For
the patient households in the calibrated economy, the monthly job-finding rate averages
49.7%, which is 1.3 percentage points lower than the efficient 50.9%. On the other
hand, impatient households have an inefficiently high job-finding rate. In the calibrated
economy their monthly job-finding rate is 40.5%, which is 1.7 percentage points higher
than the efficient rate.


6     Policy Experiment: Banning Credit Checks
We now solve the economy with the same parameters, except that vacancies cannot be
conditioned on a worker’s score which implies market tightness θ is independent of s.
That is, we substitute q(θ) for q(θ(s)) in the free entry condition in (11). While market
tightness and the job-finding rate are therefore independent of s (and independent of
βi as before), match surplus and therefore bargained wages still depend on s since the
worker’s score affects her bargaining position post match. Credit markets operate as
before the ban, except that the workers’ incentives to repay endogenously fall: since
default (which lowers a worker’s credit score) does not affect the worker’s job finding
rate, there is less punishment associated with default.
    The ban affects workers by changing equilibrium labor and credit market functions,
which in turn affect lifecycle dynamics of credit ratings. This can be seen in Figure 12a,
which shows that the score updating function for a defaulting worker is substantially
less severe after the ban goes into effect. The ban reduces the dynamic incentive for


                                           36
                       Avg. Unemployment Dur. (in Weeks)                                     " Average Repayment Rates (x 100)
 6.3                                                                                0
                                                             Baseline
                                                             After Ban
                                                                              -0.02


 5.8                                                                          -0.04


                                                                              -0.06


                                                                              -0.08


                                                                                  -0.1


                                                                              -0.12


 4.6                                                                          -0.14


                                                                              -0.16


                                                                              -0.18


 3.9                                                                              -0.2
       0   p 1 =0.13                   p 10 =0.55                        1               0                           p 50=0.68   1
            HU                          HU

                                  Type Score                                                            Type Score



                                      (a)                                                                   (b)
Notes: Model’s predictions for unemployment duration and repayment rates in response to PECS ban. Functions are plotted on score
range 0.01 − 0.99.




                                                    Figure 11: Equilibrium Effects of Ban


workers to repay debts, which is much more important for the patient borrowers since
the impatient discount the future heavily. This in turn affects default behavior for patient
borrowers more than for impatient, which makes the default rates more similar for the
two types. A flatter score updating function manifests as a flatter lifecycle profile of
credit ratings, as seen in Figure 12b, where the post-ban average credit percentile grows
less than in the baseline economy since separation occurs less rapidly. Finally, the job-
finding rate is constant following the ban, which eliminates the effect of age on finding
rates, as seen in Figure 12c.




                                                                             37
                                                 Scoring Functions                                                                                                                        Lifecycle Dynamics of Score Distribution
                   1                                                                                                                                                      1.1
                              Baseline                                                                                                                                                 Baseline
                              After Ban                                                                                                                                                After Ban
                  0.9                                                                                                                                                      1


                  0.8                                                                                                                                                     0.9




                                                                                                                                       Percentile of Score Distribution
                  0.7                                                                                                                                                     0.8
  Updated Score




                  0.6                                                                                                                                                     0.7


                  0.5                                                                                                                                                     0.6


                  0.4                                                                                                                                                     0.5


                  0.3                                                                                                                                                     0.4


                  0.2                                                                                                                                                     0.3


                  0.1                                                                                                                                                     0.2


                   0                                                                                                                                                      0.1
                        0   0.1      0.2   0.3     0.4       0.5                       0.6           0.7   0.8      0.9   1                                                  20                    30          40          50        60
                                                         Type Score                                                                                                                                            Age



                                                              (a)                                                                                                                                               (b)




                                                                                                                 Lifecycle Dynamics of Finding Rate
                                                                                              52
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Baseline
                                                                                                                                                                                                   After Ban

                                                                                              50
                                                                   Monthly Finding Rate (%)




                                                                                              48



                                                                                              46



                                                                                              44



                                                                                              42



                                                                                              40



                                                                                              38
                                                                                                20                 30           40                                                50                      60
                                                                                                                                Age



                                                                                                                                     (c)
Notes: Lifecycle figures generated by simulating 10, 000 individuals from birth. At each date there is a distribution of each endogenous
variable, which we average over ten year intervals for averages in Figures 12b and 12c.




                                                     Figure 12: Lifecycle Dynamics Before & After Ban

    The ban’s effect on aggregate variables can be seen in Table 5. The average job-
finding rate actually rises from 45.11% to 46.4%, which occurs for three reasons. First,
the finding function is concave in scores, which means that the finding rate rises me-
chanically from pooling, keeping all other equilibrium variables constant. Second, the
equilibrium unemployment pool’s composition shifts towards higher productivity work-

                                                                                                                                     38
ers following the ban. This shift occurs because high-score workers find jobs at a higher
rate in the baseline economy and the patient are disproportionately represented in the
upper credit ratings. Therefore, the patient have shorter unemployment durations and
make up a smaller fraction of the unemployed pool than they do in the population as
a whole. Once the ban goes into effect, they have the same job-finding rate as every-
one else, and therefore their share of the unemployed is the same as their share of the
population.
    Finally, post-match expected discounted profits rise on average after the ban be-
cause workers’ threat points change. As shown in Figures 15c and 15d, the post-match
profitability of employing a worker of either type with super prime credit rises, since
these workers experience a deterioration in their threat points. On the other hand, the
post-match profitability of employing a worker with prime or sub prime credit falls since
these workers experience an increase in their threat points (i.e. they no longer suffer
from low job finding rates due to their bad credit). On net, however, post-match ex-
pected discounted profits rise after the ban, since almost all patient households have
excellent credit (post-match profits rise in 56.8% of matches overall, which is driven by
an increase in 95% of matches with patient workers).31
    The effects on job-finding rates differ substantially across the score distribution, as
seen in Figure 11a.32 We find that the job finding rate for workers with very low scores
rises substantially, which causes the average duration of unemployment for the bottom
quintile of workers to decline by 27%.
  31
     The above increase in average post-match profits occurs after the ban goes into effect through
changes in the equilibrium threat point of workers, which are taken as given during bargaining. This
means that a given employer in the baseline economy (with employer credit checks) cannot increase
profits by unilaterally ignoring the worker’s credit report. Furthermore, there is no change in the cost of
posting a vacancy, so the ex-ante expected profit from posting a vacancy is zero in both environments.
  32
     We plot changes in the expected unemployment duration in Figure 11a since it is in more easily
interpreted units (weeks). The relationship with the job finding rate is monotone - a higher finding rate
implies a lower duration.




                                                    39
                            Table 5: Effect of Employer Credit Ban

                                 Moment                  Baseline After Ban
                        Avg. Job Finding Rate            45.11%         46.4%
                       Median Job Finding Rate           46.42%        46.40%
                        Average Interest Rate             1.17%         1.18%
                       Average Debt to Income            21.34%        20.50%
                            Delinq. Rate                  0.92%         0.93%



    This exercise shows that banning PECS may actually increase the average job-finding
rate, but still does so at the cost of labor market efficiency. This can be seen by the
small fall in the median job-finding rate, which is due to a decline in the job-finding
rate for almost all of the patient workers (who are 55% of the population in our baseline
economy and tend to have high scores). In fact, the unemployment rate for patient
workers rises from 5.4% to 5.7% following the ban. Relative to the efficient job-finding
rate, the impatient worker’s finding rate is 7.6% higher after the ban (in levels, it rises
from 42.4% to 46.4%). On the other hand, patient workers are now pooled with more
low-patience workers and therefore experience a more inefficiently low finding rate than
in the economy with pre-employment credit screening. Their finding rates falls from
49.7% to 46.4%, which is 3.25% lower than the efficient level. If we average over these
absolute changes, then the ban moves job-finding rates away from efficiency by 5.42%.
    The ban also affects the credit market through the repayment decisions of borrowers,
again seen in Table 5. The average interest rate rises from 1.17% to 1.18% as the average
default rate rises from 0.92% to 0.93%. However, these incentive effects differ across
worker types and states. Specifically, the patient worker’s repayment rate falls more
than the impatient, since they respond to dynamic incentives more in the first place.
The new stationary equilibrium therefore features less separation of worker types by
credit score (i.e. more workers of each type in the prime rating rather than impatient in
subprime and patient in super prime). This causes a small decline in the average interest
rate of prime borrowers, since a larger equilibrium share are patient. The overall rise in
default causes a reduction in credit access, as the the average debt-to-income ratio falls
from 21.34% to 20.50%. Again, the small aggregate changes mask larger changes at the
micro level, as seen in Figure 11b.33
  33
    Note that the change in default rate is zero at both s = 0 and s = 1 since these are absorbing scores
and therefore the dynamic incentives to repay are zero for both types in both the baseline economy and


                                                   40
                Welfare Effects of Ban, Unemployed                                             Welfare Effects of Ban, Employed
  6                                                                                 1.5
                                                     Welfare Effect, - H                                                           Welfare Effect, - H
                                                     Welfare Effect, - L                                                           Welfare Effect, - L
                                                                                      1
  4

                                                                                    0.5

  2
                                                                                      0



  0                                                                                 -0.5



                                                                                     -1
 -2

                                                                                    -1.5

 -4
                                                                                     -2



 -6                                                                                 -2.5
      0                          p 50=0.55                                 1               0                            p 50=0.7                         1
                                  U                                                                                      E

                           Type Score                                                                    Type Score


                                (a)                                                                           (b)
Notes: Consumption equivalent welfare effects of being in an economy with PECS ban relative to baseline economy, by worker type, score,
and employment status. Positive numbers represent a gain from the ban, negative numbers represent a loss.




                                             Figure 13: Welfare Effects of Ban


    It is important to note that, while banning PECS eliminates the poverty trap, most of
the people with inefficiently low finding rates (i.e. unlucky, patient workers) experience
lower job-finding rates. The pre-PECS ban equilibrium is nearly separating, with only
10% of impatient workers carrying scores below s = 0.55, which is the threshold for
which durations rise post-ban (as seen in Figure 11a). On average, patient workers
experience 3.8 days more unemployment following the ban, which is large when compared
to the effects of much larger labor market policies. For example, Card and Levine [5]
estimate that a thirteen week extension of unemployment benefits increases average
unemployment duration by roughly one week.34
    Furthermore, the net effect is a decrease in labor market efficiency in spite of the
increase in average job-finding rates. This can be seen by comparing the finding rate after
the ban to the full-information finding rates in Figure 6a. The full-information rates are
efficient since our bargaining weight satisfies the Hosios condition. The economy with
PECS experience partial separation through type scores, so on average each type has a
the one with PECS bans.
  34
     We make this comparison to put the magnitude into context, not because they are directly compara-
ble policies. Specifically, unemployment benefits likely work through labor supply rather than demand,
as in our model.


                                                                               41
job finding rate closer to their full information value than under the pooled finding rate
that arises after the ban goes into effect.
    Banning pre-employment credit screening also affects the size and split of rents after
a match has occurred by affecting a worker’s bargaining position. We demonstrate this
in Figures 15a-15d. Prior to the ban, there is a clear positive effect of credit rating on
wages for both worker types and, likewise, a downward effect on profits. Wages depend
on the score because it affects the job-finding rate of unemployed workers. A higher
credit score means that the worker would find a job faster if she was to walk away from
her current match. One one hand, this means that the match surplus is smaller overall.
However, it also means that the worker has a better bargaining position and therefore
captures a larger share of the surplus as her credit score rises. The net effect causes wages
to rise with credit score for a given worker type. Of course, the unconditional wage rises
even faster with credit rating since patient workers have higher wages at all scores. The
opposite profile appears in profits - conditional on worker type, profits are highest for
workers with bad credit ratings. On the other hand, the level of profits is strictly higher
for patient workers than for impatient, due to their higher labor productivities, which
generates the positive profile of vacancies with respect to score.
    Once the ban goes into place, job finding rates are no longer score specific, which
means that a worker’s outside option is less affected by her score. This leads to a
near complete flattening of the wage profiles in Figures 15a and 15b and profit profiles
in Figures 15a and 15b.35 Relative to the baseline, this causes a decline in wages for
workers with high scores but a rise in wages for sub prime and prime, while profits move
in the opposite direction.
    We next plot the net effect of the ban on welfare36 for the unemployed in Figure
13a, since the direct change on market tightness and finding rates affects these workers.
Workers with low type scores experience a gain in welfare, since they experience a higher
job finding rate than when firms can discriminate based on score.37 Furthermore, the
patient workers gain more since they put a higher weight on finding a job due to their
higher β. The welfare gains are falling for both worker types as scores rise, eventually
  35
     Quantitatively, our wage profiles are flat to three decimal places and therefore appear as such in
the plots, but do still vary in theory. Likewise, the discounted profit lines are quite flat, though less so
than wages.
  36
     See the appendix for the definition of these welfare measures.
  37
     We can evaluate the welfare effects for workers at each score, even if the theoretical measure of
them is zero. For example, we calculate the value function of patient workers at s = 0 and impatient
at s = 1 when we solve the model. However, we omit these points from our plots because there are no
workers who actually experience them in equilibrium.


                                                    42
                                                                                                7
                                                                                                                                 Patient Employed
                                                                                                                                 Patient Unemployed
                                                                                                6




                                                       Welfare Gains/Losses From PECS Ban (%)
                                                                                                                                 Impatient Employed
                                                                                                                                 Impatient Unemployed

                                                                                                5


                Patient   Impatient   Ex Ante                                                   4

  Employed      -0.40%      0.46%
                                                                                                3
 Unemployed     -0.54%      4.78%
   Average      -0.43%      0.72%      -0.10%                                                   2


                                                                                                1


                                                                                                0


                                                                                                -1


                                                                                                -2
                                                                                                     Sub Prime       Prime        Super Prime
                                                                                                                 Credit Rating




        Table 6: Avg. Welfare Effects              Figure 14: Welfare Effects by Credit Rating


becoming negative for those with high scores. Likewise the welfare effect is positive
but falling for employed workers, as seen in Figure 13b. On average, impatient workers
gain from the ban and patient workers lose. The effects (both positive and negative)
are magnified for unemployed workers since any change in job finding rates affects them
immediately.
    We summarize these conditional averages in Table 6.38 In aggregate, only 43% of
the population have a positive gain from banning PECS.39 However, the distributional
effects are substantial, with patient workers losing slightly on average (equivalent to
0.4 − 0.54% of consumption each month), but impatient workers gaining a lot, especially
the unemployed. If we consider the ex-ante lifetime utility of a worker before her type
is realized (i.e. who has a πH probability of being patient and will enter the economy
as unemployed), then there is a welfare loss of 0.10% of monthly consumption for a
worker born into the economy without PECS, relative to being born into an economy
that allows them.
    Even within a worker type and employment status, there is substantial heterogeneity
in the welfare effect of banning PECS. We illustrate this in Figure 14, which shows that
subprime workers gain from banning PECS no matter the worker’s type or employment
  38
     If private information persisted after hiring, then we would expect reduced expected profits due
to overpaying the low-productivity type. This would make scores more valuable than in our baseline
model. So, getting rid of PECS would have bigger negative effects on matching and welfare losses would
be larger than what we are estimating.
  39
     So the ban would be voted down.


                                                 43
                         Patient Wages By Credit Rating                                              Impatient Wages By Credit Rating
 0.97                                                                            0.55




0.965


                                                                                0.545


 0.96




0.955                                                                            0.54
            Sub Prime                        Prime               Super Prime             Sub Prime                        Prime              Super Prime

            (0-33%)                      (34-50%)                (51-100%)               (0-33%)                      (34-50%)               (51-100%)

                                  Baseline           PECS Ban                                                  Baseline           PECS Ban



                                        (a)                                                                          (b)

             Profits From Employing Patient Worker By Credit Rating                     Profits From Employing Impatient Worker By Credit Rating
0.95                                                                            0.57


                                                                                0.56
 0.9

                                                                                0.55
0.85

                                                                                0.54

 0.8
                                                                                0.53

0.75
                                                                                0.52


 0.7                                                                            0.51
           Sub Prime                         Prime              Super Prime             Sub Prime                         Prime              Super Prime

           (0-33%)                      (34-50%)                 (51-100%)              (0-33%)                      (34-50%)                (51-100%)

                                  Baseline           PECS Ban                                                 Baseline            PECS Ban



                                        (c)                                                                          (d)
Notes: Wages and post-match expected discounted profits by worker type and credit rating before PECS ban and after.




                                         Figure 15: Effect of PECS Ban on Bargaining


status, while the opposite is true for super prime workers, who lose from the ban re-
gardless of type or status. In each case, the unemployed gains/losses are larger than the
employed because they are immediately affected by changes in the job-finding rate. Fur-
thermore, the patient employed have muted welfare changes since they greatly discount
the effect of the ban on their future job finding rates when they become unemployed.


7       Conclusion
We have presented a theoretical foundation for why employers may use credit histo-
ries in the hiring process and how this practice can create a poverty trap. Our theory
extends the workhorse Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides model to include ex-ante private
information about worker productivity, while also building a novel framework for includ-
ing credit scores when borrowers have private information about their repayment rates.


                                                                               44
Combining these two microeconomic models highlights the connection across markets in
the presence of private information. Our complete theory of labor and credit contracts
under adverse selection overcomes the Lucas Critique in our policy analysis, which we
find to be important since the PECS ban’s direct effects in the labor market spill over
to the credit market. Our model also demonstrates that even when the aggregate effects
of a policy may appear small (see Table 5), there can be large effects in the cross section
(see Figure 11a) and on life cycle dynamics (see Figure 12b).
    We have used our model to complement the empirical literature on the effect of
banning PECS. Specifically, we address the effect on unmeasurable outcomes – labor
market efficiency and welfare. Banning PECS increase the job finding rate of low-
score workers, but these workers are predominantly low productivity. The opposite
is true for high-score workers, who mostly have high productivity: they experience
an increase in average unemployment duration of 3.8 days following the ban. While
efficiency is unequivocally reduced, the welfare effects are more nuanced. Impatient
workers, who tend to have relatively bad credit, gain substantially, the equivalent of
0.72% of monthly consumption. Patient workers, who are the majority, lose 0.42% of
monthly consumption, so that only 43% of the population gains from the ban. We
conclude that policy makers should consider the trade-off between equity and efficiency
when considering PECS bans.




                                            45
References
 [1] Athreya, K., X. Tam & E. Young, 2011. “A Quantitative Theory of Information
     and Unsecured Credit”,American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 4(3), p.
     153-83.

 [2] Ballance, R., R. Clifford, & D. Shoag, 2017. ““No More Credit Score”: Employer
     Credit Check Bans and Signal Substitution, ”mimeo.

 [3] Bartik, A. & S. Nelson, 2017. “Credit Reports as Resumes: The Incidence of Pre-
     Employment Credit Screening ”,mimeo.

 [4] Bos, M., E. Breza, & A. Liberman, 2018. “The Labor Market Effects of Credit
     Market Information”, The Review of Financial Studies, vol. 31(6), p. 2005-2037.

 [5] Card, D. & Phillip B. Levine. “Extended benefits and the duration of UI spells: evi-
     dence from the New Jersey extended benefit program.” Journal of Public Economics
     78, no 1-2 (2000): 107-138.

 [6] Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, M. Nakajima, V. Rios-Rull, 2007. “A Quantitative The-
     ory of Unsecured Consumer Credit with Risk of Default”, Econometrica, vol. 75, p.
     1525-89.

 [7] Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, & V. Rios-Rull, 2008. “A finite-life private-information
     theory of unsecured consumer debt,” Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 142(1), p.
     149-177.

 [8] Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, K. Dempsey, & V. Rios-Rull, 2016. “A Theory of Credit
     Scoring and the Competitive Pricing of Default Risk,” mimeo.

 [9] Cole, H. and P. Kehoe, 1998. “Models of Sovereign Debt: Partial Versus General
     Repuations,” International Economic Review, vol. 39, p. 55-70.

[10] Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2015. “The Consumer Credit Card Market
     Report”

[11] Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2017. “The Consumer Credit Card Market
     Report”

[12] Cortes, K., A. Glover & M. Tasci, 2016. “The Unintended Consequences of Em-
     ployer Credit Check Bans on Labor and Credit Markets ”, mimeo.

                                           46
[13] Chaumont, Gaston Rene & Shouyong Shi, 2017. “Wealth Accumulation, On the
     Job Search and Inequality”, mimeo.

[14] Diaz-Gimenez, J., A. Glover, V. Rios-Rull, 2011. “Facts on the Distributions of
     Earnings, Income, and Wealth in the United States: 2007 Update,”Federal Reserve
     Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Vol. 34 No. 1.

[15] Friedberg, L., R. Hynes & N. Pattison, 2017. “Who Benefits From Credit Report
     Bans? ”, mimeo

[16] Gertler, Mark, & A. Trigari, 2009. “Unemployment Fluctuations With Staggered
     Nash Wage Bargaining”, Journal of Political Economy, 117, p. 38-86.

[17] Guerrieri, V. R. Shimer, & R. Wright, 2010. “Adverse Selection in Competition
     Search Equilibrium” Econometrica, vol. 78, p. 1823-1862.

[18] Hall, R., 2005. “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness”,
     American Economic Review, 95, p. 50-65.

[19] Herkenhoff, K., 2013. “The Impact of Consumer Credit Access on Unemployment.”
     (2013).

[20] Herkenhoff, K., G. Phillips & E. Cohen-Cole, 2016. “How Credit Constraints Impact
     Job Finding Rates, Sorting & Aggregate Output ”,mimeo.

[21] Herkenhoff, K., G. Phillips & E. Cohen-Cole, 2017. “The Impact of Consumer
     Credit Access on Employment, Earnings, and Entrepreneurship ”,mimeo.

[22] Jarosch, Gregor, & L. Pilossoph, 2018. “Statistical Discrimination and Duration
     Dependence in the Job Finding Rate”, Review of Economic Studies, Forthcoming.

[23] Krusell, P., T. Mukoyama & A. Sahin, 2010. “Labour-Market Matching with Pre-
     cautionary Savings and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Review of Economic Studies,
     77(4), p. 1477-1507.

[24] Lemieux, T., 2006. “Increasing residual wage inequality: Composition effects, noisy
     data, or rising demand for skill?”, The American Economic Review, 96(3), p. 461-
     498.

[25] Lentz, R. & T. Tranaes, 2005. “Job Search and Savings: Wealth Effects and Dura-
     tion Dependence”, Journal of Labor Economics, 23, p. 467-489.

                                          47
[26] Lise, J., 2012. “On-the-job Search and Precautionary Savings”, Review of Economic
     Studies, 80, p. 1086-1113.

[27] Livshits, I., J. MacGee, & M. Tertilt, 2014. “The Democratization of Credit and the
     Rise in Consumer Bankruptcies”, Review of Economic Studies, 83, p. 1673-1710.

[28] Menzio, G. & S. Shi, 2010. “Block recursive equilibria for stochastic models of search
     on the job,” Journal of Economic Theory, 145(4), p. 1453-1494.

[29] Mortensen, D. & C. Pissarides, 1994. “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
     Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61(3), p. 397-415.

[30] Narajabad, B., 2012. “Information Technology and the Rise of Household
     Bankruptcy”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 15, p. 526-550.

[31] Netzer, N. & F. Scheuer, 2014. “A Game Theoretic Foundation of Competitive
     Equilibria with Adverse Selection”, International Economic Review, 55, p. 399-422.

[32] Rothschild, M. & J. Stiglitz, 1976. “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Mar-
     kets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information”, Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 90, p.629-649.

[33] Shimer, Robert, 2005. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and
     Vacancies ”, American Economic Review, 95(1), p. 25-49.

[34] Society for Human Resource Management, 2010. Background Checking: Conducting
     Credit Background Checks.

[35] Stokey, Nancy & R. Lucas with E. Prescott, 1989. Recursive Methods in Economic
     Dynamics, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

[36] Traub, A., 2013. “Discredited: How Employment Credit Checks Keep Qualified
     Workers Out of a Job” Demos 7.


A       Full Info Equilibrium
The full information equilibrium consists of (wif i , θif i , bfi i , Qfi i , hfi i )i∈{L,H} and associated
values Wif i , Uif i , Jif i . This gives the following system of equations, assuming that hfHi = h



                                                    48
and hfLi = h:
                                                            Z βi (1−δ)ψ−b          
                bfi i   =               −1
                            argmaxb R F βi (1 − δ)ψ − b b + ψ                F (τ )dτ            (27)
                                                                0
                                                  
             Qfi i =        R F βi (1 − δ)ψ − bi bfi i
                              −1                fi
                                                                                                  (28)
                                                          
                Jif i =            fi       −1          fi
                            ψ h − wi + R (1 − δ)(1 − σ)Ji                                         (29)
                                  
                  κ =       R q θif i Jif i
                              −1
                                                                                                  (30)

             Wif i =                                                                     (31)
                                            Z   βi (1−δ)ψ−bfi i                      
                          Qfi i + ψ wif i +           F (τ )dτ + βi (1 − δ)(Vif i − ψ)
                                           0                            
             Uif i                            fi
                                                  fi         fi
                                                                   f i
                        = z + βi (1 − δ)ψ f θi Wi + 1 − f θi Ui                          (32)

              Vif i = σUif i + (1 − σ)Wif i                                                       (33)
      Wif i − Uif i = λ Wif i + Jif i − Uif i .
                                            
                                                                                                  (34)

A first useful result is that bfi i and Qfi i are independent of h and that the problem is
concave whenever F 00 (τ ) ≤ 0. This can be seen from the first order condition on b:

      RψF (βi (1 − δ)ψ − bfi i ) = F (βi (1 − δ)ψ − bfi i ) − F 0 (βi (1 − δ)ψ − bfi i )bfi i .   (35)

The left hand side has intercept ψR < 1 when b = 0 while the right hand side has
an intercept of one. The slope of the left-hand side is −RψF 0 (βi (1 − δ)ψ − bfi i ) while
the slope of the right-hand side is −2F 0 (βi (1 − δ)ψ − bfi i ) + F 00 (βi (1 − δ)ψ − bfi i ). We
can guarantee that the right-hand side is steeper than the left-hand side by assuming
F 00 (τ ) ≤ 0, so the intersection will have bfi i > 0. Furthermore, this condition shows that
b is increasing in βi (1 − δ)ψ (and therefore in βi ) since implicit differentiation gives:

            ∂b         (1 − Rψ)F 0 (βi (1 − δ)ψ − b) − F 00 (βi (1 − δ)ψ − b)b
                     =                                                         >0                 (36)
      ∂(βi (1 − δ)ψ)   (2 − Rψ)F 0 (βi (1 − δ)ψ − b) − F 00 (βi (1 − δ)ψ − b)b

and from this we can conclude that F (βH (1 − δ)ψ − bfHi ) ≥ F (βL (1 − δ)ψ − bfLi ) by
considering ∂x
            ∂b
               in                               
                      ∂x
                           (1 − Rψ)F (x) − F (x)b = F 0 (x),
                                    0        0
                                                                                   (37)
                       ∂b


                                                      49
which means that the optimal b from this first order condition can only increase if the
term inside of F (βi (1 − δ)ψ − b) increases.
    We now consider a single worker of type i who chooses h freely, given the equilibrium
hH = h and hfLi = h. That is, the worker’s type is public, but the deviation to h rather
 fi

than hfi i is not, so that θif i is fixed. Using that Q and b are independent of h, we can
write the resulting match surplus
                                                                                                    
                                                        R βi (1−δ)ψ−bfi i
                           ψh − z +    Qfi i   +ψ        0
                                                                              F (τ )dτ − βi (1 − δ)ψ
           Sif i (h)   =                                                           ,                     (38)
                           1 − βi (1 − δ)ψ(1 − f θif i − σ)λ − R−1 (1 − δ)ψ(1 − λ)
                                                      


and the value of being unemployed for a given h is

                                             z + βi (1 − δ)ψf θif i λSif i (h)
                                                                   
                              Ũif i (h)   =                                   .                         (39)
                                                     1 − βi (1 − δ)ψ

                                                 Ũif i (h)−Ũif i (h)
We then define the function ∆i = βi                       h−h
                                                                       ,   which takes the form:

                βi ψ                         βi (1 − δ)ψf (θif i )λ
    ∆i =                                                                             .                   (40)
           1 − βi (1 − δ)ψ 1 − βi (1 − δ)ψλ(1 − f (θif i ) − σ) − R−1 (1 − δ)(1 − λ)

We want to have ∆H ≥ φ > ∆L . Clearly ∆i > 0 whenever βi > 0, so it is possible to set
φ = ∆H . We can then set βL sufficiently close to zero to guarantee that φ > ∆L . The
only thing that keeps us from fully describing the condition in terms of parameters is
the presence of f (θif i ), but these are just two numbers, so we can guarantee the correct
                eH ≥ φ > ∆
choices of h if ∆             e L , where

                            βi ψ                         βi (1 − δ)ψf (θjf i )λ
∆
eH =        min                                                                                  ,
       j∈{H,L},`∈{H,L} 1 − βi (1 − δ)ψ 1 − βi (1 − δ)ψλ(1 − f (θ f i ) − σ) − R−1 (1 − δ)(1 − λ)
                                                                `

                            βi ψ                         βi (1 − δ)ψf (θjf i )λ
∆
eL =        max                                                                                  .
       j∈{H,L},`∈{H,L} 1 − βi (1 − δ)ψ 1 − βi (1 − δ)ψλ(1 − f (θ f i ) − σ) − R−1 (1 − δ)(1 − λ)
                                                                `


We can therefore guarantee that hfHi = h and hfLi = h. This ensures that the match
surplus is higher for patient workers, since they have larger h and lower default rates
(which allows them to have more consumption in the first sub-period via higher Q). The
                                         fi
higher match surplus guarantees that θH     > θLf i from the zero-profit condition and the
fact that q(θ) is decreasing in θ.


                                                             50
B     Existence of Private Information Equilibrium
We first fix notation. The domain of all functions is [0, 1] throughout, so will be omit-
ted. The family of bounded Lipschitz continuous functions on this domain with slopes
bounded by M is given by

  LM = {h : [0, 1] → R : khk is bounded and ∀(sx , sy ), |h(sx ) − h(sy )| ≤ M |sx − sy |},

where the norm of a function f ∈ LM is given by khk = max0≤s≤1 |h(s)|. We will work
with a vector operator T : L ⇒ C, where:

                                           L ≡ Π17
                                                `=1 LM`


and C ⊂ L is the space of continuously bounded functions. The vector of norms for
v ∈ L will be denoted by kvk and the norm on this space is the Euclidian norm on
                           p
this vector, denoted kvk2 = kvk · kvk. We will verify that T is continuous and that
T : L ⇒ L. Denoting a vector of functions in L by
                                                                                            
                                                         0    0
       v = WH , WL , UH , UL , ψwH , ψwL , JH , JL , θ, s0 , s1 , Γ0 , Γ1 , bH , bL , QH , QL ,


we define T element-by-element. We fix hH = h and hL = h throughout, so suppress
these arguments, then verify that these choices are consistent under Assumption 1. Note
that, for our proofs, we assume that there is a probability p > 0 that borrowers receive
an expenditure shock τ = 0 and a probability (1 − p)q > 0 that the shock is sufficiently
large that the worker cannot pay. First, the operators for the value functions are given
by:
                                                                                                 
         THW (s)                                                     δ)VH s00 (s)
                                                                                  
                 = T1 [v](s) ≡ ψwH (s) + QH (s) + p βH (1 −                − ψbH (s) + (41)
                                                              Z λH (s;v)−bH (s)
                        0
                             
(1 − p) βH (1 − δ)VH s1 (s) − ψβH (1 − δ) + (1 − p)(1 − q)ψ                       F (τ )dτ,
                                                                 0
                                                                                       
             W                                                     0
                                                                         
           TL (s) = T2 [v](s) ≡ ψwL (s) + QL (s) + p βL (1 − δ)VL s0 (s) − ψbL (s) + (42)
                                                               Z λL (s;v)−bL (s)
                          0
                               
  (1 − p) βL (1 − δ)VL s1 (s) − ψβL (1 − δ) + (1 − p)(1 − q)ψ                     F (τ )dτ,
                                                                            0




                                                 51
where the functions Vi and λi are defined by:

                                        Vi (s) ≡ σUi (s) + (1 − σ)Wi (s),                          (43)
                                                                       
                                                      0           0
                                                                     
                    λi (s; v) ≡ βi (1 − δ) ψ + Vi s0 (s) − Vi s1 (s) .                            (44)

      The next two operator elements map into unemployment values and are then given
by:
                                                                            
       THU (s)
                                                                    
             = T3 [v](s) ≡ z + βH (1 − δ) f θ(s) WH (s) + 1 − f θ(s) UH (s) ,                      (45)
                                                                            
         U
                                                                     
        TL (s) = T4 [v](s) ≡ z + βL (1 − δ) f θ(s) WL (s) + 1 − f θ(s) UL (s) .                    (46)

      The next two operator elements update wages from the definition of firm values:
                                                                X
THw (s) = T5 [v](s) ≡ ψh − JH (s) + R−1 (1 − σ)(1 − δ)                   Gd λH (s; v) − bH (s) JH s0d (s) ,(47)
                                                                                                        

                                                               d∈{0,1}
                                                                  X
                                           −1
 TLw (s)                                                                  Gd λL (s; v) − bL (s) JL s0d (s) .(48)
                                                                                                         
           = T6 [v](s) ≡ ψh − JL (s) + R (1 − σ)(1 − δ)
                                                                d∈{0,1}


      The next two operator elements map into firm values using Nash Bargaining:
                                                                      
                 THJ (s)
                       = T7 [v](s) ≡ (1 − λ) WH (s) − UH (s) + JH (s) ,                            (49)
                                                                      
                   J
                  TL (s) = T8 [v](s) ≡ (1 − λ) WL (s) − UL (s) + JL (s) .                          (50)

      The next operator element maps to market tightness:
                                                                           −1 
                    θ                     −1
                  T (s) = T9 [v](s) ≡ q            κR sJH (s) + (1 − s)JL (s)                      (51)

      The next two operator maps to the scoring functions:

                                                          s
                           T0s (s) = T10 [v](s) ≡                   ,                              (52)
                                                  s + (1 − s)Γ0 (s)
                                                          s
                           T1s (s) = T11 [v](s) ≡                    .                             (53)
                                                  s + (1 − s)Γ1 (s)

      The next two operator elements are the definitions of each odds ratio used to update



                                                     52
the scoring functions:
                                                                                
                                         p + (1 − p)(1 − q)F λL (s; v) − bL (s)
                   T0Γ (s)= T12 [v](s) ≡                                        ,
                                         p + (1 − p)(1 − q)F λH (s; v) − bH (s)
                                                                           
                                                                           
                             (1 − p) q + (1 − q) 1 − F λL (s; v) − bL (s)
        Γ
       T1 (s) = T13 [v](s) ≡                                                 .
                                                                            
                             (1 − p) q + (1 − q) 1 − F λH (s; v) − bH (s)

   The final four operator elements are the credit contracts that solve the optimization
problem below, taking v as given.
                                              
 T14 [v](s), T15 [v](s), T16 [v](s), T17 [v](s) =
                                                                      Z   λH (s;v)−bH                    
                       argmax{bH ,bL ,QH ,QL } QH + ψ (1 − p)(1 − q)                     F (τ )dτ − pbH
                                                                       0


                                              s.t.



                                                        
                             −1
                                                     
        s − QH + (ωR) G0 λH (s; v) − bH bH +
                                                                                    
                                                           −1
                                                                                 
                                      (1 − s) − QL + (ωR) G0 λL (s; v) − bL bL ≥ 0
                      Z λL (s;v)−bL                
 QL + ψ (1 − p)(1 − q)               F (τ )dτ − pbL ≥
                         0
                                                                       Z λL (s;v)−bH                 
                                                 QH + ψ (1 − p)(1 − q)                 F (τ )dτ − pbH
                                                                         0
                     Z λH (s;v)−bH                 
QH + ψ (1 − p)(1 − q)                F (τ )dτ − pbH ≥
                       0
                                                                       Z λH (s;v)−bL                 
                                                  QL + ψ (1 − p)(1 − q)                F (τ )dτ − pbL
                                                                         0
                      Z λL (s;v)−bL                
 QL + ψ (1 − p)(1 − q)               F (τ )dτ − pbL ≥
                         0
                                                                      Z λL (s;v)−b               
                               −1
                                                   
                  max (ωR) G0 λL (s; v) − b b + ψ (1 − p)(1 − q)                     F (τ )dτ − pb
                        b                                                         0


   We now study the slopes and bounds of each element of the operator and seek

                                                53
conditions to ensure that T : L ⇒ L.

Lemma 1 If the finding rate and its derivative have bounds, so that supθ≥0 f (θ) ≤ Bf
and supθ≥0 f 0 (θ) ≤ Bf 0 ,40 then for i = 1, 2, 3, 4 the functions Ti [v](s) are Lipschitz
continuous with bounding constant M̃i :
                                                                                                
                MHw       MHQ            ψMHb                  σMHU            σ)MHW       M0s
                                                                                       
      M̃1 =           +         +p              + βH (1 − δ)          + (1 −
                                                     
            +   (1 − p)βH (1 − δ) σMH + (1 − σ)MH M1s
                                      U            W

                                                                           
                                              U             W
                                                               s     s   b
            +   (1 − p)(1 − q)ψ βH (1 − δ) σMH + (1 − σ)MH (M0 + M1 ) + MH ,
                                                                      
                   w      Q         b                 U          W
                                                                    s
      M̃2 =     ML + ML + p ψML + βL (1 − δ) σML + (1 − σ)ML M0
                                                     
            +   (1 − p)βL (1 − δ) σML + (1 − σ)ML M1s
                                      U            W

                                                                          
                                             U             W
                                                               s    s   b
            +   (1 − p)(1 − q)ψ βL (1 − δ) σML + (1 − σ)ML (M0 + M1 ) + ML ,
                                                             
                                  W     U      θ Bf 0 h     U
      M̃3 =     βH (1 − δ) Bf (MH + MH ) + M            + MH ,
                                                1 − βH
                                                            
                                  W     U     θ Bf 0 h     U
      M̃4 =     βL (1 − δ) Bf (ML + ML ) + M            + ML .
                                                1 − βL

If there exists some mf such that supτ ≥0 |F 0 (τ )| ≤ mf then the functions T5 [v] and T6 [v]
  40
     Conceptually, we have Bf = 1, although not all matching functions used in practice satisfy this for
θ ≥ 0. Furthermore, in practice it is enough that f 0 (θ) be bounded on a compact interval of θ which
excludes zero.




                                                      54
are Lipschitz with constants:
                                    
                    −1
           MHJ  + R (1 − δ)(1 − σ) p + (1 − p)(1 − q) MHJ M0s
                                                       
M̃5 =
                                                                                 
                                h       b                 U          W
                                                                        s    s
       +   (1 − p)(1 − q)mf           MH + βH (1 − δ) σMH + (1 − σ)MH (M0 + M1 )
                            1 − R−1
       +   (1 − p)MHJ M1s
                                                                                   
                                  h       b                 U          W
                                                                          s      s
       +   +(1 − p)(1 − q)mf           MH + βH (1 − δ) σMH + (1 − σ)MH (M0 + M1 ) ,
                              1 − R−1
                                    
                   −1
           ML + R (1 − δ)(1 − σ) p + (1 − p)(1 − q) MLJ M0s
              J
                                                       
M̃6 =
                                                                                
                                h       b                U          W
                                                                       s    s
       +   (1 − p)(1 − q)mf           ML + βL (1 − δ) σML + (1 − σ)ML (M0 + M1 )
                            1 − R−1
       +   (1 − p)MLJ M1s
                                                                                   
                                  h       b                U          W
                                                                         s      s
       +   +(1 − p)(1 − q)mf           ML + βL (1 − δ) σML + (1 − σ)ML (M0 + M1 ) .
                              1 − R−1

The operators T7 and T8 generate functions with Lipschitz constants:

                               M̃7 = (1 − λ) MHW + MHU + MHJ ,
                                                            

                               M̃8 = (1 − λ) MLW + MLU + MLJ .
                                                            

                                                              −1
If there exists some mq such that supθ≥0 | dq dθ(θ) | ≤ mq ,41 then the function T9 [v] is
Lipschitz with constant:
                                                             2                                 
                                         1                          J    J
M̃9 = mq κR max                                                   2ML + MH + max |JH (s) − JL (s)| .
                  0≤s≤1       sJH (s) + (1 − s)JL (s)                             0≤s≤1


The functions implied by the operators T10 and T11 are Lipschitz with constants:

                                            M0Γ + max0≤s≤1 Γ0 (s)
                           M̃10 =                                2 ,
                                     min0≤s≤1 | s + (1 − s)Γ0 (s) |
                                            M1Γ + max0≤s≤1 Γ1 (s)
                            M̃11 =                               2 .
                                     min0≤s≤1 | s + (1 − s)Γ1 (s) |
                                            dq −1 (θ)
  41
    As with f 0 (θ), we only require that      dθ       be bounded on a compact interval of θ which excludes
zero in practice.




                                                         55
If supτ F 0 (τ ) ≤ mf , then the functions T16 [v] and T17 [v] are Lipschitz with constants:
                                                                            
          1                     b                 U           W
                                                                  s     s
                                                                           
M̃12 =      (1 − p)(1 − q)m ML + βL (1 − δ) σML + (1 − σ)ML M0 + M1
          p
                                                                                              
            p + (1 − p)(1 − q)                      b               U             W
                                                                                        s   s
                                                                                               
      +                          (1 − p)(1 − q)m MH + βH (1 − δ) σMH + (1 − σ)MH M0 + M1 ,
                    p2
                                                                                   
              1                        b               U            W
                                                                         s     s
                                                                                  
M̃13 =             (1 − p)(1 − q)m ML + βL (1 − δ) σML + (1 − σ)ML M0 + M1
          (1 − p)q
                                                                                        
               1−p                            b               U            W
                                                                                s     s
                                                                                         
      +                  (1 − p)(1 − q)m MH + βH (1 − δ) σMH + (1 − σ)MH M0 + M1 .
            ((1 − p)q)2

Finally, for the general problem, the distances for T14 , T15 , T16 , and T17 depend on the
form and parameters of F and the parameters p, q, κ, R, βL , and βH . We will therefore
assume that there exist some values of MHb , MLb , MHQ , MLQ such that M̃14 ≤ MHb , M̃15 ≤
MLb , M̃16 ≤ MHQ , and M̃17 ≤ MLQ .

Each of these is derived from the definition of a Lipschitz constant, the triangle inequality,
and the mean value theorem. We can use these expressions to prove the following lemma:


Lemma 2 Assume that there exists mf such that supτ ≥0 |F 0 (τ )| ≤ mf , mq such that
           −1
supθ≥0 | dq dθ(θ) | ≤ mq , Bf and Bf 0 such that supθ≥0 f (θ) ≤ Bf and supθ≥0 f 0 (θ) ≤ Bf 0 .
Further, assume that operators 14−17 have M̃i as described above. If mf , βH , βL , ψ, 1−λ,
and κ are sufficiently small, then there exists some vector of bounds, M , such that
T : L ⇒ L.

Note that we must only find a vector M for which the operator is self mapping. We do
this by construction for each operator element. For the first, we set Miw , MiW , and MiQ
such that Miw + MiQ < MiW . Then we can set ψ, βL , and βH sufficiently low to ensure
that M̃1 ≤ MHW and M̃2 ≤ MLW . Ensuring that M̃3 ≤ MHU and M̃4 ≤ MLU requires again
setting βL and βH sufficiently low. If we set MHJ < MHw and MLJ < MLw then M̃5 ≤ MHw
and M̃6 ≤ MLw for R−1 sufficiently small. If we set MiJ ≥ 1−λ
                                                                               
                                                                λ
                                                                   MiW + MiU , which can be
guaranteed for sufficiently small λ, then M̃7 ≤ MHU and M̃8 ≤ MLU . We can then set M θ
to the expression defining M̃9 , M0s to M̃10 , and M1s to M̃11 . Finally, for sufficiently small
m we can guarantee that M̃12 ≤ M0Γ and M̃13 ≤ M1Γ . By assumption we can find values
of MHb , MLb , MHQ , MLQ such that M̃14 ≤ MHb , M̃15 ≤ MLb , M̃16 ≤ MHQ , and M̃17 ≤ MLQ .

                                                                                          QED


                                              56
In order to apply Schauder’s fixed point theorem, we must also ensure that T is a
continuous mapping. It is sufficient to check that, for each s ∈ [0, 1], and vector v1 , v2
with each vi ∈ L, there exists some matrix Z such that |T [v1 ](s)−T [v2 ](s)| ≤ Z ·|v1 (s)−
v2 (s)|. For the first 13 elements of T this follows from the definition and applications
of the triangle inequality and mean value theorem. For a general contracting problem
we again assume that this is true. We now write the expressions for kTi [vx ] − Ti [vy ]k for
i = 1, 2, ...13.

Lemma 3 Take vx and vy in LM . If supθ≥0 f (θ) ≤ Bf and supθ≥0 f 0 (θ) ≤ Bf 0 for some
Bf , Bf 0 , then for i = 1, 2, 3, 4, the distances kTi [vx ] − Ti [vy ]k are bounded by

kT1 [vx ] − T1 [vy ]k ≤ kψwH,x − ψwH,y k + kQH,x − QH,y k                                       (54)
                                                                                     
                                      U            W      0    0
                      + pβH (1 − δ)(σMH + (1 − σ)MH ) ks0,x − s0,y k + ψkbH,x − bH,y k

                   + (1 − p)βH (1 − δ)(σMHU + (1 − σ)MHW )ks01,x − s01,y k
                                                                                            
                   + ψ(1 − p)(1 − q) kbH,x − bH,y k + σkUH,x − UH,y k + (1 − σ)kWH,x − WH,y k ,

kT2 [vx ] − T2 [vy ]k ≤ kψwL,x − ψwL,y k + kQL,x − QL,y k                                       (55)
                                                                                      
                                      U             W     0    0
                      + pβL (1 − δ)(σML + (1 − σ)ML ) ks0,x − s0,y k + ψkbL,x − bL,y k

                      + (1 − p)βL (1 − δ)(σMLU + (1 − σ)MLW )ks01,x − s01,y k
                                                                                               
                      + ψ(1 − p)(1 − q) kbL,x − bL,y k + σkUL,x − UL,y k + (1 − σ)kWL,x − WL,y k ,
                                  
kT3 [vx ] − T3 [vy ]k ≤ βH (1 − δ) (1 + Bf )kUH,x − UH,y k                                      (56)
                                                                    
                                                 1
                      + Bf kWH,x − WH,y k +          Bf 0 kθx − θy k ,
                                             1 − βH
                                  
kT4 [vx ] − T4 [vy ]k ≤ βL (1 − δ) (1 + Bf )kUL,x − UL,y k                                      (57)
                                                                   
                                                1
                      + Bf kWL,x − WL,y k +         Bf 0 kθx − θy k .
                                             1 − βL

If there is some mf > 0 such that supτ ≥0 F 0 (τ ) ≤ mf then, for i = 5, 6, the distances




                                             57
kTi [vx ] − Ti [vy ]k are bounded by

kT5 [vx ] − T5 [vy ]k ≤ kJH,x − JH,y k                                                      (58)
                                                                                   
                         + R−1 (1 − δ)(1 − σ) MHJ ks00,x − s00,y k + ks01,x − s01,y k
                                       
                              h
                                    mf (σMHU + (1 − σ)MHW ) ks00,x − s00,y k + ks01,x − s01,y k
                                                                                                
                         +       −1
                           1−R
                                          
                         + 2kbH,x − bH,y k ,

kT6 [vx ] − T6 [vy ]k ≤ kJL,x − JL,y k                                                          (59)
                                                                                   
                         + R−1 (1 − δ)(1 − σ) MLJ ks00,x − s00,y k + ks01,x − s01,y k
                                        
                              h               U            W       0        0         0       0
                                                                                                    
                         +         m  f   (σML  + (1 − σ)ML   )  ks0,x −  s 0,y k + ks1,x − s 1,y k
                           1 − R−1
                                          
                         + 2kbL,x − bL,y k .


For i = 7, 8, the distances kTi [vx ] − Ti [vy ]k are given by
                                                                                   
  kT7 [vx ] − T7 [vy ]k = (1 − λ) kWH,x − WH,y k + kUH,x − UH,y k + kJH,x − JH,y k , (60)
                                                                                   
    kT8 [vx ] − T8 [vy ]k = (1 − λ) kWL,x − WL,y k + kUL,x − UL,y k + kJL,x − JL,y k . (61)

                                                       −1
If there exists some mq such that supθ≥0 | dq dθ(θ) | ≤ mq and J > 0 such that Ji (s) ≥ J,42
then the distance kT9 [vx ] − T9 [vy ]k is bounded by
                                                                                         
                                                  −2
                 kT9 [vx ] − T9 [vy ]k ≤ κRmq J            kJH,x − JH,y k + kJL,x − JL,y k .    (62)


For i = 10, 11, the distances kTi [vx ] − Ti [vy ]k are bounded by
                                                                    2
                                                 p + (1 − p)(1 − q)
               kT10 [vx ] − T10 [vy ]k ≤ 0.25                            kΓ0,x − Γ0,y k,        (63)
                                                           p
                                       kT11 [vx ] − T11 [vy ]k ≤ 0.25q −2 kΓ1,x − Γ1,y k.       (64)

If there is some mf > 0 such that supτ ≥0 F 0 (τ ) ≤ mf then, for i = 12, 13, the distances
  42
       Our assumption that h > z and λ < 1 ensures that such a lower bound on Ji (s) can be imposed.




                                                       58
kTi [vx ] − Ti [vy ]k are bounded by
                                                                
                            p + (1 − p)(1 − q)
kT12 [vx ] − T12 [vy ]k ≤                      (1 − p)(1 − q)mf kbH,x − bH,y k          (65)
                                     p2
                                                                                        
                                           U             W      0      0        0    0
                       +    βH (1 − δ)(σMH + (1 − σ)MH ) ks0,x − s0,y k + ks1,x − s1,y k
                                                 
                             −1
                       +    p (1 − p)(1 − q)mf kbL,x − bL,y k
                                                                                       
                                           U             U    0      0        0    0
                       +    βL (1 − δ)(σML + (1 − σ)MH ) ks0,x − s0,y k + ks1,x − s1,y k ,
                                                         
                                1−p
kT13 [vx ] − T13 [vy ]k ≤               (1 − p)(1 − q)mf kbH,x − bH,y k                 (66)
                            ((1 − p)q)2
                                                                                        
                                           U             W      0      0        0    0
                       +    βH (1 − δ)(σMH + (1 − σ)MH ) ks0,x − s0,y k + ks1,x − s1,y k
                                                      
                                1
                       +             (1 − p)(1 − q)mf kbL,x − bL,y k
                            (1 − p)q
                                                                                       
                                           U             U    0      0        0    0
                       +    βL (1 − δ)(σML + (1 − σ)MH ) ks0,x − s0,y k + ks1,x − s1,y k .


These are again derived algebraically by evaluating the difference kTi [vx ]−Ti [vy ]k. These
bounds immediately imply the following lemma:

Lemma 4 Suppose that there exists some 4 × 17 matrix z such that, for any vx and vy
in LM , for i = 14, 15, 16, and 17,

                                kTi [vx ] − Ti [vy ]k ≤ zkvx − vy k.                     (67)

Then, if the conditions stated for each bound to hold in Lemma 3 are satisfied, the
operator T : LM ⇒ C is continuous.

Let the assumptions of Lemma 4 hold and denote the matrix implied by the inequalities
in Lemma 1 (after appending z for rows 14 − 17) by Z. This means that for any vx , vy
in L we have kT [vx ] − T [vy ]k ≤ Zkvx − vy k. Denote z ∗ as the element of Z with the
largest value. For any  > 0, the distance kT [vx ] − T [vy ]k2 is smaller than  for any pair
vx , vy for which kvx − vy k2 < z ∗  ≡ δ.

                                                                                        QED

We can now invoke Schauder’s Fixed Point Theorem to ensure existence of an equilibrium
under the conditions from these lemmas.

                                                59
Theorem 3 Under the conditions in Lemmas 1 and 3, there exists some v ∗ ∈ L such
that ∀s ∈ [0, 1] : T [v ∗ ](s) = v ∗ (s).

We apply the statement of Schauder’s Fixed Point Theorem in Stokey, et al [35]. The
space L is closed, bounded, and convex. T : L ⇒ L is continuous by Lemma 3 and
the image is an equicontinuous family by virtue of L being Lipschitz and T being self-
mapping on L.

                                                                                   QED

The final step is to verify that h∗L = h and h∗H = h. We again consider a single agent of
type i deviating to h instead of h∗i and check that doing so is suboptimal for each type.
This requires setting βL , βH , and φ so that:

                         UH,h (πH ) − UH,h (πH ) ≥ φ(h − h),                        (68)
                          UL,h (πH ) − UL,h (πH ) < φ(h − h).                       (69)

For φ sufficiently low and βH > 0, the top inequality holds. Driving βL → 0 then ensures
the bottom inequality is satisfied.


C     Definitions of Moments
For model moments we use the stationary distribution. For the average value of an
endogenous variable xi` (s) where i is worker type, ` is worker employment status, and s
is score we compute:
                                Z   1   X      X
                         x̄ =                            xi` (s)dµ∗i` (s)
                                  0 i∈{L,H} `∈{U,E}
                                        R1P
                                        0   `∈{U,E}      xi` (s)dµ∗i` (s)
                                x̄i =
                                                        µ∗i` (1)
                                                P
                                                    `
                                        R1P
                                        0     i∈{U,E}    xi` (s)dµ∗i` (s)
                                x̄` =
                                                        µ∗i` (1)
                                                P
                                                    i


So, for example, the quarterly repayment rate is conditional on employment and is
therefore defined as:   R1P                 ∗     ∗
                                                        ∗
                          0   i∈{L,H} G0 (τ i s, bi (s) dµiE (s)
                                      P ∗
                                        i µiE (1)



                                                 60
In order to compute percentiles of the score distribution, we first define the cumulative
distribution for the level of aggregation of interest. For unconditional percentiles, we
use CDF:
                                         X X
                               µ∗ (s) ≡              µ∗i` (s)                        (70)
                                        i∈{L,H} `∈{U,E}

Unconditional percentiles are then found by first solving for the type score of that
percentile. For percentile x ∈ [0, 1] we solve:

                                        x = µ∗ (px )                                 (71)

Likewise we define conditional percentiles using the conditional cumulative distribu-
tions. So, for example, the xth percentile of unemployed uses the CDF of unemployed
households defined by:
                                                    ∗
                                        P
                                 ∗         i∈{L,H} µiU (s)
                               µU (s) ≡ P           ∗
                                                                                 (72)
                                           i∈{L,H} µiU (1)

which is then used to solve for pxU :

                                        x = µ∗U (pxU )                               (73)

These percentiles are used to report conditional means. We also use the stationary
distribution to create distributions over other endogenous variables. For example, to
compute a percentile of earnings we create a grid W ≡ {wi∗ (s)|s ∈ {s0 , s1 , ...sN }, i ∈
{L, H}} and create the approximate probability distribution:

                                           µ∗ (sj+1 ) − µ∗iE (sj )
                          P DF w wi∗ (sj ) ≡ iE
                                              P          ∗
                                                                                     (74)
                                                i∈{L,H} µiE (1)


We then arrange W in ascending order and for any w ∈ W create:
                                              X
                             CDF w (w) =                 P DF w (m)                  (75)
                                           m∈W,m≤w


And finally we use these approximate cumulative densities to compute percentiles of the
earnings distribution.
   For our welfare measures, we use the consumption equivalent concept. Since our
preferences are linear, this corresponds to the percentage change in welfare. We ask
“what fraction of total consumption in each period of the economy with employer credit


                                             61
checks would the worker exchange in order to switch to the economy without employer
credit checks?” When this number is negative the household gains from the ban and
when it is positive the household loses. We scale consumption in each sub-period in
each date by a number 1 + γij (s), where i is worker type and j is employment status.
Denoting W nc and U nc as the value functions without employer credit checks, we define
γij (s) by:

                                                     nc
                          Wih∗i (s)[1 + γiE (s)] = Wih ∗ (s)
                                                       i
                                                                                  (76)
                                                      nc
                            Uih∗i (s)[1 + γiU (s)] = Uih ∗ (s)
                                                         i
                                                                                  (77)




                                             62
