                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    ESTIMATING THE CONSEQUENCES OF CLIMATE CHANGE FROM VARIATION
                            IN WEATHER

                                        Derek Lemoine

                                      Working Paper 25008
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25008


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 2018, Revised December 2019




I thank seminar participants at the 2019 Spring Meeting of the National Bureau of Economic
Research Energy and Environment Program, the Bank of Canada Climate Change and Central
Banking Workshop, the Queen's Institute of Intergovernmental Relations State of the Federation
Workshop, Arizona State University, Auburn University, University of Alabama, University of
Arizona, University of California Berkeley, University of Chicago, University of Massachusetts,
University of Southern California, and University of Wisconsin for helpful comments. I thank
Wolfram Schlenker for kindly providing data and Olivier Deschênes for helpful conversations.
An early version circulated as “Sufficient Statistics for the Cost of Climate Change.” The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Derek Lemoine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Consequences of Climate Change from Variation in Weather
Derek Lemoine
NBER Working Paper No. 25008
September 2018
JEL No. D84,H43,Q54

                                             ABSTRACT

I formally relate the consequences of climate change to the time series variation in weather extensively
explored by recent empirical literature. I show that reduced-form fixed effects estimators can recover
the effects of climate if agents are myopic, if agents' payoff functions belong to a particular class, or
if the actions agents take in each period do not depend on actions taken in previous periods. I also
show how to recover structural estimates of climate change impacts from reduced-form weather regressions.
Applying this new method, I find that an additional 2°C of global warming would reduce eastern U.S.
agricultural profits by around 50% under the median estimates.


Derek Lemoine
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
McClelland Hall 401EE
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
dlemoine@email.arizona.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25008
Lemoine                             Estimating Climate from Weather                            November 2019


1       Introduction
A pressing research agenda seeks to estimate the economic costs of climate change. Ignorance
of these costs has severely hampered economists’ ability to evaluate policy. Recognizing
that different locations have different climates, many economists have hoped to estimate the
effects of climate change from the spatial correlation between climate and outcomes of interest
(e.g., Mendelsohn et al., 1994; Schlenker et al., 2005; Nordhaus, 2006). However, any two
locations differ along many dimensions, leading to concerns about omitted variables bias.1
Fortunately, though, the same location does experience different weather at different times.
Stimulated by Deschênes and Greenstone (2007), an explosively growing empirical literature
estimates the consequences of a location happening to experience cooler-than-average or
hotter-than-average weather.2 These researchers project the consequences of climate change
by combining their credibly estimated effects of weather with scientists’ predictions about
how climate change will alter the distribution of weather. Whether the estimated weather
treatment is in fact a good proxy for the unobserved climate treatment has been the subject
of much debate but little analysis.3
    I here undertake the first formal analysis that precisely delineates what and how we
can learn about climate impacts from weather impacts. A change in climate differs from a
weather shock in being repeated period after period and in affecting expectations of weather
far out into the future. Linking weather to climate therefore requires analyzing a dynamic
model that captures the distinction between transient and permanent changes in weather. I
study an agent (equivalently, firm) who is exposed to stochastic weather outcomes. The agent
chooses actions (equivalently, investments) that suit the weather. Actions can be responses
to realized weather (“ex-post adaptation”) or can be proactive investments against future
weather (“ex-ante adaptation”). The actions chosen in different periods may be complements
or substitutes: when actions are intertemporal complements, choosing a high action in the
previous period reduces the cost of choosing a high action today, but when actions are
intertemporal substitutes, choosing a high action in the previous period increases the cost
of choosing a high action today. The first case is consistent with adjustment costs, and the
second case is consistent with actions that require scarce resources.4 When choosing actions,
    1
     See Dell et al. (2014) and Auffhammer (2018b) for expositions and Massetti and Mendelsohn (2018) for
a review.
   2
     For recent reviews, see Dell et al. (2014), Carleton and Hsiang (2016), and Heal and Park (2016). Blanc
and Schlenker (2017) discuss the strengths and weaknesses of relying on panel variation in weather. Few
doubt that weather shocks are as-good-as-randomly assigned. For instance, Dell et al. (2014, 741) write that
“the primary advantage of the new literature is identification”, and Blanc and Schlenker (2017, 262) describe
“weather anomalies” as “ideal right-hand side variables” because “they are random and exogenous”.
   3
     For instance, Dell et al. (2014, 771–772) emphasize that “short-run changes over annual or other relatively
brief periods are not necessarily analogous to the long-run changes in average weather patterns that may
occur with climate change.” And Mendelsohn (2019, 272) observes, “An important failing of current weather
panel studies is that they lack a clear theoretical model.”
   4
     Both types of stories exist in the literature. For instance, in studies of the agricultural impacts of climate


                                                     1 of 34
Lemoine                          Estimating Climate from Weather                         November 2019


the agent knows the current weather, has access to forecasts of future weather, and relies
on knowledge of the climate to generate forecasts of weather at longer horizons. A change
in the climate alters the distribution of potential weather outcomes as well as the agent’s
expectation of future weather outcomes.
    I derive the effects of climate change in terms of model primitives and express reduced-
form fixed effects estimators in terms of these same model primitives. I show that reduced-
form estimates of weather impacts can exactly recover the theory-implied effects of climate
change on payoffs in a few special cases. Two are of particular interest. First, if actions are
neither intertemporal substitutes nor intertemporal complements (so that current decisions
are not directly affected by previous decisions), then empirical researchers can recover the
effects of climate on actions by combining the estimated effects on actions of current weather,
lagged weather, and forecasts. And because empirical researchers can recover the effects of
climate on actions, they can also recover the effect of climate on payoffs. Second, researchers
do not need to recover effects on actions if agents’ payoff functions satisfy a particular
condition. Empirical researchers can then recover the effects of climate from especially
simple regressions that are consistent with standard practice to date.
    However, many applications will not satisfy the special cases. I therefore also extend
conventional regression frameworks to recover structural estimates of climate impacts. Be-
cause I formally derive the reduced-form regression coefficients in terms of model primitives,
I can recover combinations of model primitives from these coefficients and then calculate the
theory-implied effects of climate change.5 The identification is exactly the same as in the re-
cent reduced-form literature (relying on within-unit variation in weather), but the regression
specification and the use of the estimated coefficients both differ from standard practice.
    I apply this new method to the seminal analysis of climate and agriculture from De-
schênes and Greenstone (2007). The results suggest that the special cases do not hold in
this application. I find that adaptation offsets some of the costs of extreme heat in the short
run, but because adaptation imposes its own costs, adaptation adds to the costs of extreme
heat in the long run. In contrast, adaptation to non-extreme heat imposes costs in the short
run in exchange for adding to the long-run benefits of additional days with non-extreme
change, Deschênes and Greenstone (2007) conjecture that long-run adjustments to changes in climate should
be greater than short-run adjustments to weather shocks because there may be costs to adjusting crops,
whereas Fisher et al. (2012) and Blanc and Schlenker (2017) conjecture that constraints on storage and
groundwater pumping, respectively, could make short-run adjustments exceed long-run adjustments.
    5
      This approach is in the spirit of Marschak’s Maxim. Heckman (2010, 359) writes, “Marschak’s Maxim
suggests that economists should solve well-posed economic problems with minimal assumptions. All that
is required to conduct many policy analyses or to answer many well-posed economic questions are policy
invariant combinations of the structural parameters that are often much easier to identify than the indi-
vidual parameters themselves and that do not require knowledge of individual structural parameters.” It
is also related to sufficient statistics approaches (see Chetty, 2009) and to price theory (see Weyl, 2019).
Throughout, I use “reduced-form” and “structural” in the way now common in empirical work rather than
in accord with their original usage.



                                                 2 of 34
Lemoine                           Estimating Climate from Weather                         November 2019


heat. Most adaptation is ex post, but there is evidence of ex-ante adaptation to extreme
heat in more recent years. In total, the costs of additional days with extreme heat outweigh
the benefits of more days with non-extreme heat: the median estimates suggest that the
current century’s warming (in the RCP 4.5 scenario of stabilized emissions) would reduce
agricultural profits by 56% in the absence of adaptation and by 50% if agents adapt as they
do to annual weather shocks.
    But will agents display more or less adaptation to climate than to weather? The estimated
regression coefficients imply that actions are intertemporal substitutes, as in resource scarcity
stories. This finding is consistent with recent empirical results in agricultural economics
(Hendricks et al., 2014; Kim and Moschini, 2018) and with implications of crop rotation
dynamics (Eckstein, 1984) but is contrary to widespread intuition based on Le Châtelier’s
principle. According to the theoretical analysis, agents will undertake more adaptation to
short-run weather shocks than to long-run climate change. I can therefore bound the effects
of climate change by the no-adaptation and full-adaptation estimates. The median estimates
suggest losses of 50–56% ($20–22 billion annually, in year 2017 dollars) from warming over
the century.
    There has been remarkably little formal analysis of the economic link between weather
and climate, despite the importance of empirically estimating the costs of climate change and
the sharpness of informal debates around the relevance of the recent empirical literature to
climate change. The primary exception is an argument given in Hsiang (2016) and repeated in
Deryugina and Hsiang (2017). The argument stipulates that a change in climate differs from
a change in weather only by affecting beliefs about future weather. This difference in beliefs
can matter for payoffs only if it affects an agent’s chosen actions. However, the envelope
theorem tells us that an optimizing agent’s actions cannot have first-order consequences for
payoffs. Therefore the effects of weather on payoffs exactly—and generically—identify the
effects of climate on payoffs.
    By formalizing the distinction between climate and weather in a dynamic environment,
the present analysis highlights two weak points in this argument.6 First, it is true that
a change in climate alters beliefs about future weather, but it is also true that a change
in climate alters past weather and past actions. Past actions are predetermined variables
from the perspective of an optimizing agent and thus do not drop out through the envelope
theorem. Even myopic agents can respond differently to weather and climate. Second, in a
dynamic model, the envelope theorem applies to the intertemporal value function, not to the
per-period payoff function investigated by much empirical work. Optimized current actions
can have first-order effects on current payoffs when those are offset by first-order effects on
    6
      In an earlier expositional analysis, I showed how envelope theorem arguments can fail in a three-period
model (Lemoine, 2017). The present work precisely analyzes the consequences of climate change in an
infinite-horizon model, constructively shows which types of empirical estimates can be informative about
the climate, and develops and applies a new approach to structurally estimating the consequences of climate
change.


                                                  3 of 34
Lemoine                           Estimating Climate from Weather                           November 2019


expected future payoffs. Only in a special class of payoff functions will optimized current
actions not have first-order effects on future payoffs.
    A few other lines of research are related. First, calibrated numerical simulations have
shown that dynamic responses are critical to the effects of climate on timber markets (Sohn-
gen and Mendelsohn, 1998; Guo and Costello, 2013) and to the cost of increased cyclone
risk (Bakkensen and Barrage, 2018). I develop a general analytic setting that precisely dis-
entangles several types of dynamic responses and relates them to widely used fixed effects
estimators. Second, empirical work has shown that agents use forecasts of future weather,
even at seasonal scales. In particular, Shrader (2017) and Taraz (2017) use variation in
seasonal forecasts and in past years’ weather outcomes, respectively, to identify ex-ante
adaptation to weather events. I formally demonstrate that estimating responses to forecasts
and lagged weather is critical to recovering the consequences of climate change. Finally,
Kelly et al. (2005) and Kala (2017) study learning about the climate from observed weather.
I here abstract from learning in order to focus on mechanisms more relevant to the recent
empirical literature.
    The challenge of attempting to estimate long-run effects from short-run variation is a com-
mon one in empirical economics. To get around this challenge, environmental economists
have found policy-induced variation in long-run pollution exposure that is plausibly ex-
ogenous to health outcomes (e.g., Chen et al., 2013; Anderson, 2015; Barreca et al., 2017;
Bishop et al., 2018). Unfortunately, this type of variation may not be available to researchers
interested in the consequences of changing the climate. Labor economists desire the long-
run consequences of changing the minimum wage, but inflation converts observed minimum
wage increases into short-run shocks (Sorkin, 2015).7 And macroeconomists formerly hoped
to learn about long-run output-inflation tradeoffs by estimating distributed lag models, but
Lucas (1972) argued that, when agents have rational expectations, the lagged response to a
transient inflation shock is not informative about the long-run effects of permanently chang-
ing inflation policy. Here we desire the long-run effect of changing the policy rule used by
nature to generate weather.
    The next section describes the setting. Section 3 derives the theory-implied effect of
climate. Section 4 establishes conditions under which the effect of climate can be recovered
from reduced-form estimates of weather impacts. Section 5 develops the new method of
structurally estimating climate impacts and applies it to U.S. agriculture. The final sec-
tion describes potential extensions. The appendix contains empirical details, proofs, and
   7
    Three other papers are related to both Sorkin (2015) and the present paper’s project. First, I here
formalize analogues to arguments in Hamermesh (1995) about why the pre- and post-periods around a min-
imum wage increase are not true pre- and post-periods. Second, in a model of dynamic stock accumulation,
Hennessy and Strebulaev (2019) show that estimated responses to transient shocks can differ substantially
from the theory-implied causal effects that empirical researchers seek to test. The present paper is similar in
deriving sufficient conditions for estimated effects to match theory-implied effects. Third, Keane and Wolpin
(2002) describe tradeoffs between cross-sectional and time series variation when estimating the effects of
welfare benefits. These tradeoffs are similar to those that motivate the present paper.


                                                   4 of 34
Lemoine                           Estimating Climate from Weather                           November 2019


additional results, including formal analysis of recently popular long difference estimators.


2       Setting
An agent is repeatedly exposed to stochastic weather outcomes and takes actions based on
realized weather and information about future weather. The realized weather in period t is
wt and the agent’s chosen action is At . This action may be interpreted as a level of activity
(e.g., time spent outdoors, energy used for heating or cooling, irrigation applied to a field)
or as a stock of capital (e.g., outdoor gear, size or efficiency of furnace, number or efficiency
of irrigation lines). The agent’s time t payoffs are given by the twice-differentiable function
π(At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 ) : R × R × R × R → R.8 Letting subscripts indicate partial derivatives,
I assume π11 < 0 and π22 ≤ 0, implying declining marginal benefits of current and past
actions.
    I interpret actions as adaptations that become more valuable with high weather out-
comes (π13 , π23 ≥ 0). Following terminology from the literature on climate adaptation (e.g.,
Fankhauser et al., 1999; Mendelsohn, 2000), a case with π13 > 0 reflects adaptation that can
occur after weather is realized (“reactive” or “ex-post” adaptation) and a case with π23 > 0
reflects adaptation that can occur before weather is realized (“anticipatory” or “ex-ante”
adaptation).9 I allow adaptation to play both roles at once. The possibility that π4 6= 0
reflects potential delayed impacts from the previous period’s weather, with π14 and π24 cap-
turing the potential for ex-post adaptation to alter these delayed impacts. Consistent with
the normalizations above, I assume π14 , π24 ≥ 0. Finally, observe that the actions could
reflect a firm’s production responses to price signals rather than responses to weather per
se. In this interpretation, the normalizations imply that “high” weather outcomes increase
the price of a firm’s output or reduce the cost of its input.
    I allow π12 to be positive or negative, with its magnitude constrained as described below.
When π12 < 0, actions are “intertemporal substitutes”, so that choosing a higher level of
past actions increases the cost of choosing higher actions today. I describe this case as
a resource scarcity story.10 For instance, pumping groundwater today raises the cost of
pumping groundwater tomorrow (see Blanc and Schlenker, 2017) or rescheduling activities
around today’s weather makes it hard to reschedule activities around tomorrow’s weather (see
Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2009). When π12 > 0, actions are “intertemporal complements”,
    8
      I generalize to vector-valued actions and multidimensional weather in the appendix. Doing so yields
little new insight at the expense of exposition.
    9
      When interpreting actions as the choice of capital stock, the payoff function is consistent with standard
models of depreciation. If we restrict the payoff function to allow only ex-ante adaptation, then the setting
corresponds to a time-to-build model with a one-period lag. Section 6 discusses the implications of capital
stocks that take longer to build.
   10
      Relating to the literature on resource extraction, the case with π12 < 0 can be seen as reflecting stock-
dependent extraction costs (Heal, 1976).


                                                   5 of 34
Lemoine                           Estimating Climate from Weather                          November 2019


so that choosing a higher level of past actions increases the benefit from choosing higher
actions today. I describe this case as an adjustment cost story.11 For instance, small changes
to cropping practices or activity schedules may be easier to implement than large changes.
The magnitude of π12 affects the agent’s preferred timing of adaptation. As |π12 | becomes
large, the agent prefers to begin adapting before the weather event arrives, but when |π12 |
is small, the agent may wait to undertake most adaptation only once the weather event has
arrived.12
    The agent observes time t weather before selecting her time t action. The agent also
understands the climate C, which controls the distribution of weather. We can interpret
weather as realized temperature and climate as a location’s long-run average temperature.
At all times before t − 1, the agent’s only information about time t weather consists in
knowledge of the climate. However, at time t − 1 the agent receives a forecast ft−1 of time
t weather: ft−1 = C + ζνt−1 , where the innovation νt−1 is a mean-zero, serially uncorrelated
random variable with variance τ 2 > 0. The forecast is an unbiased predictor of time t
weather: wt = ft−1 + ζt , where t is a mean-zero, serially uncorrelated random variable with
variance σ 2 > 0.13 The parameter ζ ≥ 0 is a perturbation parameter that will be useful for
analysis (see Judd, 1996). The covariance between t and νt is ρ. The covariance between
wt and wt−1 is then ζ 2 ρ. The agent incorporates knowledge of such serial correlation in her
forecasts.
    The agent maximizes the present value of payoffs over an infinite horizon:
                                           ∞
                                           X
                                 max
                                   ∞
                                                 β t E0 [π(At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 )] ,
                                {At }t=0
                                           t=0

where β ∈ [0, 1) is the per-period discount factor, A−1 is given, and E0 denotes expectations
  11
      The benchmark quadratic adjustment cost model has π12 = k for some k > 0 (see Hamermesh and
Pfann, 1996).
   12
      The magnitude of π12 is related to the distinction between ex-post and ex-ante adaptation insofar as it
affects the agent’s preferred timing of adaptation actions. However, π12 incentivizes early adaptation only to
reduce the costs of later adaptation, not because early adaptation provides protection from weather events.
I reserve the terms ex-ante and ex-post adaptation to refer to the effects of actions on the marginal benefit
of weather, captured by π13 , π23 , π14 , and π24 .
   13
      Consistent with much previous literature, climate here controls average weather. One might wonder
about the dependence of higher moments of the weather distribution on climate. In fact, the effects of
climate change on the variance of the weather are poorly understood and likely to be spatially heterogeneous
(e.g., Huntingford et al., 2013; Lemoine and Kapnick, 2016). Further, for economic analysis, we need to know
not just how climate change affects the variance of realized weather but how it affects the forecastability of
weather: the variance of the weather more than one period ahead is ζ 2 (σ 2 + τ 2 ), so we need to apportion
any change in variance between σ 2 and τ 2 . I leave such an extension to future work.




                                                       6 of 34
Lemoine                           Estimating Climate from Weather                          November 2019


at the time 0 information set. The solution satisfies the following Bellman equation:
                                                                                                       
    V (At−1 , wt , ft , wt−1 ; ζ) = max π(At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 ) + βEt [V (At , wt+1 , ft+1 , wt ; ζ)]
                                   At

                   s.t. wt+1 =ft + ζt+1
                        ft+1 =C + ζνt+1 .

Time t payoffs do depend indirectly on actions and weather prior to time t−1 because earlier
actions affect time t − 1 actions.
    The setting is sufficiently general to describe many applications of interest. For instance,
much empirical literature has studied the effects of weather on energy use. The agent could
then be choosing indoor temperature in each period, where payoffs depend on current actions
through energy use and depend on weather through thermal comfort. Habituation to outdoor
temperatures is captured by π14 . Much empirical work has also studied the effect of weather
on labor productivity. The decision variable could be effort, the dependence of payoffs on
weather could reflect current thermal stress as well as the effects of the previous day’s weather
via sleep and physiological functioning, the resource scarcity is one of tasks needing to be
done, and forecasts allow the agent to plan tasks and vacation time around weather outcomes.
Finally, many researchers have studied the effects of weather on agricultural outcomes. In
that case, payoffs are profits, actions include planting decisions, and weather affects yields.
    I will often impose one of the following two assumptions:

Assumption 1. ζ 2 is small.

Assumption 2. π is quadratic.

Either assumption will limit the consequences of stochasticity for optimal policy, whether by
limiting the variance of weather outcomes (Assumption 1) or by making the policy function
independent of that variance (Assumption 2).14
    I will be interested in empirical researchers’ ability to estimate the consequences of al-
tering C from observable responses to time series variation in wt and ft . It is important
to be clear about the climate experiment. I study the effects of a change in climate on an
agent who has had time to adapt to the new climate. This climate change treatment is
consistent with the exercise common in the empirical literature, which calculates the effect
of replacing today’s distribution of weather with a distribution projected to hold by the end
of the century. I will not study how the transition from one climate to another interacts
with agents’ decisions,15 and I will not study how expectations of a future change in climate
  14
     Note that when applying Assumption 2, the chosen policy is affected by the variance of weather (through
the realized weather) even though the policy rule is independent of that variance.
  15
     Kelly et al. (2005) frame the cost of learning as an adjustment cost. Quiggin and Horowitz (1999, 2003)
discuss broader costs of adjusting to a change in climate. These papers’ adjustment costs are conceptually


                                                  7 of 34
Lemoine                            Estimating Climate from Weather                            November 2019


affect agents today.16 These are both important questions but are beyond the scope of the
present analysis—and thus far largely beyond the empirical literature that this analysis seeks
to inform.


3      Theory-Implied Effect of Climate Change
I now derive the exact effect of climate change on long-run payoffs and actions within this
model. I later explore how to estimate these effects from observable variation in weather.
    The analysis approximates the solution to the full, stochastic model around the steady
state of the deterministic model, which sets ζ = 0 (Judd, 1996). The first-order condition
for the deterministic model is:

                             0 = π1 (At , At−1 , C, C) + βV1 (At , C, C, C; 0).

The envelope theorem yields:

                               V1 (At−1 , C, C, C; 0) = π2 (At , At−1 , C, C).

Advancing this forward by one timestep and substituting into the first-order condition, we
have the Euler equation:

                             0 = π1 (At , At−1 , C, C) + βπ2 (At+1 , At , C, C).                              (1)

A steady state Ā of the deterministic system is implicitly defined by

                                 0 = π1 (Ā, Ā, C, C) + βπ2 (Ā, Ā, C, C).                                  (2)

Define π̄ , π(Ā, Ā, C, C). The following lemma describes the uniqueness and stability of the
steady state.17
Lemma 1. For π̄12 6= 0 and ζ = 0, Ā is locally saddle-path stable if and only if (1+β)|π̄12 | <
−π̄11 − β π̄22 , in which case Ā is unique. For π̄12 = 0 and ζ = 0, the agent chooses At = Ā
at all times t.
distinct from the adjustment costs studied here. The present use of “adjustment costs” follows much other
economics literature in referring to the cost of changing decisions from their previous levels. I study how
these adjustment costs hinder estimation of the consequences of climate change from weather impacts, not
how they affect the cost of transitioning from one climate to another.
  16
     Severen et al. (2018) show that land markets capitalize expectations of future climate change and correct
cross-sectional analyses in the tradition of Mendelsohn et al. (1994) for this effect. I here study responses to
widely available, shorter-run forecasts in a time series context and show how to use them to improve panel
analyses in the tradition of Deschênes and Greenstone (2007).
  17
     The steady state exists if supĀ [π1 (Ā, Ā, C, C) + βπ2 (Ā, Ā, C, C)] > 0 and inf Ā [π1 (Ā, Ā, C, C) +
βπ2 (Ā, Ā, C, C)] < 0. These conditions will hold in most applications.

                                                    8 of 34
Lemoine                         Estimating Climate from Weather                              November 2019


Proof. See appendix.


I henceforth assume that (1 + β)|π̄12 | < −π̄11 − β π̄22 , so that the deterministic steady state
is unique and saddle-path stable.
    Now consider optimal actions in the stochastic system. The first-order condition is:

                   0 = π1 (At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 ) + βEt [V1 (At , wt+1 , ft+1 , wt ; ζ)].

The envelope theorem yields:

                        V1 (At−1 , wt , ft , wt−1 ; ζ) = π2 (At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 ).

Advancing this forward by one timestep and substituting into the first-order condition, we
have the stochastic Euler equation:

                    0 = π1 (At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 ) + βEt [π2 (At+1 , At , wt+1 , wt )].               (3)

The following lemma describes the evolution of E0 [At ].
Lemma 2. Let either Assumption 1 or 2 hold, and let E0 [(A1 − Ā)2 ] be small. Then
limt→∞ E0 [At ] = Ā.
Proof. See appendix.
When the conditions of Lemma 2 hold, applying the implicit function theorem to equation (2)
yields:
                                                         ex-post          ex-ante
                                          z        }|        { z}|{
                          dE0 [At ] dĀ   π̄13 + π̄14 + β π̄24 + β π̄23
                      lim          =    =                               ≥ 0.                           (4)
                     t→∞    dC       dC   −π̄11 − (1 + β)π̄12 − β π̄22
This is the average long-run effect of climate change on actions. Expected future actions
increase in the climate index because I normalize high actions to be more beneficial when
the weather index is high. Equation (4) captures how climate change alters weather in all
periods: the past, the present, and the future. We see the various forms of ex-post adaptation
captured by π̄13 , π̄14 , and β π̄24 . We also see the possibility of ex-ante adaptation, controlled
by π̄23 and arising because the agent understands that the altered climate affects weather
in subsequent periods. Finally, observe that π̄12 enters through the denominator in (4).
When actions are intertemporal substitutes (π̄12 < 0), this term reduces the magnitude of
the response to climate change, as when resource scarcity makes long-run responses smaller
than short-run responses. However, when actions are intertemporal complements (π̄12 > 0),
this term increases the magnitude of the response to climate change, as when adjustment
costs allow long-run responses to exceed short-run responses.

                                                  9 of 34
Lemoine                           Estimating Climate from Weather                            November 2019


   Approximating the payoff function around the steady state, wt = wt−1 = C, and ζ = 0
and using either Assumption 1 or Assumption 2, we have:

E0 [π(At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 )] =π̄ + π̄1 (E0 [At ] − Ā) + π̄2 (E0 [At−1 ] − Ā)
                                    1                          1                          1
                                 + π̄11 E0 [(At − Ā)2 ] + π̄22 E0 [(At−1 − Ā)2 ] + (π̄33 + π̄44 )ζ 2 (σ 2 + τ 2 )
                                    2                          2                          2
                                 + π̄12 E0 [(At − Ā)(At−1 − Ā)] + π̄13 Cov0 [At , wt ] + π̄23 Cov0 [At−1 , wt ]
                                 + π̄14 Cov0 [At , wt−1 ] + π̄24 Cov0 [At−1 , wt−1 ] + π̄34 ζ 2 ρ,       (5)

for t > 1. Differentiating equation (5) with respect to C and applying either Assumption 1
or Assumption 2 again, we find that

                           dE0 [π(At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 )]                           dĀ
                     lim                                   =π̄3 + π̄4 + [π̄1 + π̄2 ]     .               (6)
                     t→∞               dC                                            dC
The marginal effect of climate on long-run payoffs is composed of the direct effect of a larger
weather index, in both the present (π̄3 ) and the past (π̄4 ), and the effects of changing long-
run actions, including both present actions (π̄1 ) and past actions (π̄2 ). Equation (2) implies
π̄1 = −β π̄2 . Therefore,

                           dE0 [π(At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 )]                         dĀ
                     lim                                   =π̄3 + π̄4 + (1 − β)π̄2     .                 (7)
                    t→∞                dC                                          dC
Whether economic responses increase or decrease payoffs depends on the sign of π̄2 . A
case with π̄2 > 0 is a case in which higher actions impose costs today but provide benefits
tomorrow, as when undertaking adaptation investments that take time to build. A case with
π̄2 < 0 is a case in which higher actions provide benefits today but impose costs tomorrow,
as when borrowing money or selling from storage. Undertaking more actions because of
climate change increases payoffs if and only if actions are of the former type.
    Equation (6) shows that changes in average payoffs depend on changes in actions. How-
ever, some previous literature has relied on envelope theorem intuition to argue that changes
in actions are in fact irrelevant to effects on payoffs. Each solid curve in Figure 1 plots time t
payoffs as a function of time t weather holding current actions, past actions, and past weather
fixed. The three solid curves represent a continuum obtained by varying the agent’s current
actions. The dotted line gives the effect of time t weather on maximized time t payoffs,
with points (a) and (b) indicating maximized payoffs at two particular weather realizations.
The slope of the dotted line does not depend on how actions change with weather: because
it is tangent to the solid lines, it matches the partial derivative of payoffs with respect to
weather. This is the content of the envelope theorem. If a change in climate only affected
current weather, then we could ignore how actions respond to the change in climate.
    However, a change in climate also affects past and future weather. First consider the
consequences of affecting past weather. Interpret weather as temperature. Imagine that

                                                  10 of 34
Lemoine                       Estimating Climate from Weather                   November 2019




Figure 1: Per-period payoffs πt against weather wt . Each solid curve holds actions fixed.
The dotted curve through points (a) and (b) gives the effect of time t weather shocks on
myopically maximized payoffs. Point (c) shows the effect of weather shocks repeated in times
t − 1 and t, and point (d) illustrates dynamically optimizing agents.


changing inputs imposes adjustment costs (i.e., π12 > 0) and that the solid curves are condi-
tioned on previous actions having been chosen in response to experiencing the temperature
at point (a). The dashed curves in Figure 1 plot payoffs conditional on past actions having
been chosen in response to experiencing the indicated temperature, not the temperature at
point (a). Payoffs increase because the preferred current actions do not impose as many
adjustment costs when past actions are better-matched to current weather. Whereas a tran-
sient weather shock induces a change from point (a) to point (b), an enduring weather shock
induces a change from point (a) to point (c). This figure illustrates intuition based on Le
Châtelier’s principle for why the effects of transient weather shocks on payoffs could overstate
the effects of climate change (e.g., Deschênes and Greenstone, 2007). What does envelope
theorem intuition miss? Changes in actions chosen at time t − 1 can have first-order effects
on time t payoffs. Responses to transient weather shocks can fail to identify the effects of
climate because they do not capture how climate affects the trajectory of previous actions.
    Now consider the implications of climate affecting future weather. An agent who expects
a transient weather shock to occur yet again in period t + 1 may choose actions that fail to
maximize short-run payoffs if these actions increase payoffs in subsequent periods, as when
π23 6= 0. As an example, point (d) could be optimal even though its action maximizes short-
run payoffs only at point (a). Further, if π12 6= 0, agents may choose not to maximize short-
run payoffs even when not expecting a time t+1 weather shock (see equation (2)). What does
envelope theorem intuition miss? Dynamic optimization typically requires trading off short-
run and long-run effects. The envelope theorem no longer applies to per-period payoffs in
the presence of such tradeoffs, instead applying only to expected present discounted payoffs.




                                            11 of 34
Lemoine                            Estimating Climate from Weather                                November 2019


4      Estimating the Effect of Climate Change from Reduced-
       Form Weather Regressions
I have derived the theory-implied long-run effect of climate change, but researchers do not
know all of the structural parameters required to calculate this effect. Instead, empirical
researchers have sought to estimate the effect of climate from reduced-form regressions with
observed weather. I now consider whether and how such reduced-form regressions can recover
the effect of climate.18

4.1     Estimating Effects on Actions
We have seen that the effects of climate on payoffs are closely related to its effects on actions.
Further, much empirical research has sought to estimate the consequences of climate change
for decision variables or functions of decision variables, including productivity (Heal and
Park, 2013; Zhang et al., 2018), time allocation (Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2014), and energy
use (Auffhammer and Aroonruengsawat, 2011; Deschênes and Greenstone, 2011; Auffham-
mer, 2018a). I therefore begin by considering the potential to estimate the effect of climate
on actions from time series variation in weather.
    First consider the determinants of time t actions. The proof of Lemma 2 shows that if
either Assumption 1 or 2 holds and (At−1 − Ā)2 is small, then
                                                                         effects of current weather
                            effects of past weather
                                                          { z                      }|
                                                                                           π̄12
                                                                                                       {
                                                                 π̄    + β π̄    + β π̄
                   z                   }|
                   π̄14                    π̄12                     13        24        14 χ1
          At =Ā +      (wt−1 − C) +            (At−1 − Ā) +                                   (wt − C)
                    χ2                      χ2                                 χ2
                                                        
                 β π̄23 + β π̄13 + β π̄24 + β π̄14 π̄χ120 π̄χ121
               +                                                 (ft − C),                                  (8)
                                        χ2
                 |                            {z                           }
                                     effects of future weather

where each χi > |π12 |. We see time t actions determined by past, present, and future weather.
Figure 2 illustrates the main relationships identified by this expression.
    Actions depend on present weather in three ways. First, actions respond to current
weather as a means of mitigating its immediate harm or amplifying its immediate benefits.
This channel is controlled by π̄13 . Second, actions respond to current weather when current
actions can mitigate the harm or amplify the benefits incurred by current weather in future
periods. This channel is controlled by π̄24 and arises only for forward-looking agents. As an
  18
     I here consider only the internal validity of estimated effects. Equations (4) and (6) imply that the
effect of climate change will vary with the current climate unless weather enters π only linearly. Empirical
researchers should therefore take care when extrapolating estimated effects across locations and when pooling
data across locations.


                                                     12 of 34
Lemoine                       Estimating Climate from Weather                     November 2019




             Figure 2: The determinants of present actions, from equation (8).

example of the distinction between the two channels, an agent may avoid going outside on
a cold day both to minimize discomfort from the current temperature and to avoid getting
sick in the near future. Both of these channels are forms of ex-post adaptation. Third, when
π̄14 6= 0, current weather will affect the agent’s chosen action in the next period (not pictured
in Figure 2), leading a forward-looking agent to adjust her current action in preparation for
that choice. This channel vanishes when π̄12 = 0 because today’s actions then do not directly
interact with subsequent actions.
     Actions also depend on forecasts of future weather. When there is the possibility of
ex-ante adaptation (π̄23 > 0), the agent chooses today’s actions in order to directly mitigate
the consequences (or enhance the benefits) of expected future weather. Further, expected
future weather also affects desired future actions. The agent takes preparatory actions today
that help her achieve her desired future actions. When π̄12 > 0, a high forecast leads the
agent to choose high actions today as a means of reducing future adjustment costs, but when
π̄12 < 0, a high forecast leads the agent to choose low actions today as a means of conserving
resources for the future.
     Past weather also affects actions in two ways. First, past weather affects the marginal
payoffs from current actions directly when π̄14 6= 0. This is a form of ex-post adaptation.
Second, past weather affects past actions, which impose historical restraints on current ac-
tions when π̄12 6= 0. When actions are intertemporal complements (π̄12 > 0), high past
actions justify higher present actions as a way to reduce adjustment costs, but when actions
are intertemporal substitutes (π̄12 < 0), high past actions justify lower present actions by
depleting the resources needed to maintain a high action.
     Empirical researchers hope to recover (4) from time series variation in weather. Let there
be J agents (equivalently, firms) observed in each of T periods. Index these agents by j.
In order to focus on the issue at hand, imagine that they are in the same climate C with
the same payoff function π and the same stochastic process driving forecasts and weather,
though each agent draws its own sequence of weather and forecasts. Consider the following
fixed effects regression:
                    Ajt =αj + Γ1 wjt + Γ2 wj(t−1) + Γ3 fjt + Γ4 Aj(t−1) + ηjt ,              (9)
where αj is a fixed effect for unit j and ηjt is an error term that is uncorrelated with the

                                             13 of 34
Lemoine                            Estimating Climate from Weather                           November 2019


covariates.19 I use a hat to denote the probability limit of each estimator. The following
proposition relates the estimated coefficients to the effect of climate change.

Proposition 1. Let either Assumption 1 or 2 hold, and let (Aj(t−1) − Ā)2 be small for all
observations. Then Γ̂4 ∝ π̄12 and
                                                                
                                                   dĀ
                             Γ̂1 + Γ̂2 + Γ̂3 = ω       + β π̄12 Ω ,                  (10)
                                                   dC

where π̄12 > 0 implies ω ∈ (0, 1), π̄12 < 0 implies ω > 1, π̄12 = 0 implies ω = 1, and
Ω ∝ π̄13 + π̄14 + β π̄24 ≥ 0.

Proof. See appendix.
The three coefficients capture the three temporal relationships altered by climate change:
Γ̂1 recovers consequences of altering current weather, Γ̂2 recovers consequences of altering
past weather, and Γ̂3 recovers consequences of altering expectations of future weather. How-
ever, we cannot in general recover the response to a permanent change in climate from the
estimated response to transient weather shocks. The reason for this failure is the possibility
that π̄12 6= 0, which occurs if and only if Γ̂4 6= 0.
     Relationships of intertemporal substitutability or complementarity drive two types of
wedges between the estimator in (10) and the effect of climate change in (4). The second
term in parentheses in (10) reflects preparatory actions that are undertaken in response to
forecasts but are not relevant to the long-run effects of climate. The fixed effects estimator is
identified from shocks to forecasts and weather. As described above, a high forecast increases
present actions both through the possibility of ex-ante adaptation and through preparatory
actions. The former are important components of the effect of climate but the latter are
not: an increase in the climate index C does increase forecasts, but because it also increases
current and past weather, preparatory actions are not relevant to its long-run effects. When
π̄12 > 0, preparatory actions make the fixed effects estimator overstate responses to climate
as observed agents are motivated by expectations of temporary adjustment costs, but when
π̄12 < 0, preparatory actions make the fixed effects estimator understate responses to climate
as observed agents temporarily conserve resources.
     The second wedge in (10) arises from ω. This term reflects the difference between the his-
torical restraints on current actions imposed by transient weather shocks and those imposed
by a change in climate that affects all past weather realizations. When π̄12 > 0, historical
restraints prevent an agent from adjusting too much to a transient weather shock, but when
  19
     I do not explicitly model the unobservable characteristics that motivate the fixed effects specification. I
am here not interested in identification but in what we learn from a well-identified weather regression. See
Dell et al. (2014) and Auffhammer (2018b), among others, for expositions of identification in the climate-
economy literature. I assume that the only possible sources of omitted variables bias are the failure to control
for variables such as forecasts and lagged actions that are defined within the theoretical model.

                                                   14 of 34
Lemoine                             Estimating Climate from Weather                            November 2019


that shock has been repeated many times in the past (as eventually happens following a
change in climate), the many small adjustments eventually add up to much greater adjust-
ment. The ω < 1 captures how responses to transient shocks overstate historical restraints
in this case. Consistent with conjectures in Deschênes and Greenstone (2007), observable
short-run responses are smaller than long-run responses. In contrast, when π̄12 < 0, an agent
experiences more severe historical restraints following a change in climate than following a
transient weather shock. When actions depend on scarce resources, actions can be more
extreme when they are maintained for only a short period of time. The ω > 1 captures how
responses to transient shocks understate historical restraints in this case. Consistent with
conjectures in Fisher et al. (2012) and Blanc and Schlenker (2017), short-run responses are
larger than long-run responses.
    The wedges introduced by Ω and ω conflict, making it impossible to sign the bias in
general. However, we can make progress in two special cases. First, when π̄12 = 0, both
wedges vanish. In this case, the fixed effects estimator exactly recovers the effect of climate.
Second, when β = 0, the wedge introduced by preparatory actions vanishes because myopic
agents are not concerned about future actions. The sign of the bias then depends only on
the wedge ω induced by historical restraints, as even myopic agents respond to their own
past decisions (see also Keane and Wolpin, 2002).20
    Now consider the following distributed lag regression, which matches most literature in
not controlling for lagged actions:21
                                        I+1
                                        X                       I+1
                                                                X
                          Ajt =αj +           Γwt−i wj(t−i) +         Γft−i fj(t−i) + ηjt ,                  (11)
                                        i=0                     i=0

where I ≥ 0. The following proposition relates the estimated coefficients to the effect of
climate change.22

Proposition 2. Let either Assumption 1 or 2 hold, and let (Aj(t−1) − Ā)2 be small for all
observations. Then
                           I h                                     
                          X                   i       dĀ
                      lim      Γ̂wt−i + Γ̂ft−i = ω̃       + β π̄12 Ω ,
                     I→∞
                          i=0
                                                      dC
  20
      The wedge introduced by preparatory actions also vanishes if there is no ex-post adaptation, but this is
an artifact of modeling forecasts as existing only one period ahead. In this environment, there are no time
t shocks that affect expectations of time t + 2 weather. If there were longer-horizon forecasts, then time t
shocks could affect those expectations and thereby induce preparation for ex-ante adaptation anticipated to
be undertaken at time t + 1.
   21
      This omission is driven in part by concern for Nickell (1981) omitted variables bias.
   22
      The proof also shows that, beyond the first lag, the coefficients alternate signs as the lags increase if and
only if π̄12 < 0. The appendix shows that pi  ¯ 12 = 0 is not sufficient to recover the effects of climate if the
regression does not control for forecasts and there is scope for ex-ante adaptation.


                                                    15 of 34
Lemoine                           Estimating Climate from Weather                           November 2019


where β π̄12 > 0 implies ω̃ ∈ (ω, 1), β π̄12 < 0 implies ω̃ ∈ (1, ω), and β π̄12 = 0 implies ω̃ = 1,
with ω and Ω from Proposition 1. If π̄12 = 0, then Γ̂wt−i = 0 for i > 1 and Γ̂ft−i = 0 for
i > 0. If β = 0, then Γ̂ft−i = 0 for all i ≥ 0.
Proof. See appendix.
This estimator is subject to the same bias from preparatory actions, but by using a long
history of transient shocks, it reduces the bias introduced by historical restraints. If the latter
bias is the dominant one, then this estimator may reduce the overall bias in estimated effects
on actions. Further, this estimator recovers the effects of climate in a new case: when agents
are myopic. Myopic agents are never subject to the bias induced by preparatory actions,
and we now lose the bias induced by historical restraints because myopic agents respond to a
long sequence of transient weather shocks in exactly the same way as they respond to living
in a world with an altered climate.

4.2     Estimating Effects on Payoffs
We now consider the possibility of recovering effects on payoffs from observations of payoffs
and weather. For instance, empirical research studies how variation in weather affects agri-
cultural profits (e.g., Deschênes and Greenstone, 2007) or affects macroeconomic variables
such as gross output or income that are potentially related to payoffs (e.g., Dell et al., 2012;
Burke et al., 2015; Deryugina and Hsiang, 2017; Colacito et al., 2019).
    The class of payoff functions defined by the following assumption will yield especially
interesting results:
Assumption 3. π2 (At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 ) = Kπ1 (At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 ) if At−1 = At , for K 6= −β.
Consider a few members of this class. First, adjustment cost models yield K = 0: if π =
g(At , (At − At−1 )z , wt , wt−1 ) for z > 1, then π2 = z(At − At−1 )z−1 g2 (At , (At − At−1 )z , wt , wt−1 )
and thus is equal to 0 when At = At−1 . Second, a model in which the returns to resource
extraction decline in previous extraction can yield K = −1: if π = g(At /At−1 , wt , wt−1 ),
then π1 = g1 (At /At−1 , wt , wt−1 )/At−1 and π2 = −At g1 (At /At−1 , wt , wt−1 )/A2t−1 . Third, a
model in which ex-post adaptation and ex-ante adaptation form a constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) aggregate with distribution parameter κ yields K = (1 − κ)/κ: π =
g(h(At , At−1 ), wt , wt−1 ) where h(At , At−1 ) = (κAσt + (1 − κ)Aσt−1 )1/σ for σ < 1, 6= 0 and
h(At , At−1 ) → Aκt A1−κ
                       t−1 as σ → 0. Finally, a model without dynamic linkages has π2 (·, ·, ·, ·) =
0 and thus K = 0.
    Empirical researchers hope to recover (6) from time series variation in weather. They
will not generally observe the full set of actions available to agents or firms. As a result,
empirical researchers may estimate the following regression:
                                      I+1
                                      X                       I+1
                                                              X
                          πjt =αj +         θwt−i wj(t−i) +         θft−i fj(t−i) + ηjt ,               (12)
                                      i=0                     i=0


                                                  16 of 34
Lemoine                        Estimating Climate from Weather                    November 2019


where I again label units as j, αj is a fixed effect for agent j, and ηjt is an error term (see
footnote 19). We are interested in the vector of coefficients θ. As before, I use a hat to
denote the probability limit of each coefficient.

Proposition 3. Let Assumption 1 hold, or let Assumption 2 hold with the  and ν normally
distributed. Also let (Aj(t−1) − Ā)2 and (Ajt − Ā)2 be small for all observations and let each
agent’s average actions be Ā.

  1. If π̄12 = 0 and I > 1, then lims→∞ dE0 [πs ]/ dC = θ̂wt + θ̂wt−1 + θ̂wt−2 + θ̂ft + θ̂ft−1 and
     all other coefficients are equal to 0.
                                                    hP                         i
                                                       I            PI
  2. If β = 0, then lims→∞ dE0 [πs ]/ dC = limI→∞          θ̂
                                                       i=0 wt−i  +    i=0 ft−i .
                                                                           θ̂
                                               hP                          i
                                                  I               PI
  3. lims→∞ dE0 [πs ]/ dC = limβ→1 limI→∞          i=0 θ̂wt−i +    i=0 ft−i .
                                                                      θ̂

  4. If Assumption 3 holds and I ≥ 0, then lims→∞ dE0 [πs ]/ dC = θ̂wt + θ̂wt−1 and all other
     coefficients are equal to zero.

Proof. See appendix.
The proposition describes four cases in which we can recover the effect of climate from
time series variation in weather (and the appendix further describes cases in which we can
unambiguously bound the effect). The first two cases follow directly from the analysis in
Section 4.1. There we saw that we can recover the effect of climate on actions if either
π̄12 = 0 or β = 0. In the former case, we can recover the effect on current actions from the
coefficient on weather, its lag, and forecasts, and the first result in Proposition 3 follows from
recognizing that we need to recover effects on both current and lagged actions and that the
coefficients on weather and its lag also capture the direct effects of weather in equation (6).
If β = 0, we recover effects on actions only as the lags become very long, in which case we
also recover effects on payoffs.
     The other two cases are ones in which we do not need to recover the effect of climate on
actions. The proof shows that the bias from estimating the effect of climate on payoffs from
the combination of infinite lags is proportional to β π̄12 (π̄1 + π̄2 ). The bias vanishes as β → 1
because agents’ responses equalize the marginal value of past and current actions, without
discounting the former. Alternately, Assumption 3 and equation (2) imply that π̄2 = π̄1 = 0:
an optimizing agent sets the marginal benefit of actions to zero around a steady state. In
this case, the consequences of marginal climate change are independent of changes in actions
and the estimated coefficients do not include any effects of weather or forecasts on actions.
Summing θ̂wt and θ̂wt−1 now captures only the direct effects of weather and fully captures
the effects of climate on payoffs. We can test whether Assumption 3 holds by examining
the magnitude of the coefficient on forecasts: because forecasts matter for current payoffs

                                             17 of 34
Lemoine                           Estimating Climate from Weather                           November 2019




Figure 3: Per-period payoffs πt against previous actions At−1 . Each solid curve holds time
t actions and weather fixed. The dotted curve gives the effect of time t − 1 actions on
myopically maximized payoffs.


only through their effects on actions, they cannot affect these payoffs if Assumption 3 indeed
holds and agents are near a steady state.23,24
    Assumption 3 leads us to the same point as envelope theorem intuition proposed in previ-
ous literature. But Section 3 explained why these arguments fail. So what does Assumption 3
do? Figure 3 plots payoffs as a function of previous actions, conditional on current actions
and weather. The dotted curve gives the effect of previous actions on myopically optimized
payoffs. Point (1) identifies the previous action that maximizes current payoffs. Around this
point, previous actions do not have first-order effects on current payoffs. Why is that im-
portant? The dashed curves in Figure 1 reflected how past actions can shift current payoffs.
If these past actions do not have first-order effects, then the dashed curves are not shifted
out and point (c) converges to point (b) in Figure 1. Further, if past actions do not have
first-order effects on current payoffs, then current actions do not have first-order effects on
future payoffs. In that case, the myopically optimal action is also dynamically optimal and
point (d) converges to point (b) in Figure 1. Assumption 3 ensures that point (1) occurs
at the steady-state action. Therefore, if Assumption 3 holds and agents are near a steady
state, then points (c) and (d) converge to point (b) in Figure 1 and the treatment effect of
a transient weather shock indeed recovers the effect of permanently changing the weather.25
   23
      Much literature has studied dependent variables such as crop yields (e.g., Schlenker and Roberts, 2009),
mortality (e.g., Deschênes and Moretti, 2009; Deschênes and Greenstone, 2011), and health (e.g., Deschenes,
2014) that are functions of actions but are not payoff functions. If we consider recovering the effects of
climate on such dependent variables from a fixed effects regression on weather, then the final two parts of
Proposition 3 no longer apply because the Euler equation (1) holds only for payoffs, not for other functions
of actions.
   24
      Empirical researchers have usually not controlled for forecasts. The appendix shows that such regressions
can still recover the full effect of climate on payoffs if either Assumption 3 holds or agents are myopic.
However, the other cases now also require the absence of ex-ante adaptation.
   25
      As described earlier, one of the special cases of Assumption 3 is a model with no dynamic linkages


                                                  18 of 34
Lemoine                            Estimating Climate from Weather                           November 2019


    Proposition 3 assumed that each agent’s average actions are Ā.26 The following corollary
establishes how relaxing this assumption changes the results.

Corollary 4. Let the conditions given in Proposition 3 hold, except let each agent’s average
actions be different from Ā. In addition, let at least one of π̄13 , π̄23 , π̄14 , or π̄24 be strictly
positive. Then, in each part of Proposition 3, lims→∞ dE0 [πs ]/ dC is strictly less (greater)
than the indicated combination of coefficients if and only if Ā is strictly less (greater) than
each agent’s average actions.

Proof. See appendix.
The corollary establishes that the special cases that formerly sufficed to identify climate im-
pacts from weather impacts now merely bound the effect of climate on payoffs. In particular,
we obtain an upper bound if agents are approaching their steady-state actions from above
and a lower bound otherwise. Intuitively, if climate shifts the steady-state action farther
from the agent’s current action, then weather shocks incorporate transition costs that vanish
from the effect of climate on long-run payoffs.


5     Structurally Estimating Climate Impacts in U.S. Agri-
      culture
I have thus far explored the potential for reduced-form estimates to recover climate impacts.
I now show how to recover the combinations of structural parameters necessary to calculate
climate impacts. I use these parameters to disentangle weather effects from adaptation
and to sign the bias in the adaptation estimate. This new approach maintains precisely
the same credible identification from the reduced-form specifications. As we will see, these
specifications suffice because we do not need to specify or recover every underlying structural
parameter in order to undertake the calculations of interest.
    I demonstrate this new approach by extending the seminal analysis of agricultural impacts
from Deschênes and Greenstone (2007). In order to be consistent with common regression
specifications, generalize the foregoing analysis to allow for K types of weather variables,
which can be correlated with each other. Let there be M actions chosen in each period, so
that time t payoffs are now π(At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 ) : RM × RM × RK × RK → R, with bold
script indicating vectors. Superscripts will indicate elements of these vectors. The following
assumption is useful for the structural calculations:
(π2 (·, ·, ·, ·) = 0), in which case the agent solves a series of independent, static decision problems. Appeals
to the envelope theorem therefore can end up with the correct result in the types of static settings discussed
by previous literature (Hsiang, 2016; Deryugina and Hsiang, 2017).
  26
     Sorkin (2015) imposes an analogous restriction when relating short-run and long-run variation.



                                                   19 of 34
Lemoine                            Estimating Climate from Weather                              November 2019


Assumption 4. Either (i) there exist g : RM → R, h : RM → R, and π 0 : R × R × RK → R
such that π(At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 ) = π 0 (g(At ), h(At−1 ), wt ), or (ii) there exist π k : R×R×R →
R for k ∈ {1, ..., K} and π K+1 : RM × RM → R such that M ≥ K and
                                              K
                                              X
                π(At , At−1 , wt , wt−1 ) =          π k (Akt , Akt−1 , wtk ) + π K+1 (A∼k   ∼k
                                                                                        t , At−1 ),
                                               k=1


where A∼k
       t  indicates the (M − K)-dimensional vector of actions AK+1
                                                               t   through AM
                                                                            t .

This assumption does two things. First, it rules out delayed effects of weather, which is
plausible in the below application to annual agricultural data. Some assumption about
delayed effects is necessary for identification of structural parameters. Second, it requires
either that the vector of actions be reducible to a composite action (trivially true for M = 1)
or that payoffs be separable in the dimensions of weather. Either restriction ensures that the
terms controlling whether actions are intertemporal substitutes or complements are scalar.
    Consider the following regression:
                         K
                         X
                               Φkwt−2 wc(t−2)
                                       k
                                              + Φkwt−1 wc(t−1)
                                                        k
                                                               + Φkwt wct
                                                                       k
                                                                          + Φkwt+1 wc(t+1)
                                                                                    k
                                                                                          
     πct =αc + ψrt +                                                                         + δct ,        (13)
                         k=1

where c indicates counties, t indicates years, πct is agricultural profits, the αc are county fixed
effects, the ψrt are region-year fixed effects,27 and superscript k indexes weather variables of
interest. The following lemma expresses the coefficients in terms of model primitives:28

Lemma 3. Let Assumption 4 and the conditions of Proposition 3 hold, and let t be uncor-
   27
      In the preferred specification, the regions are USDA Farm Resource Regions (see also Deschênes and
Greenstone, 2012). The appendix provides further details, reports the variance explained by the weather
variables (see Fisher et al., 2012), and assesses sensitivity to instead defining regions as individual states (as
in Deschênes and Greenstone, 2007) or as the whole country (as in Fisher et al., 2012).
   28
      The lemma requires that weather be serially uncorrelated. This assumption seems an acceptable starting
point: over all U.S. counties from 1972 to 2017, the correlation between locally demeaned growing season
degree days and its lag is 0.10, the correlation between locally demeaned extreme growing season degree days
and its lag is 0.074, and the correlation between locally demeaned growing season precipitation and its lag
is -0.029.




                                                     20 of 34
Lemoine                              Estimating Climate from Weather                                 November 2019


related with νt . Then:
                                     (τ k )2
           Φ̂kwt+1 = −β π̄2k Γ̂k3                ,
                               (τ k )2 + (σ k )2
                                                 k
                                                             (τ k )2
                                                   
                                               π̄12
           Φ̂wt = π̄3 − β π̄2 Γ̂1 + 1 − β k π̄2k k 2
             k      k       k k
                                                                       k  2
                                                                            Γ̂k3 ,
                                               χ2       (τ ) + (σ )
                                k                          k
                                                              k
                                                                                (τ k )2
                                              
             k                π̄12      k k             π̄12   π̄12 k
           Φ̂wt−1 = 1 − β k π̄2 Γ̂1 + 1 − β k                        π̄                      Γ̂k ,
                               χ2                        χ2 χk2 2 (τ k )2 + (σ k )2 3
                       k              k
                                                      k 2                 k
                                                                                            (τ k )2
                                                                              
             k       π̄12          π̄12      k k      π̄12                π̄12        k
           Φ̂wt−2 = k 1 − β k π̄2 Γ̂1 +                  k
                                                                1  −    β    k
                                                                                   π̄ 2   k 2       k 2
                                                                                                        Γ̂k3 .
                      χ2            χ2                χ2                   χ2           (τ ) + (σ )
If case (i) of Assumption 4 holds, then we replace the k superscripts on the right-hand side
with 0.
Proof. See appendix.
The Γ̂ were defined in regression (11) and analyzed in Proposition 1. The proof of Proposi-
tion 1 defines these in terms of model primitives. They here gain a superscript k to indicate
the corresponding dimension of weather. Solving the system of equations, we find:
                           k
                         π̄12   Φ̂kwt−2
                              =         ,
                         χk2    Φ̂kwt−1
                                      (τ k )2        Φ̂kwt+1
                        π̄2k Γ̂k3                 =−          ,
                                (τ k )2 + (σ k )2         β
                                                           k
                                                     π̄ k   π̄               k )2
                                    Φ̂kwt−1 − 1 − β χ12k χ12k π̄2k (τ k )(τ2 +(σ         k
                                                                                  k )2 Γ̂3
                              k                         2      2
                        π̄2 Γ̂1 =                           π̄ k
                                                                                           ,
                                                    1 − β χ12k
                                                               2
                                                                k
                                                                                  (τ k )2
                                                                  
                                                             π̄ 12
                          k        k          k k
                        π̄3 = Φ̂wt + β π̄2 Γ̂1 − 1 − β k π̄2k k 2                            Γ̂k .
                                                             χ2           (τ ) + (σ k )2 3
   k
π̄12  /χk2 is identified from the first and second lags of weather. Recalling that χk2 must be
                                                                                                   k
positive for a saddle-path stable steady-state, the sign of this term matches the sign of π̄12       .
                                               k
                                            (τ ) 2
                                     k k
The lead of weather identifies π̄2 Γ̂3 (τ k )2 +(σk )2 , which the proof of Proposition 1 connects to
ex-ante adaptation.29 Given these two terms, the residual effects of lagged weather identify
π̄2k Γ̂k1 , which the proof of Proposition 1 connects to ex-post adaptation. Finally, the residual
effects of contemporary weather identify the direct effects π̄3k . Intuitively, lagged weather
affects current payoffs only through actions, so we can identify ex-post adaptation from
  29
    I calibrate β to the annual discount rate of 34% obtained in Duquette et al. (2012). The appendix shows
that results are not sensitive to lower discount rates.

                                                       21 of 34
Lemoine                               Estimating Climate from Weather                                November 2019


lagged weather and can identify intertemporal links between actions by comparing lags of
weather. And once we have identified the scope of adaptation, we can recover the direct
effects of weather from the response of payoffs to contemporary weather.
    Equation (7) shows that calculating climate impacts requires π̄3 and (1 − β)π̄2 dĀ/ dC.
The above steps recover π̄3 directly. From equation (10),

                                           dĀ 1 h       i
                                              = Γ̂1 + Γ̂3 − β π̄12 Ω,
                                           dC ω
with ω > 1 if and only if π̄12 < 0. If π̄12 ≈ 0, then
                                                    dĀ
                                                        ≈Γ̂1 + Γ̂3 .
                                                    dC
I calculate the effects of ex-post adaptation using (1 − β)π̄2 Γ̂1 and the effects of ex-ante
adaptation using (1 − β)π̄2 Γ̂3 .30 As described below, I use the estimated sign of π̄12 k
                                                                                            to
convert these estimates into bounds.
    For comparison, I also undertake two reduced-form calculations of the effects of climate
change. Either can be justified from an analogue of Proposition 3. A first calculation
estimates (13) without any leads or lags on the right-hand side and multiplies each weather
variable’s coefficient by the projected change in that weather variable. This calculation
recovers the theory-implied effects of climate if Assumptions 3 and 4 hold. It matches the
calculations undertaken in previous literature. A second calculation estimates (13) without
the second lag on the right-hand side and multiplies the sum of each weather index’s three
coefficients by the projected change in that weather variable. This calculation recovers the
theory-implied effects of climate if π̄12 = 0 and Assumption 4 holds.
    The appendix describes the data, details sample construction, and undertakes robustness
checks. The construction of the data follows an updated version of the methodology in
Deschênes and Greenstone (2007) and Fisher et al. (2012). I have observations of county-
level agricultural profits and acreage every 5 years from 1987 through 2012. I follow previous
literature in studying a measure of growing season degree days (i.e., accumulated heat within
a temperature range favorable to plant growth), a measure of extreme growing season degree
days (i.e., accumulated extreme heat, generally harmful to plant growth), and growing season
precipitation. The preferred specification includes USDA Farm Resource Region-by-year
fixed effects (as in Deschênes and Greenstone, 2012), weights counties by average acreage (as
in Deschênes and Greenstone, 2007), clusters standard errors by state (as in Fisher et al.,
2012), and restricts the sample to counties east of the 100th meridian, which are less likely
to be irrigated (Schlenker et al., 2005; Fisher et al., 2012).
  30
     These calculations set (τ k )2 /((τ k )2 + (σ k )2 ) equal to 1. This fraction reflects the fraction of the variation
in weather that is already realized one period ahead (i.e., that is reflected in forecasts). Estimated ex-ante
adaptation is biased towards zero if the fraction is in fact less than 1. Replacing the lead of realized weather
in regression (13) with forecasts would eliminate this bias.

                                                       22 of 34
Lemoine                      Estimating Climate from Weather                          November 2019




Table 1: Top panel: Estimated coefficients and standard errors from regression (13). Bot-
tom panel: Theory-implied structural parameters, reported as the median and lower/upper
quartiles of the distribution implied by the reduced-form estimates.

                                   GDD         Extreme GDD            Precip

                   Reduced-Form Coefficients
                   Current         18                -98                -7.9
                                 (9.1)              (54)               (3.9)
                   Lag 1           5.4               -60                -7.1
                                 (6.2)              (22)               (3.9)
                   Lag 2          -15                32                0.51
                                 (9.9)              (23)               (3.8)
                   Lead           -3.8              -1.4                 1.3
                                 (4.1)              (20)               (1.5)

                   Theory-Implied Parameters
                   π̄3                  15           -130                -12
                                     (8.9,22)    (-160,-110)         (-16,-7.8)
                   π̄2 Γ̂1              13            -46               -7.6
                                     (3.4,28)     (-60,-31)           (-11,-5)
                                2
                   π̄2 Γ̂3 τ 2τ+σ2      5.0           1.9               -1.8
                                     (1.3,8.8)     (-16,20)         (-3.2,-0.43)
                   π̄12 /χ2            -1.7          -0.53             -0.065
                                   (-3.4,-0.41) (-0.74,-0.31)       (-0.46,0.31)
                   All specifications include county and Farm Region-year fixed
                   effects. The reduced-form estimates’ standard errors and the
                   theory-implied results derive from covariance matrices that
                   are robust to clustering at the state level. The sample includes
                   only counties east of the 100th meridian. Observations are
                   weighted by (the square root of) a county’s average farmland
                   acreage. There are 13944 county-year observations and 37
                   state observations. Profits in thous. year 2002 dollars, GDD
                   in ◦ C-days, and precip in mm.




                                              23 of 34
Lemoine                            Estimating Climate from Weather                           November 2019


     The top panel of Table 1 reports the reduced-form coefficients from regression (13).
Profits increase in same-year and previous-year growing degree days between 10◦ C and 29◦ C
(“GDD”), but profits decrease in same-year and previous-year growing degree days above
29◦ C (“Extreme GDD”). The signs of the central estimates alternate from the first to the
second lag. The lead of weather does not have a statistically significant effect on profits.
Additional same-year and previous-year precipitation reduces profits.
     The lower panel of Table 1 reports the medians and, in parentheses, lower and upper
quartiles for the theory-implied structural parameters.31 The signs of the direct terms π̄3 and
the ex-post adaptation terms π̄2 Γ̂1 are consistent with the signs of same-year and previous-
year impacts on profits. The nonzero ex-post adaptation term suggests that Assumption 3
does not hold in this application, which motivates a structural approach to recovering climate
impacts. The ex-ante adaptation terms are small and noisy, as were the coefficients on the
leads of weather.
     The final row of Table 1 reports π̄12 /χ2 . We have a case of intertemporal substitutes
(complements) if this term is negative (positive). The median values are all negative, and
even the 75th percentile is negative for the growing degree day variables.32 The negative
π̄12 are identified off the result that lagged weather affects payoffs much like current weather
but the second lag of weather has opposite effects to current weather. Within the eco-
nomic model, these opposite effects imply that adaptive actions taken two years ago increase
current payoffs by constraining the actions taken last year. Finding π̄12 < 0 is contrary
to Le Châtelier’s principle but consistent with recent empirical work in agricultural eco-
nomics (Hendricks et al., 2014; Kim and Moschini, 2018). Following Eckstein (1984), these
researchers attribute their results to soil nitrogen and pest dynamics inducing farmers to
rotate their crops over time.33
     Table 2 reports the projected effects of climate change. It uses the RCP 4.5 trajectory
of stabilized emissions from 21 downscaled CMIP5 models. In this scenario, global mean
surface temperature increases by around 2 degrees Celsius over the century. The top panel
reports the two reduced-form calculations. Both approaches project substantial costs from
climate change. The projected increase in conventional growing degree days is estimated to
  31
      The lower panel does not report means and standard errors because the distributions can be skewed due
to π̄12 /χ2 being the ratio of two reduced-form coefficients. The appendix reports standard errors from method
of moments estimators of the structural parameters and reports results for the 10th and 90th percentiles.
   32
      Reassuringly, these estimates are consistent with |π̄12 | < χ2 , which the proof of Lemma 2 shows follows
from saddle-path stability. One might consider estimating a geometric lag structure in regression (13), with
the geometric term equal to π̄12 /χ2 . I find that coefficient estimates can be unstable when adding longer lags,
likely due to collinearity problems that commonly arise with lagged predictors. When using three lags, the
estimated π̄12 /χ2 for extreme growing degree days is extremely noisy, the estimated π̄12 /χ2 for conventional
growing degree days in a one- (two-) step GMM estimator is -1.18 (-0.56) with a standard error of 0.43
(0.34), and the estimated π̄12 /χ2 for precipitation in a one- (two-) step GMM estimator is -1.47 (-0.17) with
a standard error of 0.56 (0.31).
   33
      Huang and Moore (2019) show that U.S. farmers do adjust crop acreage in response to pre-planting
precipitation.

                                                   24 of 34
Lemoine                            Estimating Climate from Weather                           November 2019


increase agricultural profits, but the projected increase in extreme growing degree days is
projected to reduce profits to a greater degree. Projected costs are 50% greater under the
assumption that π̄12 = 0 than under Assumption 3. However, these numbers are meaningless
if Assumption 3 does not hold or π̄12 6= 0, and we have already seen that Assumption 3 does
not appear to hold and that π̄12 < 0.
     The lower panel reports the new, theory-based estimates of climate impacts. It decom-
poses the effects of climate change into direct effects (driven by π̄3 ), ex-post adaptation
(driven by π̄13 via π̄2 Γ̂1 ), and ex-ante adaptation (driven by π̄23 via π̄2 Γ̂3 ). The median
direct effects of projected changes in each measure of growing degree days are smaller than
either of the reduced-form estimates, but the median combined direct effect is in between
the two reduced-form estimates.
     Ex-post adaptation increases the benefits from conventional growing degree days but
increases the costs from extreme growing degree days. From equation (6), adaptive changes
in actions affect steady-state payoffs as π̄1 + π̄2 , and from equation (2), π̄1 + π̄2 is opposite
in sign to π̄1 . As described following equation (7), actions that provide short-run benefits
(costs) in exchange for long-run costs (benefits) have negative (positive) effects on steady-
state payoffs when agents are not perfectly patient. Adaptation to increases in conventional
growing degree days therefore imposes short-run costs, but agents reap the benefits from
past adaptation in the long run. In contrast, adaptation to increases in extreme growing
degree days provides short-run benefits, but agents reap these benefits only while paying the
larger costs of past adaptation, which dominate in the long run. Ex-ante adaptation is not
clearly important.34 Accounting for adaptation, projected changes in conventional growing
degree days increase profits by 54% in the median estimate and projected changes in extreme
growing degree days eliminate profits in the median estimate. The median total effect of
climate change is a 50% reduction in profits.
     The median effect of climate happens to be somewhat close to the value that would be
obtained by applying previous literature’s methods (which are identical to applying Assump-
tion 3). However, the interpretation is quite different. The structural estimates approximate
dĀ/ dC by setting π̄12 = 0, which implies that ω = 1 and that Ω is irrelevant in equation (10).
In contrast to reduced-form approaches, these structural calculations have a clear interpre-
tation even if that assumption is violated. We know from Proposition 1 that the bias from
π̄12 6= 0 reflects preparatory actions (through Ω) and historical restraints (through ω). In the
present context, it is reasonable to assume that the wedge induced by preparatory actions
is small relative to the wedge induced by historical restraints, an intuition reinforced by the
small effects of ex-ante adaptation. Therefore π̄12 > 0 implies that the present calculations
  34
     Recall, however, that the estimated effects of ex-ante adaptation are biased towards zero (see footnote 30).
The appendix reports that ex-ante adaptation to extreme growing degree days becomes clearer if we omit the
earlier years from the sample, which is consistent with the reduced skill and availability of seasonal forecasts
prior to the mid-1990s (see Klemm and McPherson, 2017). Takle et al. (2013) and Klemm and McPherson
(2017) describe the various seasonal forecasts of interest to agriculture.


                                                   25 of 34
Lemoine                        Estimating Climate from Weather                         November 2019


Table 2: The percentage change in eastern U.S. agricultural profits due to predicted end-of-
century changes in growing degree days, extreme growing degree days, and precipitation. The
reduced-form estimates report central estimates and standard errors. The theory-implied
estimates report the median and lower/upper quartiles.

                                   GDD        Extreme GDD          Precip        Combined

          Reduced-Form
          Using Assumption 3         51             -97              -1.0            -47
                                    (25)           (37)             (0.4)           (24)
          Using π̄12 = 0             44         -1.1e+02             -1.6            -71
                                    (29)           (35)            (0.66)           (28)
          Theory-Implied
          Direct Effects             38             -93               -1.2           -56
                                  (22,54)     (-1.1e+02,-74)     (-1.7,-0.83)     (-71,-41)
          Ex-Post Adaptation         8.3            -8.0             -0.21           0.56
                                  (2.1,17)       (-11,-5.4)     (-0.29,-0.13)     (-5.7,9.2)
          Ex-Ante Adaptation         3.2            0.33            -0.048            3.4
                                 (0.84,5.5)      (-2.8,3.4)    (-0.085,-0.012)   (0.026,6.8)
          Total                      54           -1e+02              -1.5           -50
                                  (32,74)     (-1.2e+02,-79)        (-2,-1)       (-69,-31)
          All specifications include county and Farm Region-year fixed effects. The reduced-
          form estimates’ standard errors and the theory-implied results derive from covari-
          ance matrices that are robust to clustering at the state level. The sample includes
          only counties east of the 100th meridian. Observations are weighted by (the square
          root of) a county’s average farmland acreage. Climate projections use the RCP 4.5
          scenario averaged across 21 CMIP5 models. There are 13944 county-year observa-
          tions and 37 state observations.



underestimate adaptation to climate (because ω < 1) and π̄12 < 0 implies that the present
calculations overestimate adaptation to climate (because ω > 1).
    We saw in Table 1 that π̄12 < 0, implying that we observe more adaptation to short-
run weather shocks than would occur in response to long-run changes in climate. We can
therefore bound the effects of climate by the estimated total effects that include projected
adaptation and by the estimated direct effects that exclude adaptation. If I were following
the conventional approach in the weather-climate literature, I would undertake calculations
like those relying on Assumption 3 and apply intuition based on Le Châtelier’s principle to
conclude that climate change reduces profits by 0–47% in the median estimates. Instead,
here the median estimates and the finding that π̄12 < 0 imply that climate change reduces
agricultural profits by 50–56% ($20–22 billion annually at the year 2017 price level), with the
75th percentile estimates yielding a reduction in profits of 31–41% and the 90th percentile
estimates (see appendix) yielding a reduction in profits of 9–28%.


                                               26 of 34
Lemoine                       Estimating Climate from Weather                  November 2019


6    Potential Extensions
I have demonstrated how to estimate the effects of climate change from time series variation
in weather. I conclude by discussing the primary restrictions in the present setting and
describing other aspects of climate change that should be the subject of future analysis.
    The theoretical model is fairly general. The three notable restrictions are that past
weather and actions can directly affect payoffs with only a one-period lag (although they
do indirectly affect payoffs arbitrarily far into the future) and that agents have access to
specialized forecasts only one period in advance of a realized weather outcome. Longer-run
delayed weather impacts are probably important to some applications, but they would not
substantially change the theoretical results. In particular, distributed lag models will recover
the effects of climate in exactly the same cases as analyzed here. Allowing for longer-horizon
forecasts also does not change the theoretical results unless actions can have direct effects
over those horizons.
    Allowing actions to have longer-run direct consequences can have interesting conse-
quences. Such an extension is attractive if we interpret actions as the choice of capital
stock and we want to study capital that can be built only with a lag of more than one
period. If longer-run forecasts are available, then the present results extend in a natural
way, implying that it is important to control for these longer-run forecasts. But if weather
forecasts do not exist over the whole horizon over which today’s actions will directly af-
fect payoffs, then empirical researchers may be unable to estimate the full effect of climate:
changing the climate can lead agents to undertake actions that pay off only in the distant
future, but observable variation in forecasts will not identify this adaptation margin. In the
empirical application of Section 5, the existence of such actions would imply that long-run
adaptation could be greater than short-run adaptation even though I estimate π̄12 < 0 from
the actions that vary in the data.
    The present setting successfully captures the distinction between transient and permanent
changes in weather. Future work should consider other aspects of climate change. First,
global climate change differs from weather shocks not only in its temporal structure but
also in its spatial structure. A change in global climate affects weather in every location
and thus will have general equilibrium consequences. In the empirical application, general
equilibrium channels change the prices of land and crops. The present setting has followed
most empirical work in abstracting from such effects, but some recent empirical work has
begun exploring the implications of changing the weather in many locations simultaneously
(e.g., Costinot et al., 2016; Gouel and Laborde, 2018; Dingel et al., 2019). Future work
should extend the present setting to account for general equilibrium effects.
    Second, the present analysis has held the payoff function fixed over time. However,
climate change should induce innovations that alter how weather affects payoffs, and many
such innovations will arise even in the absence of climate change. Some types of innovation
can be interpreted as actions within the present framework, but the potential for future


                                           27 of 34
Lemoine                           Estimating Climate from Weather                         November 2019


innovation may be inherently unobservable. Historical studies have begun exploring the
interaction between climate and agricultural innovation (e.g., Olmstead and Rhode, 2008,
2011; Roberts and Schlenker, 2011; Bleakley and Hong, 2017). Future work should consider
approaches to bounding the scope for future innovation.
    Third, the present analysis has considered only marginal changes in climate, but climate
change over the next century is likely to be nonmarginal.35 The present analysis implies
that the marginal effect of climate will not generally be constant. Some recent work (Mérel
and Gammans, 2019) explores the types of variation captured by quadratic regression terms.
Future work should explore whether nonlinear specifications might inform estimates of the
impacts from nonmarginal climate change in a dynamic setting such as the present one.
    Fourth, the present analysis assumes that actions can be adjusted continuously. In the
presence of fixed costs, an agent may choose to change an action only when the agent
expects a change in weather to endure, and in the presence of constraints imposed by policy,
actions may not respond smoothly to weather shocks, changing the interpretation of reduced-
form coefficients. Future work should explore the conditions under which aggregating over
many agents’ fixed-cost decisions makes actions appear continuous. Future work should also
explore whether responses to weather events of varying durations can identify how fixed-cost
actions respond to a change in climate and whether responses to weather events of varying
magnitudes can identify the role of policy constraints.
    Finally, the present analysis has focused on identifying the long-run consequences of cli-
mate change, abstracting from the transition costs induced by climate change. In this regard,
the present analysis matches the calculations undertaken by nearly all empirical work but
omits a potentially critical aspect of climate change (see Quiggin and Horowitz, 1999, 2003;
Kelly et al., 2005). Future work should consider whether imposing stronger assumptions on
the decision-making environment can allow for credible simulation of counterfactual climate
trajectories and thereby estimate transition costs.


References
Anderson, Michael L. (2015) “As the wind blows: The effects of long-term exposure to air
 pollution on mortality,” Working Paper 21578, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Auffhammer, Maximilian (2018a) “Climate adaptive response estimation: Short and long run
  35
     Estimating the consequences of nonmarginal climate change is critical to the damage functions required
by climate-economy integrated assessment models (see Nordhaus, 2013). However, there is an argument
that the consequences of marginal climate change might be especially policy relevant: if we accept climate
scientists’ views that the potentially nonquantifiable risks imposed by nonmarginal climate change are likely
to exceed the cost of avoiding them, then the effects of marginal climate change become critical to policy
choices.




                                                 28 of 34
Lemoine                     Estimating Climate from Weather                 November 2019


  impacts of climate change on residential electricity and natural gas consumption using big
  data,” Working Paper 24397, National Bureau of Economic Research.

        (2018b) “Quantifying economic damages from climate change,” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, Vol. 32, No. 4, pp. 33–52.

Auffhammer, Maximilian and Anin Aroonruengsawat (2011) “Simulating the impacts of
 climate change, prices and population on California’s residential electricity consumption,”
 Climatic Change, Vol. 109, No. 1, pp. 191–210.

Bakkensen, Laura and Lint Barrage (2018) “Climate shocks, cyclones, and economic growth:
  Bridging the micro-macro gap,” Working Paper 24893, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Barreca, Alan I., Matthew Neidell, and Nicholas J. Sanders (2017) “Long-run pollution
  exposure and adult mortality: Evidence from the Acid Rain Program,” Working Paper
  23524, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bishop, Kelly C., Jonathan D. Ketcham, and Nicolai V. Kuminoff (2018) “Hazed and con-
  fused: The effect of air pollution on dementia,” Working Paper 24970, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Blanc, Elodie and Wolfram Schlenker (2017) “The use of panel models in assessments of
  climate impacts on agriculture,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, Vol. 11,
  No. 2, pp. 258–279.

Bleakley, Hoyt and Sok Chul Hong (2017) “Adapting to the weather: Lessons from U.S.
  history,” The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 77, No. 3, pp. 756–795.

Burke, Marshall, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel (2015) “Global non-linear effect
  of temperature on economic production,” Nature, Vol. 527, pp. 235–239.

Carleton, Tamma A. and Solomon M. Hsiang (2016) “Social and economic impacts of cli-
  mate,” Science, Vol. 353, No. 6304, p. aad9837.

Chen, Yuyu, Avraham Ebenstein, Michael Greenstone, and Hongbin Li (2013) “Evidence
 on the impact of sustained exposure to air pollution on life expectancy from China’s Huai
 River policy,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 110, No. 32, pp.
 12936–12941.

Chetty, Raj (2009) “Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: A bridge between structural
 and reduced-form methods,” Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 451–488.



                                          29 of 34
Lemoine                     Estimating Climate from Weather               November 2019


Colacito, Riccardo, Bridget Hoffmann, and Toan Phan (2019) “Temperature and growth: A
  panel analysis of the United States,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 51, No.
  2-3, pp. 313–368.

Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Cory Smith (2016) “Evolving comparative advan-
  tage and the impact of climate change in agricultural markets: Evidence from 1.7 million
  fields around the world,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 124, No. 1, pp. 205–248.

Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken (2012) “Temperature shocks and
  economic growth: Evidence from the last half century,” American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, Vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 66–95.

       (2014) “What do we learn from the weather? The new climate-economy literature,”
  Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 52, No. 3, pp. 740–798.

Deryugina, Tatyana and Solomon Hsiang (2017) “The marginal product of climate,” Working
  Paper 24072, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Deschenes, Olivier (2014) “Temperature, human health, and adaptation: A review of the
  empirical literature,” Energy Economics, Vol. 46, pp. 606–619.

Deschênes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone (2007) “The economic impacts of climate change:
  Evidence from agricultural output and random fluctuations in weather,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, Vol. 97, No. 1, pp. 354–385.

         (2011) “Climate change, mortality, and adaptation: Evidence from annual fluctua-
  tions in weather in the US,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 3, No.
  4, pp. 152–185.

         (2012) “The economic impacts of climate change: Evidence from agricultural output
  and random fluctuations in weather: Reply,” American Economic Review, Vol. 102, No.
  7, pp. 3761–3773.

Deschênes, Olivier and Enrico Moretti (2009) “Extreme weather events, mortality, and mi-
  gration,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 91, No. 4, pp. 659–681.

Dingel, Jonathan I., Kyle C. Meng, and Solomon M. Hsiang (2019) “Spatial correlation,
  trade, and inequality: Evidence from the global climate,” Working Paper 25447, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Duquette, Eric, Nathaniel Higgins, and John Horowitz (2012) “Farmer discount rates: Ex-
 perimental evidence,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 94, No. 2, pp.
 451–456.


                                         30 of 34
Lemoine                    Estimating Climate from Weather                November 2019


Eckstein, Zvi (1984) “A rational expectations model of agricultural supply,” Journal of
  Political Economy, Vol. 92, No. 1, pp. 1–19.
Fankhauser, Samuel, Joel B. Smith, and Richard S. J. Tol (1999) “Weathering climate
  change: some simple rules to guide adaptation decisions,” Ecological Economics, Vol.
  30, No. 1, pp. 67–78.
Fisher, Anthony C., W. Michael Hanemann, Michael J. Roberts, and Wolfram Schlenker
  (2012) “The economic impacts of climate change: Evidence from agricultural output and
  random fluctuations in weather: Comment,” American Economic Review, Vol. 102, No.
  7, pp. 3749–3760.
Gouel, Christophe and David Laborde (2018) “The crucial role of international trade in
 adaptation to climate change,” Working Paper 25221, National Bureau of Economic Re-
 search.
Graff Zivin, Joshua and Matthew Neidell (2009) “Days of haze: Environmental information
  disclosure and intertemporal avoidance behavior,” Journal of Environmental Economics
  and Management, Vol. 58, No. 2, pp. 119–128.
       (2014) “Temperature and the allocation of time: Implications for climate change,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 32, No. 1, pp. 1–26.
Guo, Christopher and Christopher Costello (2013) “The value of adaption: Climate change
 and timberland management,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
 Vol. 65, No. 3, pp. 452–468.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. (1995) “Comment,” ILR Review, Vol. 48, No. 4, pp. 835–838.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. and Gerard A. Pfann (1996) “Adjustment costs in factor demand,”
  Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 34, No. 3, pp. 1264–1292.
Heal, Geoffrey (1976) “The relationship between price and extraction cost for a resource
  with a backstop technology,” The Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 371–378.
Heal, Geoffrey and Jisung Park (2013) “Feeling the heat: Temperature, physiology and the
  wealth of nations,” Working Paper 19725, National Bureau of Economic Research.
        (2016) “Temperature stress and the direct impact of climate change: A review of
  an emerging literature,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, Vol. 10, No. 2,
  pp. 347–362.
Heckman, James J. (2010) “Building bridges between structural and program evaluation
  approaches to evaluating policy,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 48, No. 2, pp.
  356–398.

                                        31 of 34
Lemoine                      Estimating Climate from Weather                  November 2019


Hendricks, Nathan P., Aaron Smith, and Daniel A. Sumner (2014) “Crop supply dynamics
  and the illusion of partial adjustment,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol.
  96, No. 5, pp. 1469–1491.

Hennessy, Christopher A and Ilya A Strebulaev (2019) “Beyond random assignment: Credi-
  ble inference of causal effects in dynamic economies,” Journal of Finance, Vol. forthcoming.

Hsiang, Solomon M. (2016) “Climate econometrics,” Annual Review of Resource Economics,
  Vol. 8, pp. 43–75.

Huang, Hsing-Hsiang and Michael R. Moore (2019) “Farming under weather risk: Adap-
 tation, moral hazard, and selection on moral hazard,” in Wolfram Schlenker ed. Under-
 standing Productivity Growth in Agriculture: University of Chicago Press, pp. 77–124.

Huntingford, Chris, Philip D. Jones, Valerie N. Livina, Timothy M. Lenton, and Peter M.
 Cox (2013) “No increase in global temperature variability despite changing regional pat-
 terns,” Nature, Vol. 500, No. 7462, pp. 327–330.

Judd, Kenneth L. (1996) “Approximation, perturbation, and projection methods in economic
  analysis,” in Hans M. Amman, David A. Kendrick, and John Rust eds. Handbook of
  Computational Economics, Vol. 1: Elsevier, pp. 509–585.

Kala, Namrata (2017) “Learning, adaptation, and climate uncertainty: Evidence from Indian
 agriculture,” working paper.

Keane, Michael P. and Kenneth I. Wolpin (2002) “Estimating welfare effects consistent with
  forward-looking behavior. Part I: Lessons from a simulation exercise,” The Journal of
  Human Resources, Vol. 37, No. 3, pp. 570–599.

Kelly, David L., Charles D. Kolstad, and Glenn T. Mitchell (2005) “Adjustment costs from
  environmental change,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 50,
  No. 3, pp. 468–495.

Kim, Hyunseok and GianCarlo Moschini (2018) “The dynamics of supply: U.S. corn and
  soybeans in the biofuel era,” Land Economics, Vol. 94, No. 4, pp. 593–613.

Klemm, Toni and Renee A. McPherson (2017) “The development of seasonal climate fore-
  casting for agricultural producers,” Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, Vol. 232, pp.
  384–399.

Lemoine, Derek (2017) “Expect above average temperatures: Identifying the economic im-
  pacts of climate change,” Working Paper 23549, National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                          32 of 34
Lemoine                     Estimating Climate from Weather                 November 2019


Lemoine, Derek and Sarah Kapnick (2016) “A top-down approach to projecting market
  impacts of climate change,” Nature Climate Change, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 51–55.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1972) “Econometric testing of the natural rate hypothesis,” in Otto
  Eckstein ed. The Econometrics of Price Determination: Board of Governors of the Federal
  Reserve System, pp. 50–59.

Massetti, Emanuele and Robert Mendelsohn (2018) “Measuring climate adaptation: Meth-
 ods and evidence,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp.
 324–341.

Mendelsohn, Robert (2000) “Efficient adaptation to climate change,” Climatic Change, Vol.
 45, No. 3-4, pp. 583–600.

         (2019) “An examination of recent revealed preference valuation methods and re-
  sults,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 267–282.

Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw (1994) “The impact of global
 warming on agriculture: A Ricardian analysis,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 84,
 No. 4, pp. 753–771.

Mérel, Pierre and Matthew Gammans (2019) “Climate econometrics: Can the panel ap-
 proach account for long-run adaptation?” working paper, University of California Davis.

Nickell, Stephen (1981) “Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects,” Econometrica, Vol.
  49, No. 6, pp. 1417–1426.

Nordhaus, William (2013) “Integrated economic and climate modeling,” in Peter B. Dixon
  and Dale W. Jorgenson eds. Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling, Vol.
  1: North Holland, Elsevier B.V. pp. 1069–1131.

Nordhaus, William D. (2006) “Geography and macroeconomics: New data and new findings,”
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, Vol. 103,
  No. 10, pp. 3510–3517.

Olmstead, Alan L. and Paul W. Rhode (2008) Creating Abundance: Biological Innovation
  and American Agricultural Development, New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

        (2011) “Responding to climatic challenges: Lessons from U.S. agricultural develop-
  ment,” in Gary D. Libecap and Richard H. Steckel eds. The Economics of Climate Change:
  Adaptations Past and Present, pp. 169–194.

Quiggin, John and John Horowitz (2003) “Costs of adjustment to climate change,” Australian
 Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, Vol. 47, No. 4, pp. 429–446.

                                          33 of 34
Lemoine                     Estimating Climate from Weather               November 2019


Quiggin, John and John K. Horowitz (1999) “The impact of global warming on agriculture:
 A Ricardian analysis: Comment,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 4, pp.
 1044–1045.
Roberts, Michael J. and Wolfram Schlenker (2011) “The evolution of heat tolerance of corn:
  Implications for climate change,” in GaryD. Libecap and Richard H. Steckel eds. The
  Economics of Climate Change: Adaptations Past and Present, pp. 225–251.
Schlenker, Wolfram, W. Michael Hanemann, and Anthony C. Fisher (2005) “Will U.S. agri-
  culture really benefit from global warming? Accounting for irrigation in the hedonic
  approach,” American Economic Review, Vol. 95, No. 1, pp. 395–406.
Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael J. Roberts (2009) “Nonlinear temperature effects indicate
  severe damages to U.S. crop yields under climate change,” Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, Vol. 106, No. 37, pp. 15594–15598.
Severen, Christopher, Christopher Costello, and Olivier Deschnes (2018) “A forward-looking
  Ricardian approach: Do land markets capitalize climate change forecasts?” Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 89, pp. 235–254.
Shrader, Jeffrey (2017) “Expectations and adaptation to environmental risks,” working pa-
  per.
Sohngen, Brent and Robert Mendelsohn (1998) “Valuing the impact of large-scale ecological
  change in a market: The effect of climate change on U.S. timber,” The American Economic
  Review, Vol. 88, No. 4, pp. 686–710.
Sorkin, Isaac (2015) “Are there long-run effects of the minimum wage?” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 306–333.
Takle, Eugene S., Christopher J. Anderson, Jeffrey Andresen, James Angel, Roger W. El-
  more, Benjamin M. Gramig, Patrick Guinan, Steven Hilberg, Doug Kluck, Raymond
  Massey, Dev Niyogi, Jeanne M. Schneider, Martha D. Shulski, Dennis Todey, and Melissa
  Widhalm (2013) “Climate forecasts for corn producer decision making,” Earth Interac-
  tions, Vol. 18, No. 5, pp. 1–8.
Taraz, Vis (2017) “Adaptation to climate change: historical evidence from the Indian mon-
  soon,” Environment and Development Economics, Vol. 22, No. 5, pp. 517–545.
Weyl, E. Glen (2019) “Price theory,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 57, No. 2, pp.
 329–384.
Zhang, Peng, Olivier Deschenes, Kyle Meng, and Junjie Zhang (2018) “Temperature effects
  on productivity and factor reallocation: Evidence from a half million Chinese manufac-
  turing plants,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 88, pp. 1–17.

                                         34 of 34
