                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




TRANSITIONS FROM CAREER EMPLOYMENT AMONG PUBLIC- AND PRIVATE-SECTOR
                             WORKERS

                                       Joseph F. Quinn
                                        Kevin E. Cahill
                                      Michael D. Giandrea

                                      Working Paper 25003
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25003


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2018




 This paper was prepared for the NBER conference, “Incentives and Limitations of Employment
 Policies on Retirement Transitions: Comparisons of Public and Private Sectors,” held in Jackson
 Hole, WY on August 9-11, 2018. All views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
 do not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics or the
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2018 by Joseph F. Quinn, Kevin E. Cahill, and Michael D. Giandrea. All rights reserved. Short
 sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
 provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Transitions From Career Employment Among Public- and Private-Sector Workers
Joseph F. Quinn, Kevin E. Cahill, and Michael D. Giandrea
NBER Working Paper No. 25003
September 2018
JEL No. H55,J14,J26,J32

                                           ABSTRACT

Do the retirement patterns of public-sector workers differ from those in the private sector? Most
private-sector workers today face a do-it-yourself retirement income landscape characterized by
an exposure to market forces through defined-contribution pension plans and private saving, and
the risk of financial insecurity later in life. Public-sector workers, in contrast, are typically
covered by defined-benefit pension plans that both encourage retirement at relatively young ages
and offer financial security at older ages. As a result, the consequences of private- and public-
sector workers’ retirement decisions could differ in important ways.

For workers generally, and for private-sector workers in particular, a focus among researchers
and policymakers has been the importance of continued work later in life for improving financial
security at older ages. Such concerns might be of less consequence for public-sector workers due
to the prevalence of defined-benefit pensions. Public-sector workers’ departures from the labor
force might also differ from those in the private sector, all else equal, because of the age-specific
incentives within their defined-benefit plans. Despite these important differences, the private-
public distinction has received relatively little attention in the retirement literature.

Our paper examines how private- and public-sector workers transition from career employment to
complete labor force withdrawal, with a focus on the role of bridge employment, phased
retirement, and re-entry. We identify the prevalence and determinants of each pathway to
retirement using longitudinal data on four cohorts of private- and public-sector career older
workers from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). Our findings suggest that the prevalence
of work after leaving career employment among public-sector workers resembles that of private-
sector workers, although with a higher prevalence of part-time bridge employment, a result that
has important implications for public policy as the pace of societal aging accelerates.


Joseph F. Quinn                                   Michael D. Giandrea
Boston College                                    Bureau of Labor Statistics
joseph.quinn@bc.edu                               Giandrea.Michael@bls.gov

Kevin E. Cahill
Boston College
cahillkc@bc.edu
1      Introduction

       Do the retirement patterns of public-sector workers in America differ from those in the

private sector? Many private-sector workers today face a do-it-yourself retirement income

landscape characterized by an exposure to market forces through defined-contribution pension

plans and private saving, and the risk of financial insecurity later in life. These conditions stem

from a variety of interactions among the general tide of societal aging, fundamental changes in

the traditional three pillars of retirement income, and changes in the macroeconomic

environment. The relative attractiveness of work and leisure later in life has been altered as a

result, predominantly in favor of additional work. Older Americans, long used to the need for

adaptability within a market-based system, have responded to this new retirement environment.

A nearly 100-year trend toward earlier and earlier retirement among American men came to a

halt in the mid-1980s and has since reversed, albeit at a slower pace in recent years. The labor

force participation rates of older American women have increased even more dramatically.

       Not only are older Americans working later in life, but they are also doing so in many

creative ways. Gradual retirement—including phased retirement (a significant reduction in hours

with one’s current employer), bridge employment (continued work with a different employer),

and labor market reentry (a return to the labor force after retirement)—is more common among

older career workers than the stereotypical one-time, permanent exit from the labor force. The

prevalence of each type of gradual retirement is well documented in the literature, with bridge

employment being the most common, followed by reentry (unretirement!) and phased retirement.

The reasons for the relatively high prevalence of bridge employment are many, including older

workers’ preferences for fewer hours and/or more flexibility, the financial incentives associated

with some private pensions, and, in some cases, inadequate financial resources. Involuntary


                                                 -1-
transitions from career employment are important as well, as many older workers face physical

limitations, layoffs, or other barriers to continued work on a career job. Some have no choice but

to seek work with another employer if they desire to stay in the labor force.

       The impact of continued work on later financial security can be profound, as each year of

additional work can both increase assets available for retirement and reduce the number of years

of leisure that need to be financed. Continued work is also one option that many older workers—

often those in good health and with employment skills still in demand—can control. By the time

they approach traditional retirement ages, individuals can do little to increase their Social

Security wealth, their expected pension income, or their savings. Nor are they likely to have any

impact on Social Security, Medicare or Medicaid reform, all of which might have major impacts

on their economic well-being, or on their employers’ decisions concerning pensions or post-

retirement health care plans. For many older individuals, the most realistic option for improving

one’s standard of living in retirement is to work more. Of course, another option is to reduce

consumption and one’s standard of living in retirement, but this option is not appealing to many.

       Much of the discussion about the importance of continued work later in life is of less

consequence for career public-sector employees. Public-sector employees are typically covered

by defined-benefit pension plans that both encourage retirement at relatively young ages and

offer financial security at older ages. We might therefore expect public-sector employees’

retirement dates to be earlier than those with defined-contribution plans, ceteris paribus, with the

timing of retirement influenced by the age-specific incentives in their defined-benefit plans.

       Despite the important differences between the incentives and circumstances faced by

public- and private-sector workers, this distinction has received relatively little attention in the

retirement literature. This paper aims to fill the gap by examining how public- and private-sector



                                                 -2-
workers transition from career employment to complete labor force withdrawal, with a focus on

the roles of bridge employment, phased retirement, and reentry. We use data on four cohorts of

older Americans from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a nationally-representative

longitudinal survey of older Americans. The first cohort, the HRS Core, was aged 51 to 61 at the

time of their first survey in 1992. Biennial surveys have since been conducted through 2016 and

new cohorts aged 51 to 56 at the time of their first survey have been added to the HRS every six

years—the War Babies in 1998, the Early Baby Boomers (“Early Boomers”) in 2004, the Mid

Baby Boomers (“Mid Boomers”) in 2010, and the Late Baby Boomers (“Late Boomers”) in

2016. The HRS currently contains data on about 38,000 older Americans over a nearly 25-year

period.

          We are interested in not only when older public-sector workers leave their career jobs but

also in how they do so (i.e., the nature of the transitions from career public-sector employment)

and in how the timing of the departure impacts what they do next. For example, do they leave the

labor force or move to another job—or both, in either order. To address these topics, we

construct individual work histories using the longitudinal HRS data. We focus on respondents

who were on a full-time career (FTC) job at the time of their first HRS interview, where an FTC

job is defined as one that consists of 1,600 or more hours per year (full-time) and 10 or more

years of tenure (career). We find that public-sector employees generally follow the same diverse
                          1




retirement paths that private-sector workers do, albeit with some important distinctions, such as a

higher prevalence of part-time bridge employment, and, among women, a higher prevalence of

phased retirement.

          The next section of the paper briefly summarizes the current literature on retirement

patterns and highlights some of the limited number of studies that have examined the retirement



                                                 -3-
patterns of public-sector workers. Section 3 describes our data and methods. Sections 4 and 5

describe the prevalence of bridge employment, phased retirement, and reentry, respectively,

among both public- and private-sector workers. Section 6 examines the determinants of gradual

retirement for public- and private-sector workers, with special attention paid to several key

similarities and differences between the two groups. Section 7 discusses the policy relevance of

our findings and Section 8 concludes.


2      Retirement Patterns

       Coile (2015) summarizes the recent literature on the economic correlates of retirement

and the effects of pensions on labor force behavior. The review does not differentiate between

public-sector and private-sector employees, but does describe important factors that differ across

sectors, such as pension and health benefit effects. Cahill, Giandrea, and Quinn (2013a, 2015a)

and Alcover et al. (2014) discuss the literature on bridge jobs and gradual retirement, and how

retirement transitions have evolved over time. This literature extends back to the late 1960s and

1970s, with this early research documenting that retirement is not a one-time, permanent event

for many older Americans (Quinn, Burkhauser, and Meyers, 1990). Since then, research by

Ruhm (1990, 1991), Mutchler et al. (1997), Quinn (1999, 2010), Cahill, Giandrea, and Quinn

(2006, 2011, 2015b), Giandrea, Cahill, and Quinn (2009), Maestas (2010), Wang and Shultz

(2010) and Wang et al. (2014) have confirmed these findings with more recent cohorts of older

Americans. Moreover, the bridge job literature has evolved considerably both within and across

disciplines, as described in Alcover et al. (2014) and a recent article by Cahill, Giandrea, and

Quinn (2018). The general takeaway of this body of literature is that retirement is a complex and

diverse process among older Americans, frequently entailing bridge job transitions, phased

retirement, and reentry, or some combination of the three.


                                                -4-
       Looking specifically at the differences between public- and private-sector employees,

Stone and Nouroz (2006) investigate the retirement transitions of older Canadian workers, using

the Canadian Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics to perform both bivariate and multivariate

analyses of retirement transitions. They find that the average retirement age for public-sector

employees has been about one to three years lower than that for private-sector employees since

the mid-1970s. But Stone and Nouroz also ask about the speed with which one exits the labor

force for retirement once the retirement process has begun and whether the speed differs by

sector of employment.

       Stone and Nouroz develop a description of both retirement and of the path towards

retirement using a sample of employed individuals aged 45 to 69 in 1996. The path towards

retirement includes steps that signal a diminished attachment to the labor force, such as leaving a

career job, moving to a different job, cutting back on hours worked, and receiving retirement-

related income. These individuals are then followed from 1998 through 2001 to observe whether

the transition ultimately ended up in retirement by the end of 2001, where retirement was defined

as complete labor force withdrawal coupled with receipt of retirement-related income for six

uninterrupted months. The authors then compare the retirement trajectories (the speed at which

individuals make their retirement transitions based on quarterly observations of the sample)

across public- and private-sector employees. They find that among employees who began their

transition in 1996 or 1997, private-sector employees were more likely than those from the public

sector to be retired by 2001. When they condition retirement on other factors, primarily age, the

authors find that this result was heavily dependent on those workers age 60 or older in 1996

(rather than the pooled observations of 45- to 69-year-olds). In fact, they find that retirement

transitions among those who began the transition in 1996 or 1997 are faster for public-sector



                                                -5-
employees relative to private-sector workers for those younger than 60 in 1996. The opposite

effect was found for those 60 or older, with public-sector employees having a longer (or slower)

transition to retirement than private-sector employees. So while average retirement age for

public-sector workers may be consistently lower than that for those in the private sector, the

process of transitioning to retirement differs across both sectors and age.

       One important determinant of the retirement transition is savings, particularly pension

savings. Chatterjee (2010) compares retirement savings of U.S. public- and private-sector

employees using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. He finds that public-sector

(U.S. government, in this paper) employees are about one third more likely than non-government

employees to be enrolled in defined-benefit (DB) pension plans and that among those who

participate in defined-contribution (DC) pension plans, public-sector employees make larger

contributions and have larger balances. The higher incidence of defined-benefit pension coverage

among government employees, coupled with the well-studied effects of those pensions on labor

force participation among older individuals, could help create differential employment and

bridge job activity across groups. The picture for defined-contribution plans is more ambiguous

though since lower participation rates among government workers can reduce labor force

participation, while at the same time, the higher defined-contribution plan balances among

government workers act as a wealth effect that can reduce employment.

       The state of Texas Pension Review Board compares retirement benefits across public-

and private-sector employees (Anumeha, Moore, and Rendon, 2013). They report a 50 percent

reduction over 3 decades in the percentage of private-sector employees who are covered by

defined-benefit retirement pension plans, among those with some type of pension plan (from 73

percent in 1975 to only 36 percent in 2005), while the reduction in defined-benefit pension



                                                -6-
coverage among public-sector employees was modest - from 98 percent to 92 percent. Over this

same time period, defined-contribution pension participation increases, particularly in the private

sector. The Board argues that these changes were strongly affected by both the Employee

Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), which required private-sector employers to

pre-fund defined-benefit pension plans, and, the passage of the Revenue Act of 1978, which

allowed tax-deferred contributions to employer sponsored defined-contribution pension plans.

Due in part to ERISA, defined-benefit pension plan regulations for private-sector employers

have become far more substantial, while states and localities are able to determine rules and

funding for their own public-sector employees. The resulting private sector switch from defined-

benefit to defined-contribution pension plans reduces pension costs and obligations among

employers and shifts financial risk from employers to employees.

       According to the Texas Board, funding of defined-benefit pension plans differs across

sectors as well. In the private sector, defined-benefit funding is typically the responsibility of the

employer alone, whereas the expense is typically shared among employee and employer in the

public sector. At the same time, many public-sector employees traditionally do not participate in

Social Security. The continued prevalence of defined-benefit pension plans in the public sector is

in part due to the legal responsibility of these public-sector employers to provide a retirement

benefit similar to that which is available through Social Security. The Board illustrates that the
                                                                    2




differences in pension regulations, participation, and benefits across sectors, in addition to

differences in compensation, have resulted in very different environments and different

incentives for public- and private-sector employees as they approach traditional retirement ages.

       The compensation and retirement benefits available to workers differ across public- and

private-sector employees. Bewerunge and Rosen (2013) describe the differences for those



                                                 -7-
individuals above age 50 using the 2004 and 2006 waves of the HRS. Controlling for employee

characteristics, they estimate that hourly remuneration (wages plus defined-contribution pension

payments) of federal workers is about one-third higher than for similar private-sector workers

and that the difference stems not from differences in hourly salary across sectors but from

pension differences. Compared with private-sector employees, controlling for demographic

characteristics and educational attainment, the differences in annuitized pension wealth range

from about $6,300 per year for local public employees to almost $8,800 per year for federal

public employees. These differences should be kept in mind when considering the retirement

process decisions of private and public-sector workers.

       Much of the apparent difference in the likelihood and timing of retirement transitions

among private and public-sector employees may be associated with differences in retirement

income sources. The decrease in defined-benefit pension plan prevalence among private-sector

employees and their relative stability among public-sector employees is a part of this. Likewise,

the growth of defined-contribution pension plans among private-sector employees and their lack

of age-specific incentives may play a role in explaining retirement differences.

       Butrica, Iams, Smith, and Toder (2009) note the decline in defined-benefit coverage in

the U.S. and simulate the effect of a continuation of this trend on retirement incomes. As part of

the simulation, they freeze all private-sector defined-benefit plans and one-third of public-sector

defined-benefit pension plans over the first five years of the simulation. In other words, there are

no additional benefit accruals in the frozen defined-benefit plans, but employers are assumed to

establish or increase contributions to their employees defined-contribution pension plans. The

authors ask how these changes would affect the incomes of individuals when they reach the age

of 67, when most will have exited the labor force. Using the Social Security Administration’s



                                                -8-
Modeling Income in the Near Term simulation model, Butrica et al. project that those who are

near retirement ages when the freezes are implemented would not see a very large reduction in

retirement income, while younger Baby Boomers would see a substantial reduction in defined-

benefit income because of low levels of tenure at the time of the pension freeze. If there is a

transition to defined-contribution plans for these individuals, the potential exists to increase

retirement holdings and offset part of the loss of expected defined-benefit pension wealth. This

issue, though, helps illustrate the differential effects faced by private- and public-sector

employees over the previous decades as the retirement income environments for both sectors

have diverged, with more prevalent defined-contribution participation in the private sector and

continued availability of defined-benefit plans, with their guaranteed monthly income streams

through old age, for the public sector.

       Another difference across sectors is the prevalence of retiree health insurance. Shoven

and Slavov (2014) report that most public-sector employers offer continued health insurance

coverage to retirees before they become eligible for Medicare benefits, while only about one-

quarter of large (200 or more employees) private-sector employers provide a similar benefit.

Using data from the HRS, Shoven and Slavov estimate the likelihood of retiring—defined as

ceasing full-time employment between the ages of 55 and 64 (before Medicare eligibility at age

65)—based on an individual’s economic and demographic characteristics and whether retiree

health insurance is available. The availability of retiree health insurance increases the likelihood

of retirement for both private- and public-sector workers, with larger effects for those age 60 to

64 than for those age 55 to 59. The effect is also larger for those in the public sector compared

with the private sector, but the differences are not statistically significant. Importantly, public-

sector workers are about twice as likely as private-sector workers to be offered retiree health



                                                 -9-
insurance, so the overall impact of retiree health insurance on retirement is more pronounced in

the public sector.

       Investigating the continuing differences in retirement income sources among workers,

Munnell, Haverstick, and Soto (2007) explain why defined-benefit pension plans continue to be

offered to public-sector employees. The determinants include higher levels of unionization, an

older and more risk-averse workforce, and a relative lack of regulatory burden for public-sector

employers. Another important factor is the difference in the typical longevity of the employers

across sectors. States and localities are perpetual in nature and are funded by tax revenues, while

private-sector firms depend on the demand for the good or service produced, so the risk of going

out of business and defaulting on a defined-benefit plan are much higher than in the public

sector. These factors have contributed to the differing retirement income environments faced by

public- and private-sector workers nearing retirement.


3      Data and Methods

       We use 13 biennial waves of data from the longitudinal HRS to explore retirement

transitions among public- and private-sector workers. These HRS data include information on

four cohorts of older workers. The first and oldest cohort, the HRS Core, was aged 51 to 61

when first interviewed in 1992 (n=12,652). Each subsequent cohort was aged 51 to 56 at the
                                            3




time of their first survey, with the cohorts added every six years after 1992. The War Babies

were added in 1998 (n=2,529), the Early Boomers in 2004 (n=3,330) and the Mid Boomers in

2010 (n=4,992). The follow-up periods for the cohorts so far range from 24 years among the

HRS Core (1992 to 2016) to six years among the Mid Boomers (2010 to 2016).

       Our analysis focuses on retirement transitions from career employment. For each HRS

cohort we identify respondents who, at the time of their first survey, were wage-and-salary


                                                - 10 -
workers on a FTC job, defined to be one that consisted of at least 10 years of tenure and 1,600 or

more hours per year. In prior research, we tested variations on this FTC definition, from 5 to 20

years of tenure and found that such changes did not alter our general conclusions about

retirement patterns (Cahill, Giandrea, and Quinn, 2006).

       We then disaggregate our FTC wage-and-salary respondents by sector. The HRS survey

asks whether the respondent had ever been employed by a unit of a state, county, or local

government or by the federal government. Respondents who responded affirmatively were then

asked about the dates of this government employment. We use this information to identify the

public- or private-sector status of the respondent’s job at the time of the first interview. For each

FTC respondent, we then examine the work history from this career job through complete labor

force withdrawal and beyond, to check for unretirements, or until the time of the last completed

survey for those who remain employed or who drop out of the HRS because of death or other

sample attrition.

       Our three categories of gradual retirement—bridge employment, phased retirement, and

reentry—are benchmarked by our definitions of both FTC employment and retirement.

Specifically, a bridge job is defined as any job with a new employer that takes place after the last

FTC employment. Phased retirement is defined as a 20 percent or more reduction in hours with

one’s career employer. Reentry is defined as a return to paid work following two survey waves

of non-work following an exit from FTC employment or from a bridge job (Figure 1).

       We first conduct a series of cross-sectional analyses of labor force status (i.e., still

working in career employment (with and without a reduction in hours of 20 percent or more (i.e.,

phased retirement)), transitioned to another job (full-time or part-time), or not working) for each

of the four cohorts in each survey year, and for public- and private-sector workers separately.



                                                - 11 -
This provides a first glimpse at possible differences in the retirement patterns by sector. We then

examine retirement transitions in a longitudinal context, and examine the prevalence of bridge

employment, phased retirement, and reentry for public- and private-sector workers. In doing so

we conduct three separate analyses to take into account the different follow-up periods that are

available for each of our four cohorts. First, we examine outcomes using all available data (i.e.,

ranging from 24 years among the HRS Core respondents to six years among the Mid Boomers).

We then conduct an analysis using all four cohorts and a uniform six-year follow-up period—the

length of follow up available for the youngest cohort, the Mid Boomers. Finally, we use the first

three cohorts only with a 12-year follow-up period—the length of follow up currently available

for the Early Boomers.

       Our analysis of the determinants of gradual retirement begins with a series of bivariate

comparisons, for public- and private-sector workers separately, using known determinants of

retirement and our outcomes of interest: the prevalence of bridge employment, phased

retirement, and post-retirement reentry. Time-varying attributes are measured as of the wave

prior to the respondent’s first transition from career employment.

       We then control for confounding factors by estimating a multinomial logistic regression

with a three-way outcome variable: (1) still on FTC job or last observed on an FTC job; (2)

moved to a bridge job; and (3) exited the labor force directly. The model is as follows:

               R∗"# = α + β* X" + β, X"#-* + β. Cohort " + β4 Public" + ε"        (1)

where i stands for individual and t stands for the wave in which the first transition from career

                     ∗
employment is made. 𝑅=> is a latent variable that determines the observed choice, 𝑅=> , which

denotes whether the individual moved to a bridge job or exited directly from the labor force by

time t. Time invariant and time varying characteristics are represented by 𝑋= and 𝑋=>-* ,


                                               - 12 -
respectively. These characteristics include demographic and economic traits known to be

significant determinants of the retirement process, such as age, health status, pension status,

spouse’s employment status, and wage rate. The specification shown in Model 1 includes

controls for HRS cohort and sector (private or public), and is estimated separately for men and

for women. As with the descriptive analysis, all time varying variables are measured as of the

wave prior to the transition from career employment. ε" is a white noise error term. Coefficients

are transformed into relative risk ratios (RRR) with those remaining in FTC employment as the

base category.

       Next we estimate a logistic regression model of part-time work in bridge employment,

conditional on having transitioned to a bridge job. The right-hand side variables in this model

resemble those in Model 1, with both time invariant and time-varying determinants of part-time

status, along with cohort controls and a dichotomous indicator for career public employee. The

dependent variable, H"#∗ , is a latent variable that determines the observed choice, H"# —a zero-one

indicator of whether the respondent is working part time (less than 1,600 hours per year) in

bridge employment. Time-varying factors are measured as of the wave prior to transition from

career employment and the model is estimated separately for men and women.

       We also estimate logistic regression models of phased retirement and reentry. For phased

retirement, the dependent variable is equal to one if the respondent reduced hours worked on the

career job by 20 percent or more, and zero otherwise. As with Model 1, the explanatory variables

are measured as of the latest survey in which the respondent was working full time on a career

job. For reentry, the dependent variable is equal to one if the respondent reentered the labor force

after having been out for at least two consecutive survey waves. For those who reentered, time-

varying demographic variables (health status of the respondent and spouse, marital status, work



                                                - 13 -
status of spouse, presence of a dependent child, census region), and non-job-related economic

variables (home ownership, wealth) are measured as of the wave prior to reentry. Like the bridge

employment and part-time employment models, the phased retirement and reentry models are

estimated for men and women separately, with the explanatory variables measured as of the

wave the respondent left paid work.


4      Results

       More than nine out of ten HRS Core men had work experience since age 49 and about

one half were working on a FTC job at the time of their first interview in 1992 (Table 1). Among

HRS Core women, nearly eight out of ten had work experience since age 49 and 38 percent were

on a FTC job at the time of their first interview. The percentages for work experience since age

49 were generally lower among the HRS War Babies, Early Boomers, and Mid Boomers, as

expected, given the different age range at the time of the first interview for these three cohorts.

The prevalence of FTC employment at the time of the first interview, however, was generally

similar across all four cohorts for both men and for women.   4




       Across all four HRS cohorts, about one quarter of career workers (20-25 percent of career

men and 21-30 percent of career women) held jobs in the public sector at the time of their first

interview (Table 1, bottom two rows)—a total 1,803 respondents, of which 926 were men (51%)

and 877 were women (49%). Nearly one half of these observations belonged to the HRS Core

sample, due to the larger sample size and the broader age range of interviewees.




                                                - 14 -
4.1    Cross-sectional Analysis of Labor Force Participation Among Public-

       and Private-Sector Older Workers

       A cross-sectional examination of labor force status shows that public- and private-sector

men differed only slightly with respect to their transitions from career employment six years (the

most we have for Mid Boomers) after the first interview (see the darker shading in tables 2a and

2b). The percentage of public-sector men who moved to another job, for example, was 25

percent among the HRS Core compared with 26 percent of private-sector workers. Among the

much younger Mid-Boomers, the difference was slightly larger (21 percent vs. 26 percent,

respectively). Twelve years beyond the first interview public-private sector differences were

generally similar (26 percent and 28 percent, respectively, among the War Babies, and 23

percent and 27 percent among the Early Boomers—see the lighter shading in Tables 2a and 2b).

       An important finding from this cross-sectional analysis that persists throughout our

analyses is the difference between public- and private-sector workers with respect to part-time

bridge employment. For those respondents who did move to another job, public-sector workers

were always much more likely than private-sector ones to be working part time in bridge

employment and twice as likely in three of the four male cohorts (e.g., 55% vs. 41% among the

HRS Core and 54% vs. 28% among the War Baby men). In contrast, the prevalence of phased

retirement generally remains below 10 percent in each year, with the notable exception of those

who remain in career employment at older ages, and by and large does not differ meaningfully

between public- and private-sector men.

       Among career women, in contrast, the percentage of public-sector workers transitioning

to another job six years following the first interview was always lower than that of private-sector

workers across all cohorts: 22 vs. 27 percent among the HRS Core, 26 vs. 31 percent among the



                                               - 15 -
War Babies, 17 vs. 31 percent among the Early Boomers, and 19 vs. 22 percent among the Mid

Boomers. These differences persisted twelve years following the first interview among the HRS

Core and the Early Boomers, but narrowed among the War Baby women. Similar to the men,

public-sector women who transitioned to another job were substantially more likely than private-

sector women to be working part time. The prevalence of phased retirement among public- and

private-sector women varies by cohort and by year, although a clear pattern does not emerge. As

we note below, a pattern does emerge in the longitudinal work, with public-sector women having

a higher prevalence of phased retirement compared with private-sector women.

       The takeaway from the cross-sectional analysis is that public-sector women and, to a

lesser extent, public-sector men had a lower prevalence of transitioning to another job following

career employment. When a transition was made, public-sector career workers were more likely

than their private-sector counterparts to be working part time in these positions. The next set of

analyses examine bridge job prevalence based on individual work histories using the longitudinal

nature of the HRS.


4.2    Longitudinal Analysis of Gradual Retirement Among Public- and

       Private-Sector Older Workers

       Roughly one half of the HRS respondents who left career employment moved to a bridge

job rather than out of the labor force (Tables 3a and 3b, column 7). This is consistent with

considerable literature on the tremendous importance of bridge job employment in the retirement

process (Alcover et al., 2014; Cahill, Giandrea, and Quinn, 2015b, 2018). As with the cross-

sectional findings above, bridge job prevalence among public-sector workers was generally

lower than that among private-sector workers, with the difference ranging from two to 17

percentage points. One exception was the War Baby men for whom bridge job prevalence was


                                               - 16 -
two percentage points higher among public-sector workers than private-sector ones (Table 3a).

Also consistent with the cross-sectional results, public- and private-sector workers differed

substantially with respect to the number of hours that they worked in bridge employment.

Among the HRS men, public-sector workers who transitioned to a bridge job were 18 to 36

percentage points more likely to be working part time than those in the private sector (27% vs.

45% among the Early Boomer men and 25% vs. 61% among the Mid-Boomer men). A similar

pattern existed for the HRS women, with the differences ranging from 12 to 24 percentage

points.

          Consistent with prior research on the prevalence of phased retirement (defined here as a

reduction in career job hours of 20 percent or more) and reentry (defined here as a return to the

labor force after being out for at least two HRS waves), we find that both of these forms of

gradual retirement are considerably less common than bridge employment among both public-

and private-sector workers. We also find that public-sector women and, to a lesser extent, men

are more likely than those in the private sector to have reduced hours in career employment later

in life. Among respondents who were on their FTC job in 2016 or who were last observed on

their FTC job, public-sector workers were generally about twice as likely as private-sector

workers to reduce hours by 20 percent or more. A similar relationship also holds among the

women, but not men, who left their career jobs. Small sample sizes limit the extent we can

evaluate reentry decisions among public-sector workers, but we do find that the percentage of

public-sector men reentering was 3 to 7 percentage points lower than that of private-sector men

(14% vs. 17% among HRS Core men and 8% vs. 15% among HRS War Baby men – Table 3A,

column 11), perhaps because of fewer negative pension surprises with DB plans. Differences in

reentry rates by sector were almost identical among the HRS Core and War Baby women.



                                                 - 17 -
Reentry rates were actually higher among public-sector women than private-sector ones, perhaps

an anomaly due to the relatively short follow-up period for this cohort and the lower rates of

reentry generally among women.

       A question remains as to whether the cohorts differ when the follow-up period is held

constant. To address this issue, we restrict the follow-up period first to six years for all cohorts

(Table 3b) and then to 12 years for the first three cohorts (Table 3c). Bridge job prevalence

ranges from 51 percent to 64 percent among those who transitioned from career employment

within six years of their first interview. This finding is consistent with the results in Table 3a,

combined with the notion that bridge job prevalence declines with age, as those who transition

from career employment within six years are generally younger than those who transition

afterwards. Bridge job prevalence remains lower among the public-sector career workers relative

to the private-sector ones by four to 12 percentage points for seven of the eight gender-cohort

groups. The one exception is the War Baby men for whom bridge job prevalence within six years

of the first interview is higher among public-sector men (66% among public-sector men vs. 59%

among private-sector men). Differences by sector in the part-time status of bridge employment

remain with the six-year follow-up period. Public-sector men were 26 to 39 percentage points

more likely than private-sector men to be working part time on their bridge job (58% vs. 32%

among public-and private-sector HRS Core respondents and 66% vs. 27% among the War

Babies). Like the full follow-up period analysis, differences in part-time status by sector among

women were lower than those among men, but still pronounced (between 15 and 23 percentage

points higher among public-sector women than their private-sector counterparts). Phased

retirement and reentry could not be examined with the six-year follow-up period because of the

limited timeframe.



                                                 - 18 -
       The patterns noted above regarding bridge job prevalence, the part-time status of bridge

jobs, and phased retirement are also seen when the follow-up period is expanded to 12 years

(Table 3c). The results for reentry, however, are mixed in this analysis. The prevalence of reentry

is lower among public-sector men compared with private-sector men for the War Baby and Early

Boomer cohorts, but not the HRS Core, and no clear pattern with respect to reentry is found

among the women across the three cohorts. This finding is likely a product of the 12-year follow-

up period, which limits the extent to which reentry decisions can be examined.

       To summarize the findings in Tables 3a-c, bridge job prevalence is modestly lower

among public-sector workers compared with private-sector ones. The most notable difference by

sector is with respect to hours worked in bridge employment. Phased retirement, while much less

common than bridge employment, plays a larger role in the gradual retirements of public-sector

workers than private ones, while reentry plays a smaller one.


4.3    Determinants of Gradual Retirement Among Public- and Private-Sector

       Older Workers

       The next step of the analysis focuses on the determinants of these retirement decisions.

First, do public workers’ subjective descriptions of their gradual retirement decisions differ from

those of private-sector workers? A higher percentage of public-sector men than private-sector

men who transition to bridge employment report “retired” as their reason for leaving their career

jobs (63% vs. 29% among HRS Core men and 57% vs. 22% among War Baby men) (Table 4a).

The same pattern is true among women (Table 4b), though the percentage differences are lower

(33% vs. 17% among HRS Core women and 36% vs. 9% among War Baby women). As might

be expected, public-sector career workers are much less likely than private-sector ones to report

“business closed” and “laid off” as their reason for leaving career employment for a bridge job


                                               - 19 -
(less than 6% among public-sector men and women and between 11% and 16% among private-

sector men and women). More generally, public-sector workers were more likely than private-

sector ones to report voluntary reasons only for leaving career employment (80% to 91% among

public-sector career workers compared with 58 to 72% among private-sector career workers). In     5




short, public- and private-sector workers do indeed differ with respect to their stated reasons for

leaving career employment.

       We next examine the extent to which public- and private-sector workers differ with

respect to known objective determinants of gradual retirement. Not surprisingly, bridge job

prevalence generally declines with age at transition from FTC job (although not always

monotonically), and generally increases with better self-reported health status and higher

educational attainment (Tables 5a-b for men; 5c-d for women). Bridge job prevalence is also

higher among those who are married compared with those who are not, and higher among the

married with a working spouse than the married without one. The prevalence of labor market

reentry also declines with age, increases with self-reported health status, and is higher among

those with a working spouse—all reasonable results. In contrast to bridge job activity, the

prevalence of reentry is higher among those with less formal education and those who are not

married, perhaps those less prepared to handle negative post-retirement shocks. Phased

retirement increases with higher rated self-reported health status and educational attainment but,

in contrast to both bridge employment and reentry, increases with age. One explanation for the

latter result is that older workers who remain in career employment might be more likely than

their younger counterparts to request phased retirement.

       Regarding differences by sector, public-sector workers were slightly older than private-

sector workers at the time of their transition from career employment. The percentage of public-



                                                - 20 -
sector men and women who transitioned from career employment prior to age 56 was,

respectively, 2 to 6 percentage points and 5 to 12 percentage points lower than private-sector

men and women. With the exception of the Early Boomer men, public-sector career workers

were also less likely than private-sector ones to report their health as fair or poor (between 4 and

8 percentage points among men, and between 2 and 10 percentage points among women).

Finally, public-sector workers were substantially more likely than private-sector workers to have

a college degree, with the difference ranging from 12 to 30 percentage points among men and

women.

       Interestingly, two of these three attributes—higher self-described health status and higher

educational attainment—might, at first glance, suggest a higher prevalence of bridge job activity

among public-sector workers compared with private-sector ones. One possible explanation is that

other determinants of bridge employment play an even larger role and, as we explain below,

economic factors are indeed important drivers of gradual retirement. Another hypothesis is that

bridge job prevalence might differ by sector within key health status and educational attainment

subgroups. For example, among the Core men, 28 percent of public-sector workers who reported

their health as fair or poor transitioned to a bridge job, compared with 38 percent of private-

sector men who did so. Among the Core women, however, the analogous percentages were 43

and 36 percent—the opposite direction compared to the men. Bridge job prevalence for public-

sector workers with a college degree is somewhat lower than that for private-sector workers with

a college degree. Clear patterns within specific subgroups do not appear to exist.

       Regarding phased retirement and reentry, the general patterns by age, health status,

educational attainment, and other demographic characteristics among public-sector workers

resemble those of private-sector ones.



                                                - 21 -
       Key differences by sector also emerge with respect to several job and economic

characteristics known to influence gradual retirement decisions. Public-sector career workers are

generally more likely than private-sector ones to be white collar and have health insurance that is

portable (i.e., after leaving career employment), a defined-benefit pension plan, higher wages,

and, to a lesser extent, higher levels of wealth (Tables 6a – 6d). Specifically, more than one half

of the public-sector career men and women were white collar compared to about one third of

those in the private sector. Access to health insurance that is portable—either employer-provided

retiree health insurance or health insurance not tied to career employment (i.e., private or through

a spouse’s health insurance)—has been declining over time and therefore declines across the

HRS cohorts. Across cohorts, however, differences between public- and private-sector workers

persist, with the percentage of public-sector workers with portable health insurance between

seven and 22 percentage points higher than that of private-sector workers. Access to a defined-

benefit pension plan is also declining over time and therefore across HRS cohorts and the

prevalence of DB plans is consistently higher among public-sector workers compared with

private-sector ones. The difference in prevalence ranges from 16 to 36 percentage points. Finally,

public-sector workers are considerably less likely (by 13 to 26 percentage points) to be earning a

wage of $15 per hour or less. These differences in job and economic characteristics would
                              6




suggest, broadly, a mixed effect on the prevalence of gradual retirement for public-sector

workers. The higher prevalence of white-collar workers, higher wages, and portable health

insurance among public-sector workers suggests a higher prevalence of bridge job activity

among public-sector workers, while access to a defined-benefit plan suggests a lower one.

       As with the demographic characteristics, bridge job prevalence does not appear to differ

by sector within specific economic categories (e.g., defined-benefit pension status), with one



                                                - 22 -
exception. Bridge job activity among the Early Boomer women in the public sector is

substantially higher than that in the private sector within occupational, health insurance, pension,

and wage subgroups. This result is consistent with prior literature that suggests differences by

gender have emerged in the retirement patterns of the Early Boomers (Cahill, Giandrea, and

Quinn, 2013b).

       An examination of phased retirement and reentry within economic subgroups is limited

by the relatively small sample sizes in important subgroups (e.g., public-sector workers with no

health insurance). For subgroups where comparisons can be made, public- and private-sector

men do not appear to differ systematically with respect to the prevalence of phased retirement

and reentry within economic characteristic subgroups. Among women, however, phased

retirement is notably higher for public-sector women than private-sector ones for those with

white-collar, highly-skilled jobs (18-21% vs. 7-11%, respectively, across cohorts), portable

health insurance (13%-19% vs. 7-8%, respectively, across cohorts), defined-benefit pensions

(11-20% vs. 5-8%, respectively, across cohorts), defined-contribution pensions (10-41% vs. 4-

11%, respectively, across cohorts), and higher wages ($25-$49 per hour) (23-32% vs. 7-12%,

respectively, across cohorts). These differences by sector among women pertain only to phased

retirement as similar patterns are not seen with respect to reentry.

       Prior to examining retirement determinants in a multivariate context in the next section,

we note that the outcomes of gradual retirement could also differ by public- and private-sector

status. To gain some initial insights on this topic, we compare wages in career employment with

wages in bridge employment for those who made such a transition. Interestingly, the cross-

cohort differences are most noteworthy (Table 7). Both public- and private-sector HRS Core men

and women experienced a general decline in their wages when transitioning to bridge



                                                - 23 -
employment. For example, among public-sector men who transitioned to a bridge job, one fifth

had wages below $15 per hour (inflation adjusted) on their career job whereas about 40 percent

did so on their bridge job. Among private-sector men who transitioned to a bridge job, 37 percent

had wages below $15 per hour whereas more than one half (54%) did on their bridge job. These

declines are not seen among the Early Boomers and Mid-Boomers, suggesting that those who

move to bridge employment at younger ages generally do not experience wage declines. A more

detailed analysis of wage differences between career and bridge employment seems warranted in

future research.


4.4    Multivariate Analysis of Gradual Retirement Among Public- and

       Private-Sector Older Workers

       The differences in the important demographic and economic characteristics by sector,

with some suggesting a higher prevalence of gradual retirement among pubic-sector workers

(e.g., more likely to be college educated and white-collar) and others suggesting a lower

prevalence (e.g., older at transition and more likely to have a defined-benefit pension), suggest a

multivariate approach that takes many characteristics into account. Controlling for the

demographic and economic characteristics described above using the multinomial logistic

regression model specified in Equation 1, pooling age-eligible respondents from each cohort, and

estimating separate equations for men and women, we find that public-sector workers’

transitions from career employment are not statistically different from those of private-sector

workers (Table 8). Importantly, many of the characteristics that distinguish public-sector
                   7




workers from private-sector ones, such as age at the time of transition, self-reported health status,

and levels of educational attainment are statistically significant determinants of bridge

employment in the multivariate model. Other known predictors of bridge employment, such as


                                                - 24 -
occupation, pension status, and health insurance status, are also significant predictors of bridge

employment, albeit only for certain subcategories, and with differences by gender. For example,

the presence of a defined-benefit plan lowers the probability of bridge employment among

women relative to those without a pension (RRR=0.570; p-value=0.000). The direction of the

impact is the same for men, but the difference is not statistically significant. Similarly, men in

non-highly skilled blue-collar occupations are more likely to exit the labor force directly from

career employment than highly-skilled white-collar workers (RRR=1.362; p-value=0.043), a

finding that is not statistically significant for women.

       The descriptive analysis above revealed that public- and private-sector workers differed

with respect to the number of hours worked in bridge employment, with part-time bridge

employment much more prevalent among public-sector workers than private-sector ones. This

result is confirmed in the multivariate analysis (Table 9). Public-sector men are well more than

twice as likely as private-sector men to be working part-time in bridge employment (OR=2.643;

p-value=0.000) and public-sector women are nearly twice as likely as private-sector women to be

working part-time in bridge employment (OR=1.855; p=0.002). Age at the time of transition, not

surprisingly, is a strong determinant of part-time bridge employment, but the majority of

demographic and economic characteristics included in the model, measured at the time of

transition, are not significant predictors of part-time bridge employment. This result suggests that

the determinants of working part-time in bridge employment differ from those that influence the

choice of gradual retirement compared with direct exit.

       Another area where public- and private-sector workers differed in the descriptive analysis

is with respect to phased retirement. These differences hold in a multivariate context for women

only. All else equal, career public-sector women are significantly more likely than those in the



                                                 - 25 -
private-sector to lower the number of hours worked in career employment by 20 percent or more

(OR=1.733; p-value=0.001) (Table 10). As with the bridge job models, age at the time of

transition, health status, and educational attainment, are significant determinants of both phased

retirement and reentry. The fact that public-sector status is a statistically significant predictor of

phased retirement among women, but not men, is noteworthy. Assuming that demand-side

barriers to reducing hours in public-sector career employment do not differ by gender, this

finding suggests that supply-side factors could be driving the result, and the extent to which such

factors are voluntary (i.e., desire for more leisure time) or involuntary (i.e., elder care

responsibilities) for women warrants further exploration in future research.


5         Policy Relevance

          The retirement patterns of career public-sector workers are diverse, just as they are in the

private sector. Approximately one half of full-time career public-sector workers transition to a

bridge job prior to exiting the labor force, which is only slightly lower than their private-sector

counterparts. Career public-sector workers also resemble career private-sector workers with

respect to reentering the labor force after an initial departure. Of the three components of gradual

retirement, phased retirement is the one in which public- and private-sector career workers

appear to differ. In particular, among women, the prevalence of phased retirement is higher

among career public-sector workers compared with private-sector ones though, importantly, the

overall prevalence of phased retirement among both groups is low relative to that of bridge

employment. The prevalence of phased retirement among men does not differ significantly by

sector.

          Where public- and private-sector workers differ most is with respect to the hours worked

upon leaving career employment, with part-time bridge employment being more common among


                                                  - 26 -
public-sector workers than private-sector ones. This finding has important policy implications.

Public-sector workers, on average, have characteristics that would suggest a higher degree of

financial security in retirement, not only with respect to the availability of a defined-benefit

pension, but also with respect to their self-reported health status, educational attainment, wages,

and wealth. These characteristics, in combination with public-sector workers’ subjective

responses about why they left career employment, presented in Tables 4a and 4b, suggest that the

gradual retirement decisions of public-sector workers are largely voluntary. Public-sector

workers appear to remain in the labor force on a part-time basis because they want to not because

they have to financially.

       Public sector workers’ preferences for gradual retirement highlight a potential

opportunity for public employers, as policies that facilitate phased retirements can help stave off

abrupt retirements and the disruptions in workflow they might cause, especially in this era of

rapid societal aging. The key to capitalizing on this opportunity is to properly incentivize

continued employment in the public sector. For some public workers such incentives will not

matter, as bridge employment provides an opportunity to try a new line of work. For others,

however, the choice between continued work in the public sector and part-time bridge

employment elsewhere could be marginal, and the right incentives could shift the decision in

favor of continued public-sector employment.

       In 2014, the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) offered a formal phased retirement

option to some federal workers, which is an important development in this regard (U.S. Office of

Personnel Management, 2018). A key feature of this policy is that federal workers who qualify
                                8




can receive a prorated pension while scaling back their hours (prorated based on the number of

hours they are not working). Perhaps more importantly, the size of workers’ pension benefits,



                                                - 27 -
when they do retire completely, are not negatively impacted by reducing their hours later in life,

as would be the case with some final-average-salary formulas. Employees also continue to

receive service credits (adjusted for hours) while working. 9




       More broadly, the benefit formulas and early retirement incentives within defined-benefit

plans present challenges for phased retirement options, and highlight a key tradeoff particularly

relevant to the current retirement income landscape. On one side, the financial security that DB

plans provide to public employees is a strong positive attribute. DB plans also help public

employers to attract new workers through deferred compensation, and also to retire older

workers through early retirement incentives. The latter feature is now limiting the gradual

retirement options of some older workers, however, thus prompting the need for policies such as

OPM’s formal phased retirement policy. How this barrier to phased retirement compares with the

net benefits of DB plans (e.g., net of the financial burden that such plans have imposed on local

and state governments) could inform policy decisions about the attractiveness of DB plans in the

public sector going forward.

       Another important consideration is the balance between attributes of public- and private-

sector employment generally. The relative job stability, generous defined-benefit plans, and

regular work hours in the public-sector are features that can counterbalance higher salaries in the

private sector. As such, the well-documented shift toward DC plans away from DB plans in the

private sector may have also shifted the relative attractiveness of public-sector employment.

       One aspect of this shift is that private-sector workers now bear investment risk in saving

for retirement and they are responsible for determining how to withdraw the money from their

retirement accounts so that they do not outlive their assets. One way to address the latter issue is

for workers to purchase immediate annuities. Retirees currently have the option to purchase



                                                - 28 -
immediate annuities, but relatively few do so (Brown, 2007). Research has also shown that DC

plan participation increases when participation is the default and employees must opt-out if they

do not want to participate (Beshears, Choi, Laibson, and Madrian, 2010; Butrica and

Karamcheva, 2015). It is possible that a similar opt-out provision for immediate annuities could

have a similar effect on the number of retirees that choose to annuitize all or part of their

retirement account.

       Whether this type of arrangement is feasible will depend on the ability of companies to

minimize the fees for setting up the annuity and to ensure that the insurance companies

managing the annuity payments are financially secure. It would also be necessary to determine

the fraction of the retirement account that is annuitized and whether the annuity payments are

tied to inflation. Early research on opt-out DC plans was conducted by getting a few companies

to change the default (Holden and VanDerhei, 2005). Employees could easily reverse this

decision at any time, but it is more complicated to get out of an annuity after payments have

started. All this being said, it is worth noting that almost all workers will receive Social Security,

which provides risk-free fully-indexed annuity payments.

       Many older Americans face financial challenges later in life, especially those without a

defined-benefit employer pension. One option for reducing financial insecurity later in life, for

those physically able to do so and with demand for their skills, is continued work (Munnell and

Sass, 2008; Quinn and Cahill, 2016, 2018). Should a DB-to-DC shift take place in the public
                                             10




sector, the retirement patterns of today’s public-sector workers suggest that continued work later

in life could help secure their financial well-being after retirement.

       Another policy-relevant topic is the role of public-sector employment as a bridge job.

This paper focuses on the retirement transitions of career public-sector workers. Transitions from



                                                  - 29 -
career private-sector employment into public-sector employment might also be worth some

attention, especially in the context of so-called encore jobs—those that serve a social purpose in

addition to financial compensation. Such arrangements might benefit both career private-sector

workers as well as public employers, as they tap into a highly experienced workforce. Some

policies may help facilitate these arrangements. One option is to help reduce barriers to hiring

older workers in the public-sector, perhaps by streamlining the hiring and training process for

more experienced applicants, or by offering part-time positions with a set tenure commitment.

Such a structure could be appealing to older career private-sector workers looking for

meaningful work that contributes to the broader community.


6      Conclusion

       This paper explores work after departure from career employment in the public and

private sectors, with a focus on the roles of bridge jobs, phased retirement, and reentry. We find

that the diverse retirement patterns that have been well documented in the private-sector

literature apply also to career public-sector workers. Bridge employment is most common, with

about one half of workers transitioning to a bridge job following career employment, followed

by labor market reentry and phased retirement, which have prevalence rates in the single to low

double digits. Differences by sector exist with respect to hours worked in bridge employment,

with public-sector career workers being more likely than private-sector ones to work part time.

Among women, public-sector career workers are also more likely than those in the private sector

to experience phased retirement—defined in this paper as a reduction in career job hours by 20

percent or more.

       From a policy standpoint, what is most notable about the gradual retirements of public-

sector career workers is that they are so similar to those in the private sector. To our surprise,


                                                - 30 -
public-sector workers are not more likely than private-sector workers to choose one-time,

permanent exits from the labor force (“traditional” retirements). Instead, workers in both sectors

exhibit remarkable flexibility when it comes to continued work later in life. This flexibility is a

bright spot among the many challenges our society is confronting as the population continues to

age rapidly over the next ten years. The diverse retirement patterns of public- and private-sector

workers expand options for continued work later in life among older Americans, helping to

strengthen families’ financial well-being, employers’ needs for a talented and experienced

workforce, and society’s goals for the production of more goods and services to support our

aging population.




                                                - 31 -
                                          References

Alcover, C., Topa, G., Parry, E., Fraccaroli, F., & Depolo, M. (Eds.). (2014). Bridge

   employment: A research handbook. New York, NY: Routlege.

Anumeha, N. B., Moore, D., & Rendon, A. (2013). Retirement benefits in the public and private

   sectors – a comparison of trends, regulatory environments, and related issues. Research Paper

   No. 13-002. Austin, TX: State of Texas Pension Review Board.

Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2010). The impact of employer matching

   on savings plan participation under automatic enrollment. Research Findings in the

   Economics of Aging, edited by Wise, D. A. pp. 311-328, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago

   Press.

Bewerunge, P., & Rosen, H. S. (2013). Wages, pensions, and public-private sector compensation

   differentials for older workers. NBER Working Paper No. 19454. Cambridge, MA: National

   Bureau of Economic Research.

Brown, J. R. (2007). Rational and behavioral perspectives on the role of annuities in retirement

   planning. NBER Working Paper No. 13537. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic

   Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w13537.pdf

Butrica, B. A., Barbara A., Iams, H. M., Smith, K. E., & Toder, E. J. (2009). The disappearing

   defined-benefit pension and its potential impact on the retirement incomes of baby boomers.

   Social Security Bulletin, 69(3), pp 1–27.

Butrica, B. A., & Karamcheva, N. S. (2015). The relationship between automatic enrollment and

   DC plan contributions: Evidence from a national survey of older workers. CRR Working

   Paper #WP 2015-04. Chestnut Hill, MA: Center for Retirement Research at Boston College.

   http://crr.bc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/wp_2015-14.pdf


                                               - 32 -
Cahill, K. E., Giandrea, M. D., & Quinn, J. F. (2006). Retirement patterns from career

   employment, The Gerontologist, 46(4), 514–523.

Cahill, K. E., Giandrea, M. D., & Quinn, J. F. (2011). Reentering the labor force after retirement.

   Monthly Labor Review, 134(6), 34–42 (June).

Cahill, K. E., Giandrea, M. D., & Quinn, J. F. (2013a). Bridge employment. In M. Wang (Ed.),

   The Oxford Handbook of Retirement. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Cahill, K. E., Giandrea, M. D., & Quinn, J. F. (2013b). Are gender differences emerging in the

   retirement patterns of the early boomers? U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Working Paper,

   468: Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor.

Cahill, K. E., Giandrea, M. D., & Quinn, J. F. (2015a). Evolving patterns of work and retirement.

   In L. George & K. Ferraro (Eds.), The Handbook of Aging and the Social Sciences (8th

   Edition). New York, NY: Elsevier.

Cahill, K. E., Giandrea, M. D., & Quinn, J. F. (2015b). Retirement patterns and the

   macroeconomy, 1992 – 2010: The prevalence and determinants of bridge jobs, phased

   retirement, and re-entry among three recent cohorts of older Americans. The Gerontologist,

   55(3), 384–403; doi: 10.1093/geront/gnt146.

Cahill, K. E., Giandrea, M. D., & Quinn, J. F. (2018). Is bridge job activity overstated? Work,

   Aging and Retirement, doi.org/10.1093/workar/way006.

Chatterjee, S. (2010). Retirement savings of private and public-sector employees: A comparative

   study. The Journal of Applied Business Research, 26(6), 95–102.

Chief Human Capital Officers Council. (2018). Employment as a phased retiree. Washington,

   D.C.: U.S. Office of Personel Management. https://chcoc.gov/sites/default/files/Employment-

   as-a-Phased-Retiree-Q-and-A.pdf



                                               - 33 -
Clark, R. & Morrill, M. S. (2016). Extending work life: Employer interests and concerns.

   Kalamazoo, MI: W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Coile, C. C. (2015). Economic determinants of workers’ retirement decisions. Journal of

   Economic Surveys, 29, 830–853. doi:10.1111/joes.12115.

Giandrea, M. D., Cahill, K. E., & Quinn, J. F. (2009). Bridge jobs: A comparison across cohorts,

   Research on Aging, 31(5), 549–576.

Holden, S., & VanDerhei, J. (2005). The influence of automatic enrollment, catch-up, and IRA

   contributions on 401(k) accumulations at retirement. EBRI Issue Brief No. 283. Washington,

   DC: Employee Benefit Research Institute.

   https://www.ebri.org/publications/ib/index.cfm?fa=ibDisp&content_id=3565

Karp, F. (ed.) (2007). Growing older in America: The Health and Retirement Study, U.S.

   Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing

   Office.

Maestas, N. (2010). Back to work: Expectations and realizations of work after retirement.

   Journal of Human Resources, 45(3), 719–748.

Munnell, A. H., Haverstick, K., & Soto, M. (2007). Why have defined-benefit plans survived in

   the public sector? Chestnut Hill, MA: Center for Retirement Research at Boston College.

Munnell, A. H., & Sass, S. A. (2008). Working longer: The solution to the retirement income

   challenge. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Mutchler, J. E., Burr, J. A., Pienta, A. M., & Massagli, M. P. (1997). Pathways to labor force

   exit: Work transitions and work instability, Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 52B(1),

   s4–s12.




                                               - 34 -
Quinn, J. F. (1999). Retirement patterns and bridge jobs in the 1990s. EBRI Issue Brief, no. 206,

   1–23.

Quinn, J. F. (2010). Work and retirement: How and when older Americans leave the labor

   force.” Generations, 34(3), 45–55.

Quinn, J. F., & Cahill, K. E. (2016). The new world of retirement income security in America.

   American Psychologist, 71(4), 321–333.

Quinn, J. F., & Cahill, K. E. (2018). Challenges and opportunities of living and working longer.

   In R. Clark, R. Maurer, and O. S. Mitchell (Eds.), How Persistent Low Returns Will Shape

   Saving and Retirement. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Quinn, J. F., Richard V. Burhauser, and Daniel A. Myers. (1990). Passing the torch: The

   influence of economic incentives on work and retirement. Kalamazoo, MI: W. E. Upjohn

   Institute for Employment Research.

Ruhm, C. J. (1990). Bridge jobs and partial retirement, Journal of Labor Economics, 8(4), 482–

   501.

Ruhm, C. J. (1991). Career employment. Industrial Relations, 30, 193–208.

Shoven, J. B. and Slavov, S. N. (2014). The role of retiree health insurance in the early

   retirement of public sector employees. Journal of Health Economics, 38, 99-108.

Stone, L. O., Nouroz, H., & Randawa, H. (2006). Patterns of work-to-retirement transition

   among Canadian public-sector employees, in New Frontiers of Research on Retirement,

   Leroy O. Stone (ed.), Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 75-511-XIE, 291–320.

Survey Research Center (2017). The Health and Retirement Study: Aging in the 21 Century,
                                                                                     st




   challenges and opportunities for Americans. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research at




                                               - 35 -
   the University of Michigan. http://hrsparticipants.isr.umich.edu/sitedocs/databook/inc/pdf/

   HRS-Aging-in-the-21St-Century.pdf

U.S. Office of Personnel Management. (2018). Phased retirement. Washington, D.C.: U.S.

   Office of Personel Management. https://www.opm.gov/retirement-services/phased-

   retirement/

Wang, M., & Shultz, K. S. (2010). Employee retirement: A review and recommendations for

   future investigation, Journal of Managment, 36, 172–206.

Wang, M, Penn, L. T., Bertone, A., & Stefanova, S. (2014). Bridge employment in the United

   States. In Alcover, C., Topa, G., Parry, E., Fraccaroli, F., & Depolo, M. (Eds.), Bridge

   employment: A research handbook. New York, NY: Routlege.




                                              - 36 -
                                             Endnotes

1
    We have experimented with alternatives to requiring 10 years for career status and 1,600 hours

per year for full-time status. Reasonable changes to the definition of a career job do not

substantially change any of our conclusions.


2
    Anumeha, Moore, and Rendon (2013) note that Social Security retirement coverage was not

available to public-sector workers until 1951. Between 1951 and 1991 public-sector employers

had the option to participate in Social Security. In 1991 the federal government required state

and local public-sector employers not covered by Social Security to offer either a defined-benefit

pension plan with benefits comparable to Social Security retirement benefits, or a defined-

contribution retirement plan in which at least 7.5 percent of an employee’s compensation is

allocated to retirement savings. See https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2014-title26-

vol15/xml/CFR-2014-title26-vol15-sec31-3121b7-2.xml.


3
    The HRS includes cohorts older than the HRS Core respondents. The Asset and Health

Dynamics of the Oldest Old (AHEAD) dataset was a survey of Americans born prior to 1924.

The survey began in 1993 and was folded into the HRS in 1998 (Karp, 2007; Survey Research

Center, 2017).


4
    One exception is the War Baby men who, in 1998, had a higher prevalence of FTC employment

at the time of the first interview than men in the other cohorts (68% compared with 52 to 56%;

among women, the percentages ranged from 38% to 40%).


5
    One exception is War Baby women in the public sector for whom 48 percent reported voluntary

reasons only for leaving their career job and exiting directly.


                                                 - 37 -
6
     Wages are measured in 2012 dollars.


7
     Age-eligible HRS Core respondents were aged 51 to 61 at the time of the first interview. Age-

eligible respondents for the War Babies, Early Boomers, and Mid Boomers were aged 51 to 56 at

the time of the first interview.


8
     The OPM website describes the policy as follows: “Phased Retirement is a human resources

tool that allows full-time employees to work part-time schedules while beginning to draw

retirement benefits. This new tool will allow managers to better provide unique mentoring

opportunities for employees while increasing access to the decades of institutional knowledge

and experience that retirees can provide […] This is yet another forward thinking policy that

allows the Administration to continue its efforts to deliver a Government that is effective,

efficient, and supportive of economic growth” (U.S. Office of Personnel Management, 2018).


9
     Specifically, the OPM policy states: “Employees participating in phased retirement will be paid

for the part-time service they continue to provide the government and will receive additional

credit for that service toward their full retirement. These employees will also begin receiving

partial annuity payments, prorated based on the portion of the workweek that they are not

scheduled to work” (Chief Human Capital Officers Council, 2018).


10
     See Clark and Morrill (2016) for a discussion of the employer side of continued work later in

life.




                                                  - 38 -
Figure 1: A Model of the Various Paths to Retirement


Hours of
 Work                                        Phased Retirement
                                             (on the career job)



                                                                        Bridge Job
                                                                        (a new job)

                                                                                                                         Reentry




             t0                         t1                         t2                        t3                         t4        t5
                     Period 1                    Period 2                 Period 3                   Period 4            Period 5                   Period 6
                  Full-time Career                                                                                                     Complete Labor Force Withdrawal
                   Employment                                                                                                                   ("Retirement")
                                                                                         Time

Note: The arrows indicate direction only. Vertical arrows denote that an individual's choice of hours can be higher or lower than the level specified by the upper end of the
bar. Horizontal arrows denote that an individual's choice of when to begin or end a period of employment can differ from the designated time cutoffs.

Source: Cahill, Giandrea, and Quinn (2015b).
                                                                                                    Table 1

                                                                                              Sample Size
                                                                                 by Gender, HRS Cohort, and Work Status

                                                                                   Men                                                            Women

                                              HRS Core            War Babies           Early Boomers     Mid Boomers      HRS Core   War Babies       Early Boomers   Mid Boomers

Year of first interview                         1992                1998                   2004                2010        1992        1998                2004          2010
Respondent's age at first interview            51 to 61            51 to 56               51 to 56            51 to 56    51 to 61    51 to 56            51 to 56      51 to 56

Participated in first wave
         n                                       5,869               1,198                 1,529               2,275        6,783       1,331              1,801         2,716

Worked since age 50
        n                                        5,359                     987             1,096               1,794        5,320         805              1,094         1,881
        % of respondents                          91%                     82%               72%                 79%          78%         60%                61%           69%

On FTC job in first interview
       n                                         3,061                     811                858              1,175        2,569         529                 691        1,085
       % of respondents                           52%                     68%                56%                52%          38%         40%                 38%          40%


Age-eligible respondents only
         n                                       2,649                     717                795              1,000        1,791         451                 604           847
         % of respondents                         45%                     60%                52%                44%          26%         34%                 34%           31%

Wage-and-salary workers only
       n                                         2,089                     586                655                 862       1,616         406                 559           795
       % of respondents                           36%                     49%                43%                 38%         24%         31%                 31%           29%


         Private sector                          1,635                     462                518                 651       1,217         321                 406           555
                                                  78%                     79%                79%                 76%         75%         79%                 73%           70%

         Public sector                             454                     124                137                 211         399          85                 153           240
                                                  22%                     21%                21%                 24%         25%         21%                 27%           30%


Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                               Table 2a

                                                                Labor Force Status, by Survey Participation and Year
                                                                     Sample: HRS Men on a FTC Job as of the First Interview

                                                                                         Public Sector Workers
                                                                                                                                        % Reduced FTC
                                                                            Full-time                               Not in      Don't    job hours by   % PT on "other"
      Year                        Age                     n                 career job           Other job        labor force   know    20% or more a        job
HRS Core
     1992                       51   - 61                454                 100%                   0%               0%          0%           0%              -----
     1994                       53   - 63                421                  78%                   6%              15%          1%           3%             76%
     1996                       55   - 65                400                  60%                  15%              24%          1%         11%              62%
     1998                       57   - 67                377                  38%                  25%              36%          1%           6%             55%
     2000                       59   - 69                357                  24%                  29%              46%          1%           6%             60%
     2002                       61   - 71                346                  14%                  29%              56%          0%           8%             60%
     2004                       63   - 73                329                   9%                  29%              62%          0%           4%             73%
     2006                       65   - 75                291                   5%                  29%              66%          0%          -----           85%
     2008                       67   - 77                286                   5%                  25%              70%          0%          -----           78%
     2010                       69   - 79                269                   7%                  17%              76%          0%          -----           91%
     2012                       71   - 81                249                   4%                  14%              81%          0%          -----           94%
     2014                       73   - 83                212                   3%                  10%              86%          0%          -----           86%
     2016                       75   - 85                174                   3%                  10%              86%          1%          -----           94%

War Babies
      1998                      51   - 56                124                 100%                   0%               0%          0%           0%              -----
      2000                      53   - 58                116                  91%                   8%               2%          0%           7%             44%
      2002                      55   - 60                114                  71%                  18%              11%          1%           9%             30%
      2004                      57   - 62                111                  50%                  32%              18%          0%           7%             54%
      2006                      59   - 64                101                  41%                  34%              26%          0%           7%             71%
      2008                      61   - 66                102                  32%                  31%              36%          0%         15%              78%
      2010                      63   - 68                 98                  26%                  26%              49%          0%          -----           84%
      2012                      65   - 70                 97                  23%                  24%              54%          0%          -----           83%
      2014                      67   - 72                 90                  13%                  24%              62%          0%          -----           91%
      2016                      69   - 74                 82                   5%                  22%              73%          0%          -----          100%

Early Boomers
       2004                     51   - 56                137                 100%                   0%               0%          0%           0%              -----
       2006                     53   - 58                121                  78%                  15%               5%          2%           6%             67%
       2008                     55   - 60                123                  70%                  20%              10%          0%           8%             56%
       2010                     57   - 62                118                  54%                  25%              20%          0%         20%              50%
       2012                     59   - 64                110                  36%                  22%              42%          0%         30%              54%
       2014                     61   - 66                107                  26%                  19%              55%          0%          -----           74%
       2016                     63   - 68                 84                  12%                  23%              63%          2%          -----           63%

Mid Boomers
      2010                      51   - 56                211                 100%                   0%               0%          0%          0%               -----
      2012                      53   - 58                201                  90%                   5%               5%          0%          6%              50%
      2014                      55   - 60                187                  80%                  10%              10%          0%          9%              39%
      2016                      57   - 62                159                  62%                  21%              11%          6%          7%              55%



                                                                                         Private Sector Workers
                                                                                                                                        % Reduced FTC
                                                                            Full-time                               Not in      Don't    job hours by   % PT on "other"
      Year                        Age                     n                 career job           Other job        labor force   know    20% or more a        job
HRS Core
     1992                       51   - 61               1,635                100%                   0%               0%          0%           0%              -----
     1994                       53   - 63               1,503                 78%                   9%              13%          0%           4%             33%
     1996                       55   - 65               1,410                 58%                  16%              25%          1%           9%             32%
     1998                       57   - 67               1,353                 37%                  26%              36%          1%           9%             41%
     2000                       59   - 69               1,271                 24%                  32%              43%          1%         11%              39%
     2002                       61   - 71               1,233                 15%                  30%              55%          0%         13%              46%
     2004                       63   - 73               1,181                 12%                  27%              60%          0%         18%              63%
     2006                       65   - 75               1,133                  8%                  25%              67%          0%         21%              65%
     2008                       67   - 77               1,071                  6%                  24%              70%          0%         25%              71%
     2010                       69   - 79                995                   4%                  18%              78%          0%         44%              75%
     2012                       71   - 81                918                   4%                  15%              82%          0%         45%              75%
     2014                       73   - 83                821                   2%                  13%              84%          0%          -----           80%
     2016                       75   - 85                708                   1%                  11%              88%          0%          -----           93%

War Babies
      1998                      51   - 56                462                 100%                   0%               0%          0%           0%              -----
      2000                      53   - 58                424                  80%                  12%               6%          1%           5%             17%
      2002                      55   - 60                417                  61%                  22%              16%          1%           7%             23%
      2004                      57   - 62                404                  52%                  28%              20%          0%         10%              28%
      2006                      59   - 64                389                  33%                  37%              30%          1%           9%             31%
      2008                      61   - 66                379                  28%                  34%              37%          0%         12%              44%
      2010                      63   - 68                363                  18%                  28%              55%          0%         23%              56%
      2012                      65   - 70                348                  13%                  25%              61%          0%         33%              60%
      2014                      67   - 72                319                   9%                  21%              70%          0%          -----           76%
      2016                      69   - 74                291                   3%                  20%              74%          2%          -----           84%

Early Boomers
       2004                     51   - 56                518                 100%                   0%               0%          0%          0%               -----
       2006                     53   - 58                460                  77%                  17%               7%          0%          3%              23%
       2008                     55   - 60                445                  64%                  23%              13%          0%          7%              18%
       2010                     57   - 62                436                  50%                  26%              24%          0%          9%              26%
       2012                     59   - 64                418                  42%                  26%              31%          0%         14%              30%
       2014                     61   - 66                403                  35%                  27%              38%          0%         21%              36%
       2016                     63   - 68                369                  22%                  27%              49%          2%         23%              49%

Mid Boomers
      2010                      51   - 56                651                 100%                   0%               0%          0%          0%               -----
      2012                      53   - 58                603                  86%                   8%               5%          0%          8%              16%
      2014                      55   - 60                575                  76%                  18%               6%          0%         11%              17%
      2016                      57   - 62                515                  56%                  26%              12%          5%          9%              26%

Notes:
[a] Results not reported for cells with fewer than 30 respondents.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                             Table 2b

                                                                Labor Force Status, by Survey Participation and Year
                                                                 Sample: HRS Women on a FTC Job as of the First Interview

                                                                                       Public Sector Workers
                                                                                                                                      % Reduced FTC
                                                                          Full-time                               Not in      Don't    job hours by   % PT on "other"
      Year                        Age                     n               career job           Other job        labor force   know    20% or more a        job
HRS Core
     1992                       51   - 61                399               100%                   0%               0%          0%           0%              -----
     1994                       53   - 63                374                82%                   6%              11%          1%           3%             87%
     1996                       55   - 65                351                64%                   8%              27%          1%           9%             59%
     1998                       57   - 67                332                40%                  22%              38%          0%           5%             64%
     2000                       59   - 69                325                24%                  29%              45%          2%         13%              61%
     2002                       61   - 71                313                18%                  24%              59%          0%         13%              62%
     2004                       63   - 73                303                14%                  22%              64%          0%         12%              80%
     2006                       65   - 75                295                 7%                  22%              71%          0%          -----           81%
     2008                       67   - 77                284                 3%                  21%              76%          0%          -----           75%
     2010                       69   - 79                272                 3%                  15%              82%          0%          -----           95%
     2012                       71   - 81                262                 2%                  15%              83%          0%          -----           94%
     2014                       73   - 83                237                 1%                  10%              89%          0%          -----           95%
     2016                       75   - 85                214                 0%                   6%              93%          0%          -----           77%

War Babies
      1998                      51   - 56                 85               100%                   0%               0%          0%           0%              -----
      2000                      53   - 58                 78                82%                  10%               5%          3%           6%             63%
      2002                      55   - 60                 77                62%                  19%              18%          0%         13%              53%
      2004                      57   - 62                 72                54%                  26%              19%          0%         18%              67%
      2006                      59   - 64                 74                38%                  28%              34%          0%          -----           76%
      2008                      61   - 66                 69                26%                  38%              36%          0%          -----           77%
      2010                      63   - 68                 71                24%                  25%              51%          0%          -----           72%
      2012                      65   - 70                 71                18%                  21%              61%          0%          -----           73%
      2014                      67   - 72                 70                10%                  20%              70%          0%          -----           86%
      2016                      69   - 74                 63                 5%                  16%              76%          3%          -----          100%

Early Boomers
       2004                     51   - 56                153               100%                   0%               0%          0%           0%              -----
       2006                     53   - 58                146                72%                  23%               5%          0%           8%             71%
       2008                     55   - 60                139                63%                  29%               9%          0%         11%              50%
       2010                     57   - 62                133                66%                  17%              17%          1%         25%              64%
       2012                     59   - 64                128                54%                  13%              33%          0%         26%              53%
       2014                     61   - 66                122                46%                  18%              36%          0%         27%              73%
       2016                     63   - 68                116                25%                  22%              50%          3%          -----           91%

Mid Boomers
      2010                      51   - 56                240               100%                   0%               0%          0%          0%               -----
      2012                      53   - 58                229                93%                   3%               4%          0%          9%              57%
      2014                      55   - 60                223                80%                   9%              11%          0%         15%              38%
      2016                      57   - 62                197                57%                  19%              20%          4%         10%              68%



                                                                                       Private Sector Workers
                                                                                                                                      % Reduced FTC
                                                                          Full-time                               Not in      Don't    job hours by   % PT on "other"
      Year                        Age                     n               career job           Other job        labor force   know    20% or more a        job
HRS Core
     1992                       51   - 61               1,217              100%                   0%               0%          0%           0%              -----
     1994                       53   - 63               1,113               75%                  13%              12%          0%           3%             54%
     1996                       55   - 65               1,057               57%                  16%              26%          1%           9%             40%
     1998                       57   - 67               1,018               35%                  27%              37%          1%           6%             44%
     2000                       59   - 69                968                21%                  34%              44%          1%           8%             44%
     2002                       61   - 71                949                14%                  30%              56%          0%         14%              56%
     2004                       63   - 73                916                13%                  27%              60%          0%         18%              69%
     2006                       65   - 75                877                 8%                  24%              68%          0%         27%              73%
     2008                       67   - 77                846                 5%                  21%              74%          0%         29%              78%
     2010                       69   - 79                794                 4%                  16%              80%          0%         28%              88%
     2012                       71   - 81                759                 4%                  13%              83%          0%          -----           88%
     2014                       73   - 83                700                 4%                  11%              86%          0%          -----           96%
     2016                       75   - 85                607                 1%                   9%              89%          0%          -----           91%

War Babies
      1998                      51   - 56                321               100%                   0%               0%          0%           0%              -----
      2000                      53   - 58                295                75%                  17%               9%          0%           5%             41%
      2002                      55   - 60                295                52%                  33%              16%          0%           7%             36%
      2004                      57   - 62                284                46%                  31%              23%          0%         10%              34%
      2006                      59   - 64                282                31%                  37%              33%          0%           9%             40%
      2008                      61   - 66                264                24%                  34%              42%          0%         14%              47%
      2010                      63   - 68                261                19%                  24%              57%          0%         22%              64%
      2012                      65   - 70                251                13%                  22%              65%          0%         28%              76%
      2014                      67   - 72                236                10%                  20%              70%          0%          -----           72%
      2016                      69   - 74                218                 4%                  20%              75%          0%          -----           80%

Early Boomers
       2004                     51   - 56                406               100%                   0%               0%          0%          0%               -----
       2006                     53   - 58                355                65%                  24%              10%          0%          1%              24%
       2008                     55   - 60                337                51%                  35%              14%          0%          5%              29%
       2010                     57   - 62                335                46%                  31%              23%          0%          6%              41%
       2012                     59   - 64                321                37%                  31%              32%          0%         13%              41%
       2014                     61   - 66                317                31%                  28%              41%          0%         18%              43%
       2016                     63   - 68                292                17%                  30%              51%          1%         12%              59%

Mid Boomers
      2010                      51   - 56                555               100%                   0%               0%          0%          0%               -----
      2012                      53   - 58                532                88%                   6%               6%          0%          9%              23%
      2014                      55   - 60                508                75%                  18%               8%          0%         13%              38%
      2016                      57   - 62                470                57%                  22%              16%          5%         14%              46%

Notes:
[a] Results not reported for cells with fewer than 30 respondents.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                    Table 3a

                                              Transitions from Full-time Career Employment Through 2016
                             Those with Full-Time Career Jobs at the Time of the First Interview, by HRS Cohort, Gender, and Sector
                                                                     (horizontal percentage)

                                                   Still on or                                                      Bridge Job/          PT         Reduced FTC job            Re-
                                                Last Observed on     Moved to       Moved to        Don't        (Bridge Job + No      bridge       hours >= 20% (%)         entered
                                        a                                       b                                                               c                                d
Cohort, Gender, and Sector              n           Career Job       Bridge Job      No Job          Know              Job)           job (%)       On FTC      Moved         (%)
           [1]                         [2]             [3]               [4]          [5]             [6]               [7]              [8]          [9]        [10]         [11]

HRS Core: Respondents Aged 75 to 85 in 2016

      Men                            2,089             22%              36%            38%            4%               48%              52%          7%          10%          17%
         Public sector                454              23%              34%            39%            4%               47%              68%          10%         9%           14%
         Private sector              1,635             22%              36%            38%            4%               49%              48%          6%          10%          17%

      Women                          1,616             19%              37%            40%            4%               48%              64%          4%          10%          16%
         Public sector                399              20%              36%            41%            4%               47%              73%          3%          16%          15%
         Private sector              1,217             18%              38%            40%            4%               49%              61%          5%          9%           16%

War Babies: Respondents Aged 69 to 74 in 2016

      Men                             586              18%              38%            39%            5%               50%              44%          7%          11%          14%
         Public sector                124              17%              41%            40%            2%               51%              71%          10%         9%           8%
         Private sector               462              18%              38%            39%            5%               49%              36%          6%          12%          15%

      Women                           406              15%              43%            36%            6%               54%              50%          8%          9%           16%
         Public sector                 85              15%              40%            36%            8%               52%              62%          15%         14%          16%
         Private sector               321              15%              44%            36%            5%               55%              47%          6%          8%           16%

Early Baby Boomers: Respondents Aged 63 to 68 in 2016

      Men                             655              32%              34%            32%            2%               52%              31%          11%         8%           9%
         Public sector                137              28%              31%            38%            2%               45%              45%          18%         12%          7%
         Private sector               518              33%              35%            30%            2%               53%              27%          10%         7%           10%

      Women                           559              30%              38%            29%            2%               57%              46%          10%         7%           9%
         Public sector                153              34%              29%            36%            1%               45%              64%          19%         15%          12%
         Private sector               406              29%              43%            27%            3%               62%              40%          6%          4%           8%

Mid Baby Boomers: Respondents Aged 57 to 62 in 2016

      Men                             862              64%              19%            14%            2%               57%              32%          -----       -----        -----
         Public sector                211              67%              16%            15%            2%               52%              61%          -----       -----        -----
         Private sector               651              63%              20%            14%            3%               59%              25%          -----       -----        -----

      Women                           795              62%              18%            17%            3%               51%              48%          -----       -----        -----
         Public sector                240              64%              17%            18%            2%               48%              60%          -----       -----        -----
         Private sector               555              62%              18%            17%            3%               52%              44%          -----       -----        -----

Notes:
a
  Includes respondents on a wage-and-salary FTC job at the time of the first interview. Transitions are measured as of 2016.
b
   Does not include respondents who were not working for two consecutive waves following FTC employment and who later reentered.
c
  Percentage of respondents working part-time in bridge employment as a percentage of all individuals who transitioned to a bridge job; part-time employment is defined as
working fewer than 1,600 hours per year.
d
    Percentage of respondents who returned to paid work after not having worked for at least two consecutive waves at some point following career employment.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                    Table 3b

                           Transitions from Full-time Career Employment Through the First Four HRS Interviews
                             Those with Full-Time Career Jobs at the Time of the First Interview, by HRS Cohort, Gender, and Sector
                                                                     (horizontal percentage)

                                                   Still on or                                                      Bridge Job/          PT         Reduced FTC job            Re-
                                                Last Observed on     Moved to       Moved to        Don't        (Bridge Job + No      bridge       hours >= 20% (%)         entered
                                        a                                       b                                                               c                                d
Cohort, Gender, and Sector              n           Career Job       Bridge Job      No Job          Know              Job)           job (%)       On FTC      Moved         (%)
           [1]                         [2]             [3]               [4]          [5]             [6]               [7]              [8]          [9]        [10]         [11]

HRS Core: Respondents Aged 57 to 62 in 1998

      Men                            1,417             45%              30%            21%            4%               58%              36%          -----       -----        -----
         Public sector                284              44%              27%            24%            5%               54%              58%          -----       -----        -----
         Private sector              1,133             46%              30%            21%            3%               60%              32%          -----       -----        -----

      Women                          1,145             42%              31%            23%            3%               57%              53%          -----       -----        -----
         Public sector                280              47%              26%            23%            3%               53%              65%          -----       -----        -----
         Private sector               865              40%              33%            23%            3%               59%              50%          -----       -----        -----

War Babies: Respondents Aged 57 to 62 in 2004

      Men                             586              46%              30%            20%            4%               60%              37%          -----       -----        -----
         Public sector                124              48%              33%            17%            2%               66%              66%          -----       -----        -----
         Private sector               462              46%              29%            21%            4%               59%              27%          -----       -----        -----

      Women                           406              42%              34%            19%            4%               64%              45%          -----       -----        -----
         Public sector                 85              45%              29%            21%            5%               58%              64%          -----       -----        -----
         Private sector               321              41%              36%            19%            4%               65%              41%          -----       -----        -----

Early Baby Boomers: Respondents Aged 57 to 62 in 2010

      Men                             655              48%              29%            21%            2%               58%              24%          -----       -----        -----
         Public sector                137              46%              28%            25%            1%               53%              44%          -----       -----        -----
         Private sector               518              49%              29%            20%            2%               59%              19%          -----       -----        -----

      Women                           559              48%              31%            20%            2%               61%              35%          -----       -----        -----
         Public sector                153              57%              22%            21%            0%               52%              53%          -----       -----        -----
         Private sector               406              44%              34%            19%            2%               64%              31%          -----       -----        -----

Mid Baby Boomers: Respondents Aged 57 to 62 in 2016

      Men                             862              64%              19%            14%            2%               57%              32%          -----       -----        -----
         Public sector                211              67%              16%            15%            2%               52%              61%          -----       -----        -----
         Private sector               651              63%              20%            14%            3%               59%              25%          -----       -----        -----

      Women                           795              62%              18%            17%            3%               51%              48%          -----       -----        -----
         Public sector                240              64%              17%            18%            2%               48%              60%          -----       -----        -----
         Private sector               555              62%              18%            17%            3%               52%              44%          -----       -----        -----

Notes:
a
  Includes respondents aged 51-56 on a wage-and-salary FTC job at the time of the first interview. Transitions are measured within six years of the first interview.
b
   Does not include respondents who were not working for two consecutive waves following FTC employment and who later reentered.
c
  Percentage of respondents working part-time in bridge employment as a percentage of all individuals who transitioned to a bridge job; part-time employment is defined as
working fewer than 1,600 hours per year.
d
    Percentage of respondents who returned to paid work after not having worked for at least two consecutive waves at some point following career employment.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                     Table 3c

                          Transitions from Full-time Career Employment Through the First Seven HRS Interviews
                  Those with Full-Time Career Jobs and Aged 51 to 56 at the Time of the First Interview, by HRS Cohort, Gender, and Sector
                                                                  (horizontal percentage)

                                                   Still on or                                                      Bridge Job/          PT          Reduced FTC job           Re-
                                                Last Observed on     Moved to        Moved to       Don't        (Bridge Job + No      bridge        hours >= 20% (%)        entered
                                         a                                       b                                                               c                                d
Cohort, Gender, and Sector              n           Career Job       Bridge Job       No Job         Know              Job)           job (%)        On FTC     Moved         (%)
           [1]                         [2]             [3]               [4]           [5]            [6]               [7]              [8]           [9]       [10]         [11]

HRS Core: Respondents Aged 63 to 68 in 2004

      Men                            1,417             28%              36%            33%            3%               52%              40%           6%         8%           10%
         Public sector                284              26%              33%            36%            5%               48%              60%           11%        8%           11%
         Private sector              1,133             29%              36%            32%            2%               53%              36%           5%         8%           10%

      Women                          1,145             27%              37%            33%            3%               53%              55%           4%         10%          10%
         Public sector                280              30%              34%            31%            5%               52%              70%           4%         19%          8%
         Private sector               865              26%              38%            34%            2%               53%              51%           4%         8%           11%

War Babies: Respondents Aged 63 to 68 in 2010

      Men                             586              30%              36%            30%            4%               54%              41%           6%         8%           11%
         Public sector                124              32%              40%            36%            2%               52%              69%           13%        7%           3%
         Private sector               462              29%              35%            31%            5%               53%              33%           5%         8%           14%

      Women                           406              28%              40%            27%            5%               59%              46%           4%         7%           13%
         Public sector                 85              32%              38%            25%            6%               60%              59%           10%        13%          14%
         Private sector               321              26%              41%            28%            5%               59%              43%           3%         6%           13%

Early Baby Boomers: Respondents Aged 63 to 68 in 2016

      Men                             655              32%              34%            32%            2%               52%              31%           11%        8%           9%
         Public sector                137              28%              31%            38%            2%               45%              45%           18%        12%          7%
         Private sector               518              33%              35%            30%            2%               53%              27%           10%        7%           10%

      Women                           559              30%              38%            29%           2%                57%              46%           10%        7%           9%
         Public sector                153              34%              29%            36%           65%               45%              64%           19%        15%          12%
         Private sector               406              29%              43%            27%           3%                62%              40%           6%         4%           8%

Mid Baby Boomers: Respondents Aged 63 to 68 in 2022

      Men                             ------           ------           ------         ------        ------            ------           ------        ------     ------       ------
         Public sector                ------           ------           ------         ------        ------            ------           ------        ------     ------       ------
         Private sector               ------           ------           ------         ------        ------            ------           ------        ------     ------       ------

      Women                           ------           ------           ------         ------        ------            ------           ------        ------     ------       ------
         Public sector                ------           ------           ------         ------        ------            ------           ------        ------     ------       ------
         Private sector               ------           ------           ------         ------        ------            ------           ------        ------     ------       ------

Notes:
a
  Includes respondents aged 51-56 on a wage-and-salary FTC job at the time of the first interview. Transitions are measured within 12 years of the first interview.
b
   Does not include respondents who were not working for two consecutive waves following FTC employment and who later reentered.
c
  Percentage of respondents working part-time in bridge employment as a percentage of all individuals who transitioned to a bridge job; part-time employment is defined as
working fewer than 1,600 hours per year.
d
    Percentage of respondents who returned to paid work after not having worked for at least two consecutive waves at some point following career employment.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                  Table 4a

                                      Reasons for Transitioning from Full-time Career Employment
                               HRS Men Who Transitioned from FTC Employment, by HRS Cohort and Sector


                                                                             HRS Core                                                 War Babies
                                                                   Respondents Aged 75-85 in 2016                           Respondents Aged 69-74 in 2016
                                                                  Public                       Private                     Public                      Private
Reason                               Voluntary?          Bridge        Direct Exit    Bridge        Direct Exit   Bridge        Direct Exit   Bridge        Direct Exit

Business closed                   No                       2.6%            0.6%        12.5%            6.2%       0.0%             0.0%       10.7%            6.9%
Laid off                          No                         4%              1%          15%              7%         6%               0%         16%              7%
Health reasons                    No                         4%             10%           2%             16%         9%               6%          2%             14%
Family care                       No                         0%              2%           1%              1%         0%               0%          1%              2%
Better job                        Yes                        5%              0%           8%              1%         0%               0%         20%              2%
Quit                              Yes                        0%              1%           9%              3%         0%               0%         10%              0%
Retired                           Yes                       63%             87%          29%             70%        57%              94%         22%             66%
Moved                             Yes                        2%              0%           1%              0%         0%               0%          0%              0%
Sold business                     Yes                        1%              0%           1%              0%         0%               0%          0%              0%
Reduced hours                     Yes                        3%              1%           2%              2%         9%               3%          7%              6%
Other                             Uncertain                 21%              0%          22%              0%        29%               0%         13%              0%
Switched from W&S to SE           Uncertain                  2%              0%           1%              0%         0%               0%          1%              0%

Any involuntary reason                                     11%             12%          28%             28%         14%              6%          28%            28%
Voluntary reasons only                                     87%             83%          66%             69%         80%             90%          62%            66%

Notes:
[1] Categories are not mutually exclusive.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                  Table 4b

                                    Reasons for Transitioning from Full-time Career Employment
                             HRS Women Who Transitioned from FTC Employment, by HRS Cohort and Sector


                                                                             HRS Core                                                 War Babies
                                                                   Respondents Aged 75-85 in 2016                           Respondents Aged 69-74 in 2016
                                                                  Public                       Private                     Public                      Private
Reason                               Voluntary?          Bridge        Direct Exit    Bridge        Direct Exit   Bridge        Direct Exit   Bridge        Direct Exit

Business closed                   No                       1.1%            1.4%       12.3%             6.2%       0.0%             0.0%        9.8%            2.5%
Laid off                          No                         3%              0%         11%              11%         0%               5%         10%              9%
Health reasons                    No                         3%             11%          3%              18%         0%              38%          2%             24%
Family care                       No                         2%              5%          2%               3%         4%               0%          4%              0%
Better job                        Yes                        2%              1%          9%               1%         4%               0%         14%              3%
Quit                              Yes                        4%              4%         12%               6%         8%               0%         12%              5%
Retired                           Yes                       33%             81%         17%              56%        36%              57%          9%             53%
Moved                             Yes                        1%              0%          1%               1%         4%               0%          1%              0%
Sold business                     Yes                        0%              0%          1%               0%         0%               0%          1%              1%
Reduced hours                     Yes                        0%              2%          0%               3%        16%              10%         13%             10%
Other                             Uncertain                 51%              0%         35%               0%        36%               0%         26%              0%
Switched from W&S to SE           Uncertain                  0%              0%          0%               0%         0%               0%          0%              0%

Any involuntary reason                                      7%             12%          25%             34%          0%             43%          21%            35%
Voluntary reasons only                                     91%             81%          72%             60%         84%             48%          61%            58%

Notes:
[1] Categories are not mutually exclusive.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                                                                      Table 5a

                                                                                    Transitions from Full-time Career Employment by Worker Characteristics and HRS Cohort
                                                                                                   Men with a Public-Sector Full-Time Career Job at the Time of the First Interview


                                                              HRS Core                                                    War Babies                                       Early Baby Boomers                                        Mid Baby Boomers
                                                    Respondents Aged 75-85 in 2016                               Respondents Aged 69-74 in 2016                       Respondents Aged 63-68 in 2016                           Respondents Aged 57-62 in 2016

                                                         Bridge Job/        Reduced                                 Bridge Job/     Reduced                              Bridge Job/     Reduced                                  Bridge Job/     Reduced
                                             n        (Bridge Job + No      FTC job                        n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                     n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                       n       (Bridge Job + No   FTC job
                                                                a                     b                                   a                 b                                    a                   b                                   a                     b
                                            (%)             Job)           hours (%)       Reentered      (%)          Job)         hours (%)    Reentered     (%)          Job)         hours (%)       Reentered    (%)           Job)          hours (%)        Reentered

All                                          100%           47%                9%            14%          100%         51%             8%           9%         100%         45%            14%              6%       100%            52%            --------          8%

Age at transition
 <=55                                         17%           65%                1%            23%           27%         77%             6%           4%          29%         61%             8%              3%         45%          55%             --------          9%
 56-61                                        46%           39%                8%            17%           45%         61%             7%          11%          48%         44%            12%              9%         55%          45%             --------          5%
 62-64                                        19%           47%               11%             8%            9%         10%             9%          10%          20%         24%            26%              6%       -------        -------          -------         -------
 65+                                          17%           48%               18%             4%           20%         11%            13%          11%           3%         -------        -------         -------   -------        -------          -------         -------

Respondent's Health
 Excellent/very good                          58%           50%               10%            17%           54%         56%            10%          11%          49%         45%            13%              9%        56%            58%            --------          8%
 Good                                         31%           46%                9%            12%           37%         45%             7%           5%          31%         54%            16%              0%        32%            58%            --------          8%
 Fair/poor                                    11%           28%                4%             0%            9%         50%             0%          13%          20%         35%            11%             10%        12%            29%            --------          7%

Education
  Less than high school                       13%           36%                5%            18%            5%         33%             0%           0%           9%         44%             8%              0%         7%            57%            --------         29%
  High school                                 29%           47%                5%            14%           17%         47%             5%          12%          16%         46%            14%              0%        23%            44%            --------          0%
  College                                     58%           49%               12%            13%           78%         53%             9%           9%          74%         45%            15%              8%        70%            53%            --------          7%

Ethnicity
  White                                       82%           47%               10%            14%           80%         54%             7%           9%          72%         44%            16%              6%        59%            53%            --------          9%
  Black                                       15%           45%                7%            18%           15%         27%            17%          18%          18%         50%            13%             13%        29%            44%            --------          4%
  Other                                        3%           60%                0%            10%            5%         50%             0%           0%          10%         45%             0%              0%        12%            71%            --------         14%

Married
 No                                           25%           40%               10%            17%           28%         33%             0%           6%          18%         44%             8%              0%        20%            43%            --------         14%
 Yes                                          75%           49%                9%            13%           72%         55%            11%          10%          82%         46%            16%              8%        80%            54%            --------          6%

Dependent Child
 No                                           83%           46%                9%            15%           74%         49%             9%           9%          63%         48%            14%              3%        42%            55%            --------          5%
 Yes                                          17%           49%               12%            12%           26%         57%             6%          10%          38%         39%            12%             13%        58%            50%            --------          0%

Working Spouse
 No                                           41%           38%                9%             9%           24%         50%            12%          14%          26%         32%            11%              0%        25%            67%            --------          0%
 Yes                                          59%           56%                9%            17%           76%         51%             9%           8%          74%         52%            16%             10%        75%            49%            --------          9%

Notes:
a
    Does not include respondents who were not working for two consecutive waves following FTC employment and who later reentered.
b
    Percentage of respondents who experienced a reduction in career job hours of 20 percent or more.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                                                                       Table 5b

                                                                                    Transitions from Full-time Career Employment by Worker Characteristics and HRS Cohort
                                                                                                   Men with a Private-Sector Full-Time Career Job at the Time of the First Interview


                                                              HRS Core                                                    War Babies                                        Early Baby Boomers                                        Mid Baby Boomers
                                                    Respondents Aged 75-85 in 2016                               Respondents Aged 69-74 in 2016                        Respondents Aged 63-68 in 2016                           Respondents Aged 57-62 in 2016

                                                         Bridge Job/        Reduced                                  Bridge Job/     Reduced                              Bridge Job/     Reduced                                  Bridge Job/     Reduced
                                             n        (Bridge Job + No      FTC job                         n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                     n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                       n       (Bridge Job + No   FTC job
                                                                a                     b                                    a                 b                                   a                    b                                   a                     b
                                            (%)             Job)           hours (%)       Reentered       (%)         Job)          hours (%)    Reentered     (%)         Job)          hours (%)       Reentered    (%)           Job)          hours (%)        Reentered

All                                          100%           49%                9%            17%          100%          49%            11%          14%         100%         53%             8%              9%       100%            59%            --------          9%

Age at transition
 <=55                                         19%           64%                2%            19%           32%          69%             2%          21%          35%        72%              1%             11%         46%          62%             --------         14%
 56-61                                        49%           45%                7%            17%           42%          48%            10%          15%          40%        45%              9%              9%         54%          55%             --------          2%
 62-64                                        17%           48%               13%            20%           11%          29%            13%          12%          21%        30%             14%              2%       -------        -------          -------         -------
 65+                                          14%           44%               19%             9%           15%          29%            29%           2%           4%        -------         -------         -------   -------        -------          -------         -------

Respondent's Health
 Excellent/very good                          49%           54%                8%            18%           50%          60%            11%          19%          48%         56%             9%              8%        54%            68%            --------          8%
 Good                                         32%           47%               11%            15%           35%          37%             9%           8%          33%         50%             7%             12%        31%            48%            --------          9%
 Fair/poor                                    19%           38%                8%            14%           15%          42%            12%          13%          19%         53%             7%              7%        16%            54%            --------         15%

Education
  Less than high school                       32%           46%                8%            15%           18%          47%            11%          12%          15%         64%             8%              7%        19%            53%            --------         15%
  High school                                 32%           46%                7%            16%           34%          41%             9%          17%          25%         40%             7%              8%        27%            54%            --------          5%
  College                                     36%           54%               11%            19%           48%          56%            12%          14%          60%         56%             8%             10%        54%            64%            --------          9%

Ethnicity
  White                                       82%           48%                9%            17%           84%          50%            10%          15%          77%         53%             9%              7%        66%            59%            --------         11%
  Black                                       14%           52%                9%            15%           12%          40%            11%          17%          11%         57%             2%             14%        21%            58%            --------          6%
  Other                                        4%           56%                5%             7%            3%          57%            19%           0%          12%         49%             7%             15%        13%            59%            --------         10%

Married
 No                                           20%           43%                9%            15%           33%          45%            11%           8%          20%         50%             5%              8%        22%            60%            --------          5%
 Yes                                          80%           50%                9%            17%           67%          50%            10%          16%          80%         54%             8%              9%        78%            60%            --------         11%

Dependent Child
 No                                           84%           49%                8%            17%           69%          46%            11%          12%          62%         50%             8%              7%        47%            55%            --------          3%
 Yes                                          16%           47%               13%            17%           31%          55%            11%          20%          38%         60%             7%             12%        53%            61%            --------          3%

Working Spouse
 No                                           42%           46%               11%            16%           38%          40%            15%           9%          29%         48%            14%             10%        29%            49%            --------         16%
 Yes                                          58%           53%                8%            18%           63%          55%             9%          17%          71%         55%             7%             10%        71%            63%            --------          9%

Notes:
a
    Does not include respondents who were not working for two consecutive waves following FTC employment and who later reentered.
b
    Percentage of respondents who experienced a reduction in career job hours of 20 percent or more.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                                                                      Table 5c

                                                                                    Transitions from Full-time Career Employment by Worker Characteristics and HRS Cohort
                                                                                                 Women with a Public-Sector Full-Time Career Job at the Time of the First Interview


                                                              HRS Core                                                    War Babies                                      Early Baby Boomers                                        Mid Baby Boomers
                                                    Respondents Aged 75-85 in 2016                               Respondents Aged 69-74 in 2016                      Respondents Aged 63-68 in 2016                           Respondents Aged 57-62 in 2016

                                                         Bridge Job/        Reduced                                 Bridge Job/     Reduced                             Bridge Job/     Reduced                                  Bridge Job/     Reduced
                                             n        (Bridge Job + No      FTC job                        n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                    n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                       n       (Bridge Job + No   FTC job
                                                                a                     b                                   a                 b                                  a                    b                                   a                     b
                                            (%)             Job)           hours (%)       Reentered      (%)         Job)          hours (%)    Reentered    (%)         Job)          hours (%)       Reentered    (%)           Job)          hours (%)        Reentered

All                                          100%           47%               13%            14%          100%         52%            14%          15%        100%         45%            16%             12%       100%            48%            --------          5%

Age at transition
 <=55                                         16%           49%                2%            18%           34%         71%             0%          19%         31%        73%              4%             15%         38%          47%             --------          8%
 56-61                                        53%           49%               16%            16%           41%         48%            23%          14%         35%        22%              6%              8%         62%          49%             --------          2%
 62-64                                        18%           47%               13%             9%            6%         75%            20%          50%         28%        37%             30%             16%       -------        -------          -------         -------
 65+                                          13%           31%               14%             8%           20%         18%            18%           0%          6%        -------         -------         -------   -------        -------          -------         -------

Respondent's Health
 Excellent/very good                          57%           50%               14%            15%           53%         69%            17%          20%         48%         44%            19%             13%        49%            50%            --------          8%
 Good                                         31%           41%               12%            15%           37%         30%             9%          13%         37%         54%            20%              6%        34%            48%            --------          0%
 Fair/poor                                    12%           43%                7%             4%            9%         43%            13%           0%         15%         29%             0%             24%        17%            44%            --------          6%

Education
  Less than high school                       11%           47%                7%            13%            2%        100%             0%           0%          7%         17%            10%             33%        10%            50%            --------         13%
  High school                                 24%           38%                6%            13%           24%        29%              5%           7%         16%          7%            13%              7%        19%            42%            --------          0%
  College                                     65%           50%               16%            15%           73%        58%             17%          18%         78%         54%            18%             11%        71%            49%            --------          5%

Ethnicity
  White                                       71%           45%               15%            13%           74%         51%            17%          16%         67%         44%            19%             11%        55%            49%            --------          2%
  Black                                       27%           52%                6%            18%           22%         57%             5%          14%         25%         48%            13%             16%        36%            52%            --------          7%
  Other                                        2%           29%               11%             0%            3%         50%             0%           0%          8%         44%             8%             11%         9%            33%            --------         11%

Married
 No                                           40%           50%               12%            16%           55%         47%            13%          16%         46%         42%            20%             13%        45%            49%            --------          5%
 Yes                                          60%           44%               13%            13%           45%         58%            15%          15%         54%         47%            14%             11%        55%            48%            --------          5%

Dependent Child
 No                                           72%           45%               14%            12%           81%         54%            14%          16%         61%         38%            17%             11%        54%            54%            --------          0%
 Yes                                          28%           52%               11%            20%           19%         47%            13%          13%         39%         55%            15%             14%        46%            42%            --------          6%

Working Spouse
 No                                           33%           40%               16%             5%           28%         30%            36%           0%         16%         38%            17%             25%        18%            29%            --------          0%
 Yes                                          67%           45%               13%            16%           72%         54%             8%          18%         84%         54%            13%              8%        82%            55%            --------          6%

Notes:
a
    Does not include respondents who were not working for two consecutive waves following FTC employment and who later reentered.
b
    Percentage of respondents who experienced a reduction in career job hours of 20 percent or more.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                                                                      Table 5d

                                                                                    Transitions from Full-time Career Employment by Worker Characteristics and HRS Cohort
                                                                                                 Women with a Private-Sector Full-Time Career Job at the Time of the First Interview


                                                              HRS Core                                                    War Babies                                      Early Baby Boomers                                         Mid Baby Boomers
                                                    Respondents Aged 75-85 in 2016                               Respondents Aged 69-74 in 2016                      Respondents Aged 63-68 in 2016                            Respondents Aged 57-62 in 2016

                                                         Bridge Job/        Reduced                                 Bridge Job/     Reduced                              Bridge Job/     Reduced                                  Bridge Job/     Reduced
                                             n        (Bridge Job + No      FTC job                        n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                     n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                       n       (Bridge Job + No   FTC job
                                                                a                     b                                   a                 b                                   a                    b                                   a                     b
                                            (%)             Job)           hours (%)       Reentered      (%)          Job)         hours (%)    Reentered     (%)         Job)          hours (%)       Reentered    (%)           Job)          hours (%)        Reentered

All                                          100%           49%                8%            15%          100%         55%             8%          17%        100%          61%             5%              8%       100%            52%            --------         12%

Age at transition
 <=55                                         23%           65%                4%            21%           39%         71%             2%          20%         43%         73%              1%              4%         45%          53%             --------         18%
 56-61                                        48%           44%                7%            14%           35%         56%             6%          19%         39%         51%              4%             16%         55%          49%             --------          4%
 62-64                                        16%           42%                9%            14%           14%         22%            11%          11%         14%         50%             19%              0%       -------        -------          -------         -------
 65+                                          13%           42%               16%             6%           12%         37%            28%           7%          4%         -------         -------         -------   -------        -------          -------         -------

Respondent's Health
 Excellent/very good                          50%           52%                8%            18%           52%         64%             5%          23%         50%          70%             5%              9%        49%            62%            --------         13%
 Good                                         31%           49%                8%            13%           29%         50%            13%          11%         30%          55%             8%             10%        32%            47%            --------         12%
 Fair/poor                                    19%           36%                7%             9%           19%         38%             8%           9%         21%          51%             0%              6%        19%            39%            --------         12%

Education
  Less than high school                       28%           44%                7%            17%           13%         46%             7%          14%         12%          49%             8%             11%        15%            49%            --------          8%
  High school                                 39%           48%                6%            11%           32%         52%            10%          14%         33%          59%             2%              8%        29%            50%            --------         13%
  College                                     33%           52%               10%            18%           55%         59%             7%          19%         56%          65%             6%              8%        57%            53%            --------         14%

Ethnicity
  White                                       75%           48%                8%            15%           75%         57%             9%          18%         67%          63%             4%             10%        58%            62%            --------          9%
  Black                                       21%           49%                8%            17%           21%         47%             8%          14%         21%          57%             9%              4%        32%            43%            --------         16%
  Other                                        4%           54%                6%            11%            5%         45%             0%           9%         11%          56%             2%              7%         9%            22%            --------         22%

Married
 No                                           46%           46%                9%            15%           54%         56%             8%          17%         45%          63%             4%             10%        45%            52%            --------         10%
 Yes                                          54%           51%                7%            15%           46%         53%             8%          17%         55%          60%             5%              7%        55%            51%            --------         14%

Dependent Child
 No                                           71%           46%                8%            16%           72%         54%            10%          16%         62%          61%             5%              8%        51%            62%            --------          1%
 Yes                                          29%           54%                7%            13%           28%         58%             4%          18%         38%          61%             5%              9%        49%            41%            --------          5%

Working Spouse
 No                                           40%           47%                7%            16%           32%         29%             7%           8%         18%          42%            13%              0%        22%            52%            --------         10%
 Yes                                          60%           53%                8%            15%           68%         61%             8%          20%         82%          63%             4%              8%        78%            50%            --------         14%

Notes:
a
    Does not include respondents who were not working for two consecutive waves following FTC employment and who later reentered.
b
    Percentage of respondents who experienced a reduction in career job hours of 20 percent or more.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                                                                      Table 6a

                                                                            Transitions from Full-time Career Employment by Job and Economic Characteristics and HRS Cohort
                                                                                                   Men with a Public-Sector Full-Time Career Job at the Time of the First Interview


                                                              HRS Core                                                    War Babies                                       Early Baby Boomers                                     Mid Baby Boomers
                                                    Respondents Aged 75-85 in 2016                               Respondents Aged 69-74 in 2016                       Respondents Aged 63-68 in 2016                        Respondents Aged 57-62 in 2016

                                                         Bridge Job/        Reduced                                 Bridge Job/     Reduced                              Bridge Job/     Reduced                               Bridge Job/     Reduced
                                             n        (Bridge Job + No      FTC job                        n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                     n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                   n        (Bridge Job + No   FTC job
                                                                a                     b                                   a                 b                                  a                 b                                     a                    b
                                            (%)             Job)           hours (%)       Reentered      (%)          Job)         hours (%)    Reentered     (%)          Job)         hours (%)   Reentered    (%)            Job)          hours (%)        Reentered

All                                          100%           47%                9%            14%          100%         51%             8%           9%         100%         45%            14%          6%       100%             52%            --------          8%

Occupational Status
 White collar - high skill                    52%           43%               13%            13%           62%         54%            12%           6%          50%         50%            18%          6%         25%            42%            --------          0%
 White collar - other                         10%           41%                3%            19%            7%         50%             0%          17%          14%         33%            11%          8%         26%            50%            --------         11%
 Blue collar - high skill                     23%           49%                4%            11%           20%         52%             4%          10%          23%         50%             9%         10%         32%            48%            --------         10%
 Blue collar - other                          15%           27%                6%            22%           11%         30%             0%          20%          13%         31%            11%          0%         17%            67%            --------          8%

Health Insurance Status
 None                                          2%           57%               33%            14%            1%         100%            0%           0%           2%         33%             0%          0%          4%           100%            --------          0%
 Portable                                     92%           48%                9%            14%           86%         47%             8%          11%          79%         44%            18%          5%         62%           43%             --------          8%
 Non-portable                                  6%           33%                4%            22%           13%         71%             6%           0%          19%         53%             0%         12%         34%           59%             --------          9%

Pension Status
  Defined-benefit                             69%           44%                6%            13%           59%         46%             7%          13%          49%         57%            12%          5%         36%            57%            --------         10%
  Defined-contribution                        16%           49%               14%            16%           22%         63%             8%           6%          20%         19%            16%          6%         31%            43%            --------          0%
  Both                                         6%           44%                8%            22%            6%         67%            29%           0%           3%         100%            0%         100%         3%           --------        --------        --------
  None                                         9%           76%               24%             7%           13%         55%             0%           0%          27%         35%            18%          9%         30%            60%            --------          5%

Wage
 <$15                                         20%           51%               16%            21%           28%         61%             6%          17%          11%         67%            10%         11%       --------        --------        --------        --------
 $15 to $24                                   39%           47%                5%            12%           19%         50%             9%          15%          27%         47%            16%          0%          45%           50%            --------         11%
 $25 to $49                                   38%           42%                9%            14%           47%         46%             6%           6%          53%         32%            18%          9%          55%           39%            --------         11%
 $50+                                          3%           56%               23%            11%            6%         57%            29%           0%          10%         40%            22%          0%       --------        --------        --------        --------

Wealth
 $0k                                           3%           33%                8%            33%            5%         50%             0%           0%           5%         50%             0%         50%         10%           100%            --------          0%
 $1-$24k                                      19%           51%                8%            11%           19%         63%            13%          19%          25%         42%             9%          8%         27%            45%            --------          9%
 $25k - $100k                                 33%           50%                4%            16%           33%         55%             3%           6%          28%         38%            24%          0%         30%            33%            --------          6%
 $100k - $500k                                36%           47%               11%            11%           34%         45%            10%           8%          28%         38%            13%         10%         28%            58%            --------         11%
 $500k+                                        8%           47%               22%            16%           10%         45%            17%           9%          14%         71%            11%          0%          5%           --------        --------        --------

Notes:
a
    Does not include respondents who were not working for two consecutive waves following FTC employment and who later reentered.
b
    Percentage of respondents who experienced a reduction in career job hours of 20 percent or more.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                                                                       Table 6b

                                                                            Transitions from Full-time Career Employment by Job and Economic Characteristics and HRS Cohort
                                                                                                   Men with a Private-Sector Full-Time Career Job at the Time of the First Interview


                                                              HRS Core                                                    War Babies                                        Early Baby Boomers                                     Mid Baby Boomers
                                                    Respondents Aged 75-85 in 2016                               Respondents Aged 69-74 in 2016                        Respondents Aged 63-68 in 2016                        Respondents Aged 57-62 in 2016

                                                         Bridge Job/        Reduced                                  Bridge Job/     Reduced                              Bridge Job/     Reduced                               Bridge Job/     Reduced
                                             n        (Bridge Job + No      FTC job                         n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                     n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                   n        (Bridge Job + No   FTC job
                                                                a                     b                                    a                 b                                  a                 b                                     a                    b
                                            (%)             Job)           hours (%)       Reentered       (%)         Job)          hours (%)    Reentered     (%)         Job)          hours (%)   Reentered    (%)            Job)          hours (%)        Reentered

All                                          100%           49%                9%            17%          100%          49%            11%          14%         100%         53%             8%          9%       100%             59%            --------          9%

Occupational Status
 White collar - high skill                    30%           51%               13%            17%           31%          56%            11%          16%          30%         56%            11%          6%         27%            53%            --------         15%
 White collar - other                         13%           49%               11%            17%           20%          58%            16%          14%          18%         54%             6%          5%         17%            62%            --------          8%
 Blue collar - high skill                     27%           39%                8%            19%           25%          42%            10%          13%          25%         51%             8%         11%         36%            53%            --------          8%
 Blue collar - other                          30%           39%                9%            11%           24%          42%             7%          14%          27%         52%             6%         13%         20%            69%            --------         10%

Health Insurance Status
 None                                          7%           79%               14%            14%            4%          87%            15%          36%          10%         65%            10%          3%         15%            68%            --------         10%
 Portable                                     82%           47%                9%            17%           79%          47%            11%          14%          63%         50%             8%          9%         42%            60%            --------          9%
 Non-portable                                 11%           50%                5%            18%           17%          50%             8%          11%          27%         57%             6%         11%         42%            55%            --------         11%

Pension Status
  Defined-benefit                             38%           38%                6%            17%           37%          44%             9%          15%          23%         47%             6%          8%         17%            62%            --------          0%
  Defined-contribution                        28%           55%                9%            18%           42%          51%            13%          14%          50%         58%             8%         11%         57%            54%            --------         11%
  Both                                         7%           43%                8%            16%            4%          42%             0%          25%           2%         40%            17%          0%          1%           --------        --------        --------
  None                                        27%           60%               14%            13%           17%          37%             8%          12%          25%         27%             9%         11%         24%            38%            --------         17%

Wage
 <$15                                         34%           57%               10%            16%           46%          69%            10%          15%          24%         54%             9%          4%       --------        --------        --------        --------
 $15 to $24                                   35%           43%                8%            17%           23%          37%            10%          14%          35%         45%            10%          5%          50%           61%            --------          6%
 $25 to $49                                   27%           47%                9%            17%           24%          41%            12%          14%          33%         39%            13%          9%          50%           51%            --------         12%
 $50+                                          4%           46%               16%            13%            6%          33%             7%          21%           9%         56%            19%          6%       --------        --------        --------        --------

Wealth
 $0k                                           5%           50%               12%             9%            6%          61%            14%          11%           9%         63%             2%          9%         12%            69%            --------          3%
 $1-$24k                                      26%           55%                6%            16%           24%          57%             9%          13%          30%         56%             8%          5%         35%            56%            --------          9%
 $25k - $100k                                 30%           45%                7%            18%           28%          43%             9%          11%          27%         57%             6%          8%         26%            60%            --------          8%
 $100k - $500k                                31%           49%               12%            15%           30%          47%            12%          19%          22%         41%            10%         15%         20%            58%            --------         16%
 $500k+                                        8%           53%               15%            19%           12%          51%            15%          16%          12%         55%            11%         10%          7%           --------        --------        --------

Notes:
a
    Does not include respondents who were not working for two consecutive waves following FTC employment and who later reentered.
b
    Percentage of respondents who experienced a reduction in career job hours of 20 percent or more.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                                                                      Table 6c

                                                                            Transitions from Full-time Career Employment by Job and Economic Characteristics and HRS Cohort
                                                                                                 Women with a Public-Sector Full-Time Career Job at the Time of the First Interview


                                                              HRS Core                                                    War Babies                                      Early Baby Boomers                                     Mid Baby Boomers
                                                    Respondents Aged 75-85 in 2016                               Respondents Aged 69-74 in 2016                      Respondents Aged 63-68 in 2016                        Respondents Aged 57-62 in 2016

                                                         Bridge Job/        Reduced                                 Bridge Job/     Reduced                             Bridge Job/     Reduced                               Bridge Job/     Reduced
                                             n        (Bridge Job + No      FTC job                        n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                    n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                   n        (Bridge Job + No   FTC job
                                                                a                     b                                   a                  b                                a                 b                                     a                    b
                                            (%)             Job)           hours (%)       Reentered      (%)         Job)          hours (%)    Reentered    (%)         Job)          hours (%)   Reentered    (%)            Job)          hours (%)        Reentered

All                                          100%           47%               13%            14%          100%         52%            14%          15%        100%         45%            16%         12%       100%             48%            --------          5%

Occupational Status
 White collar - high skill                    54%           41%               21%            15%           62%         49%            17%          16%         58%         46%            18%         10%         22%            59%            --------          0%
 White collar - other                         32%           41%                8%            11%           27%         60%             4%           7%         28%         46%            12%         19%         50%            43%            --------          7%
 Blue collar - high skill                      5%           36%                7%            27%            5%         67%            25%           0%          7%         40%            30%         20%         11%            54%            --------          8%
 Blue collar - other                          10%           40%               14%            10%            7%         50%            17%          50%          7%         33%             9%          0%         16%            44%            --------          0%

Health Insurance Status
 None                                          4%           56%               36%            33%            1%          0%            100%          0%          3%         50%             0%         50%          8%           100%            --------          0%
 Portable                                     89%           46%               13%            13%           87%         59%            13%          16%         77%         43%            19%         13%         57%           40%             --------          4%
 Non-portable                                  7%           57%                7%            19%           12%          0%            10%          17%         20%         50%            10%          5%         35%           55%             --------          6%

Pension Status
  Defined-benefit                             70%           39%               13%            11%           46%        46%             11%          12%         42%         42%            20%          7%         40%            41%            --------          7%
  Defined-contribution                        16%           59%               14%            12%           22%        47%             41%          20%         28%         52%            10%         12%         28%            67%            --------          0%
  Both                                         5%           53%               12%            20%            6%        100%             0%           0%          3%          0%             0%          0%          2%           --------        --------        --------
  None                                         9%           77%               18%            27%           27%        50%              5%          19%         28%         46%            20%         17%         30%            43%            --------          0%

Wage
 <$15                                         36%           55%               10%            12%           45%         68%             6%           5%         22%         29%             9%         21%       --------        --------        --------        --------
 $15 to $24                                   35%           47%                7%            17%           29%         50%            14%          15%         35%         33%            14%         17%          52%           48%            --------          7%
 $25 to $49                                   27%           38%               23%            11%           22%         44%            29%          31%         39%         33%            32%         10%          48%           44%            --------          4%
 $50+                                          2%           40%               33%            40%            4%         33%            33%           0%          5%         50%            40%         50%       --------        --------        --------        --------

Wealth
 $0k                                           5%           50%               15%            14%            7%         33%             0%           0%          9%         33%             7%         11%         15%            58%            --------          0%
 $1-$24k                                      23%           47%               10%            14%           20%         62%             6%           8%         26%         30%            20%         19%         38%            43%            --------          6%
 $25k - $100k                                 27%           50%               12%            20%           30%         35%            23%          24%         25%         62%            13%         10%         21%            60%            --------         10%
 $100k - $500k                                36%           46%               17%            13%           24%         57%            10%          14%         26%         41%            13%         11%         21%            40%            --------          0%
 $500k+                                        9%           43%               12%             4%           19%         67%            19%          20%         13%         63%            30%          6%          5%           --------        --------        --------

Notes:
a
    Does not include respondents who were not working for two consecutive waves following FTC employment and who later reentered.
b
    Percentage of respondents who experienced a reduction in career job hours of 20 percent or more.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                                                                      Table 6d

                                                                            Transitions from Full-time Career Employment by Job and Economic Characteristics and HRS Cohort
                                                                                                 Women with a Private-Sector Full-Time Career Job at the Time of the First Interview


                                                              HRS Core                                                    War Babies                                      Early Baby Boomers                                      Mid Baby Boomers
                                                    Respondents Aged 75-85 in 2016                               Respondents Aged 69-74 in 2016                      Respondents Aged 63-68 in 2016                         Respondents Aged 57-62 in 2016

                                                         Bridge Job/        Reduced                                 Bridge Job/     Reduced                              Bridge Job/     Reduced                               Bridge Job/     Reduced
                                             n        (Bridge Job + No      FTC job                        n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                     n     (Bridge Job + No   FTC job                   n        (Bridge Job + No   FTC job
                                                                a                     b                                   a                 b                                  a                 b                                     a                    b
                                            (%)             Job)           hours (%)       Reentered      (%)          Job)         hours (%)    Reentered     (%)         Job)          hours (%)   Reentered    (%)            Job)          hours (%)        Reentered

All                                          100%           49%                8%            15%          100%         55%             8%          17%        100%          61%             5%          8%       100%             52%            --------         12%

Occupational Status
 White collar - high skill                    27%           47%                9%            18%           34%         60%            11%          18%         30%          64%             7%          8%         23%            59%            --------          8%
 White collar - other                         38%           43%                9%            13%           37%         52%             8%          20%         39%          59%             3%         13%         37%            55%            --------         11%
 Blue collar - high skill                     11%           49%               11%            13%            9%         52%             3%           4%         12%          53%             8%          0%         26%            50%            --------         10%
 Blue collar - other                          24%           41%                7%            14%           21%         54%             6%          11%         19%          63%             4%          6%         14%            36%            --------         25%

Health Insurance Status
 None                                          8%           62%               10%            19%            6%         73%             5%          27%         13%          68%             6%          6%         14%            59%            --------         10%
 Portable                                     79%           47%                8%            15%           74%         52%             7%          17%         55%          58%             7%          7%         42%            42%            --------         10%
 Non-portable                                 14%           54%                4%            15%           20%         58%            12%          13%         32%          63%             2%         12%         43%            56%            --------         14%

Pension Status
  Defined-benefit                             32%           36%                7%            15%           30%         39%             8%          18%         15%         61%              5%          9%         18%            50%            --------         11%
  Defined-contribution                        32%           46%                6%            18%           47%         54%            11%          16%         66%         58%              4%          9%         58%            54%            --------         14%
  Both                                         3%           45%                5%            12%            2%         40%             0%           0%          1%         100%             0%          0%          2%           --------        --------        --------
  None                                        32%           63%               11%            12%           21%         55%             4%          20%         18%         51%              9%         11%         21%            45%            --------          0%

Wage
 <$15                                         62%           50%                7%            14%           59%         64%             8%          18%         41%          58%            12%         11%       --------        --------        --------        --------
 $15 to $24                                   28%           43%                7%            17%           24%         39%             7%          15%         32%          52%             3%         13%          48%           58%            --------          8%
 $25 to $49                                   10%           52%               12%            16%           16%         53%            10%          16%         24%          45%             7%          9%          52%           50%            --------         11%
 $50+                                          1%           71%               20%            14%            2%         60%             0%          40%          3%          67%             0%          0%       --------        --------        --------        --------

Wealth
 $0k                                           6%           57%                4%            14%            6%         64%            17%           0%         12%          63%             9%         11%         15%            54%            --------         18%
 $1-$24k                                      37%           53%                8%            13%           36%         56%             7%          24%         36%          61%             5%          8%         43%            46%            --------         10%
 $25k - $100k                                 25%           46%                7%            18%           22%         55%             8%          19%         21%          57%             6%          6%         20%            52%            --------         19%
 $100k - $500k                                26%           48%                9%            14%           23%         62%             9%          13%         22%          63%             2%         10%         17%            56%            --------          8%
 $500k+                                        6%           50%               17%            13%           13%         34%             5%           6%          9%          60%             6%          8%          5%           --------        --------        --------

Notes:
a
    Does not include respondents who were not working for two consecutive waves following FTC employment and who later reentered.
b
    Percentage of respondents who experienced a reduction in career job hours of 20 percent or more.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                    Table 7

    Hourly Wages in Career and Bridge Employment, by Gender, and Sector
         HRS Core Respondents on a Full-Time Career Job at the Time of the First Interview


                                                              Bridge job wage
Career job wage               <$15            $15 to $24        $25 to $49      $50+    Total

Men
 Public Sector
    <$15                       13.3                4.7                1.6         0.8    20.3
    $15 to $24                 11.7               15.6                5.5         3.1    35.9
    $25 to $49                 14.8                5.5               17.2         2.3    39.8
    $50+                        0.0                0.0                0.8         3.1     3.9
    Total                      39.8               25.8               25.0         9.4   100.0

  Private Sector
    <$15                       32.2                3.9                1.2         0.2    37.4
    $15 to $24                 13.8               13.1                3.5         0.8    31.2
    $25 to $49                  6.6                2.7               13.8         4.1    27.3
    $50+                        1.2                0.2                0.6         2.1     4.1
    Total                      53.8               19.9               19.1         7.2   100.0

Women
 Public Sector
   <$15                        33.1                3.2                1.6         0.0    37.9
   $15 to $24                  16.9               12.9                4.0         0.8    34.7
   $25 to $49                   4.8                6.5               11.3         3.2    25.8
   $50+                         0.0                0.8                0.8         0.0     1.6
   Total                       54.8               23.4               17.7         4.0   100.0

  Private Sector
    <$15                       56.9                4.8                1.2         0.2    63.1
    $15 to $24                 10.1               10.8                2.4         0.5    23.9
    $25 to $49                  2.4                3.1                5.8         0.5    11.8
    $50+                        0.5                0.0                0.2         0.5     1.2
    Total                      69.9               18.8                9.6         1.7   100.0

Notes:

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                        Table 8

                                                  Relative Risk Ratios from Multinomial Logistic Regression
                                                Dependent Variable: First Transition from Full-Time Career Job
                                 Age-Eligible HRS Men and Women on a Full-Time Career Job at the Time of the First Interview


                                                                        Men                                                                      Women
                                                Bridge Job                            Direct Exit                         Bridge Job                         Direct Exit
                                        Rel. Risk         p-value             Rel. Risk         p-value           Rel. Risk         p-value          Rel. Risk         p-value
Age
 51-54                                      --------         --------            --------         --------           --------         --------           --------      --------
 56-61                                      0.642             0.000 ***          1.351             0.015 **          0.691             0.003 ***         1.347          0.025 **
 62-64                                      0.453             0.000 ***          1.372             0.049 **          0.526             0.000 ***         1.588          0.011 **
 65 or older                                0.321             0.000 ***          1.051             0.778             0.281             0.000 ***         0.889          0.559

Health status
  Excellent or very good                    1.180             0.104              0.799             0.031 **          1.236             0.067 *           0.884          0.293
  Good                                      --------         --------            --------         --------           --------         --------           --------      --------
  Fair or poor                              0.646             0.002 ***          0.957             0.748             0.814             0.196             1.472          0.011 **

Educational attainment
  Less than high school                     1.046             0.736              1.012             0.929             1.016             0.921             1.104          0.560
  high school                               --------         --------            --------         --------           --------         --------           --------      --------
  college                                   1.348             0.009 ***          0.963             0.755             1.297             0.037 **          0.891          0.364

Occupation
  White collar, highly-skilled              --------         --------            --------         --------           --------         --------           --------      --------
  White collar, other                       1.096             0.544              1.112             0.496             0.807             0.126             0.903          0.465
  Blue collar, highly-skilled               0.872             0.328              1.062             0.668             0.998             0.994             1.052          0.790
  Blue collar, other                        1.018             0.908              1.362             0.043 **          0.782             0.197             1.032          0.869

Pension status
  No pension                                --------         --------            --------         --------           --------         --------           --------      --------
  Defined benefit                           0.848             0.207              1.124             0.371             0.570             0.000 ***         1.259          0.132
  Defined contribution                      1.083             0.524              0.971             0.824             0.782             0.073 *           1.012          0.937
  Both                                      1.381             0.227              1.938             0.017 **          1.060             0.859             1.394          0.311

Health insurance
  Portable                                  0.947             0.604              1.205             0.077 *           0.910             0.411             1.049          0.679
  Not portable                              --------         --------            --------         --------           --------         --------           --------      --------
  None                                      1.672             0.006 ***          0.895             0.619             1.306             0.195             0.951          0.823

Married                                     1.024             0.910              0.644             0.037 **          0.936             0.799             0.775          0.361

Spouse's health status
  Excellent or very good                    1.114             0.362              0.895             0.364             0.813             0.200             0.822          0.227
  Good                                      --------         --------            --------         --------           --------         --------           --------      --------
  Fair or poor                              1.234             0.197              1.230             0.213             0.585             0.011 **          0.465          0.000 ***

Spouse working                              1.166             0.169              0.832             0.107             1.153             0.391             0.749          0.079 *

Own home                                    2.117             0.000 ***          1.782             0.000 ***         2.115             0.000 ***         1.641          0.002 ***

Sector
  Public                                    1.020             0.860              1.034             0.767             0.918             0.504             0.980          0.873
  Private                                   --------         --------            --------         --------           --------         --------           --------      --------

Cohort
 Core                                       --------         --------            --------         --------           --------         --------           --------      --------
 War Babies                                 1.085             0.573              1.024             0.867             1.068             0.709             0.806          0.222
 Early Boomers                              0.427             0.000 ***          0.451             0.000 ***         0.336             0.000 ***         0.294          0.000 ***
 Mid Boomers                                0.140             0.001 ***          0.066             0.000 ***         0.057             0.000 ***         0.056          0.000 ***



Notes:
[1] The following controls (not shown) are also included in the regression: ethnicity, presence of dependent child, wage, wealth, and region.
[2] Based on all bridge jobs if multiple bridge jobs are observed.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                   Table 9

                           Odds Ratios from Logistic Regressions
                       Dependent Variable: Part-time Bridge Employment
          Age-Eligible HRS Men and Women Who Transitioned to Bridge Employment


                                                       Men                                 Women
                                        Odds ratio           p-value         Odds ratio            p-value
Age
 51-54                                      --------         --------           --------           --------
 56-61                                      2.529             0.000 ***         1.663               0.003 ***
 62-64                                      9.051             0.000 ***         5.934               0.000 ***
 65 or older                               18.727             0.000 ***         9.282               0.000 ***

Health status
  Excellent or very good                    0.968             0.836             0.835               0.297
  Good                                      --------         --------           --------           --------
  Fair or poor                              1.154             0.556             1.089               0.747

Educational attainment
  Less than high school                     1.381             0.121             0.978               0.927
  high school                               --------         --------           --------           --------
  college                                   1.035             0.853             1.052               0.791

Occupation
  White collar, highly-skilled              --------         --------           --------           --------
  White collar, other                       1.079             0.749             1.183               0.435
  Blue collar, highly-skilled               1.167             0.477             1.108               0.735
  Blue collar, other                        1.282             0.309             1.244               0.436

Pension status
  No pension                                --------         --------           --------           --------
  Defined benefit                           1.128             0.581             0.894               0.609
  Defined contribution                      0.838             0.394             0.736               0.137
  Both                                      0.745             0.366             1.086               0.850

Health insurance
  Portable                                  1.674             0.004 ***         1.240               0.201
  Not portable                              --------         --------           --------           --------
  None                                      1.655             0.122             1.169               0.632

Married                                     1.225             0.629              0.479              0.117

Spouse's health status
  Excellent or very good                    1.250             0.225             0.995               0.983
  Good                                      --------         --------           --------           --------
  Fair or poor                              0.856             0.545             1.044               0.886

Spouse working                              0.847             0.326              1.170              0.507

Own home                                    1.171             0.479              0.980              0.929

Sector
  Public                                    2.643             0.000 ***         1.855               0.002 ***
  Private                                   --------         --------           --------           --------

Cohort
 Core                                       --------         --------           --------           --------
 War Babies                                 1.224             0.317             0.569               0.007 ***
 Early Boomers                              0.728             0.183             0.604               0.051 *



Notes:
[1] The following controls (not shown) are also included in the regression: ethnicity, presence of dependent
[2] Based on all bridge jobs if multiple bridge jobs are observed.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Health and Retirement Study.
                                                                                      Table 10

                                                          Odds Ratios from Logistic Regressions
                                                  Dependent Variable: Reduced FTC Job Hours and Reentry
                                 Age-Eligible HRS Men and Women on a Full-Time Career Job at the Time of the First Interview


                                                               Phased Retirement                                                                 Reentry
                                                       Men                                 Women                                Men                                   Women
                                        Odds ratio           p-value         Odds ratio            p-value        Odds ratio          p-value          Odds ratio             p-value
Age
 51-54                                      --------         --------           --------           --------          --------         --------             --------           --------
 56-61                                      3.811             0.000 ***         3.325               0.000 ***        0.844             0.279               0.737               0.093 *
 62-64                                      6.873             0.000 ***         5.185               0.000 ***        0.655             0.041 **            0.612               0.046 **
 65 or older                               12.302             0.000 ***         9.586               0.000 ***        0.236             0.000 ***           0.205               0.001 ***

Health status
  Excellent or very good                    0.884             0.397             0.786               0.157            0.990             0.945               1.027               0.880
  Good                                      --------         --------           --------           --------          --------         --------             --------           --------
  Fair or poor                              0.745             0.142             0.633               0.085 *          1.203             0.372               0.479               0.005 ***

Educational attainment
  Less than high school                     1.036             0.861             1.051               0.854            0.710             0.092 *             1.610               0.055 *
  high school                               --------         --------           --------           --------          --------         --------             --------           --------
  college                                   1.399             0.056 *           1.635               0.011 **         1.073             0.682               1.200               0.367

Occupation
  White collar, highly-skilled              --------         --------           --------           --------          --------         --------             --------           --------
  White collar, other                       0.794             0.278             0.811               0.301            1.032             0.889               0.832               0.407
  Blue collar, highly-skilled               0.623             0.020 **          1.195               0.546            1.138             0.522               0.436               0.024 **
  Blue collar, other                        0.685             0.093 *           0.983               0.957            0.769             0.246               0.518               0.037 **

Pension status
  No pension                                --------         --------           --------           --------          --------         --------             --------           --------
  Defined benefit                           0.539             0.001 ***         0.761               0.196            1.373             0.133               0.778               0.268
  Defined contribution                      0.698             0.038 **          0.732               0.134            1.359             0.152               1.025               0.910
  Both                                      0.625             0.156             0.391               0.082 *          1.337             0.369               0.445               0.115

Health insurance
  Portable                                  1.023             0.886             1.300               0.158            1.209             0.259               1.046               0.801
  Not portable                              --------         --------           --------           --------          --------         --------             --------           --------
  None                                      1.405             0.292             2.541               0.005 ***        0.460             0.050 *             0.833               0.613

Married                                     1.075             0.773              0.829              0.572            1.438             0.294               0.497               0.039 **

Spouse's health status
  Excellent or very good                    1.076             0.671             0.914               0.685            0.913             0.584               0.789               0.317
  Good                                      --------         --------           --------           --------          --------         --------             --------           --------
  Fair or poor                              1.283             0.255             0.415               0.013 **         0.572             0.015 **            1.321               0.345

Spouse working                              0.815             0.190              0.800              0.321            0.413             0.000 ***           0.712               0.133

Own home                                    0.830             0.311              1.053              0.815            3.785             0.000 ***           3.018               0.000 ***

Wealth
 < $24k                                     0.944             0.791             1.807               0.009 ***        5.508             0.000 ***           3.603               0.000 ***
 $25k - $100k                               --------         --------           --------           --------          --------         --------             --------           --------
 > $100k                                    1.138             0.433             1.138               0.497            1.355             0.093 *             1.229               0.336

Sector
  Public                                    1.107             0.535             1.733               0.001 ***        0.750             0.112               1.014               0.945
  Private                                   --------         --------           --------           --------          --------         --------             --------           --------

Cohort
 Core                                       --------         --------           --------           --------          --------         --------             --------           --------
 War Babies                                 0.984             0.933             0.932               0.769            0.903             0.568               1.502               0.056 *
 Early Boomers                              1.093             0.668             0.971               0.895            0.595             0.032               0.990               0.970



Notes:
[1] The following controls (not shown) are also included in the regression: ethnicity, presence of dependent child, wage, and region.
[2] Health, spouse's health, marital status, presence of a dependent child, home ownership, wealth, and region are measured in the wave prior to reentry for those who reenter.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Health and Retirement Study.
