                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE INTERGENERATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF HUMAN CAPITAL:
            EVIDENCE FROM THE GOLDEN AGE OF UPWARD MOBILITY

                                          David Card
                                       Ciprian Domnisoru
                                         Lowell Taylor

                                       Working Paper 25000
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25000


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2018




We gratefully acknowledge support from Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development (R01 HD091134-01). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors
and does not necessarily represent the views of the NICHHD, NIH, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. We are grateful also for support from the Russell Sage Foundation for research support.
We also thank Alexandra Fahey, Alyse Fromson-Ho, Jared Grogan, Ingrid Haegle, Evan Rose, Dounia
Saeme, and Ali Wessel for invaluable help in assembling school quality data.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by David Card, Ciprian Domnisoru, and Lowell Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence from the Golden Age of
Upward Mobility
David Card, Ciprian Domnisoru, and Lowell Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 25000
September 2018
JEL No. I24

                                            ABSTRACT

We use 1940 Census data to study the intergenerational transmission of human capital for children
born in the 1920s and educated during an era of expanding but unequally distributed public school
resources. Looking at the gains in educational attainment between parents and children, we document
lower average mobility rates for blacks than whites, but wide variation across states and counties for
both races. We show that schooling choices of white children were highly responsive to the quality
of local schools, with bigger effects for the children of less-educated parents. We then narrow our
focus to black families in the South, where state-wide minimum teacher salary laws created sharp
differences in teacher wages between adjacent counties. These differences had large impacts on schooling
attainment, suggesting an important causal role for school quality in mediating upward mobility


David Card                                         Lowell Taylor
Department of Economics                            Carnegie Mellon University
549 Evans Hall, #3880                              H. John Heinz III College
University of California, Berkeley                 5000 Forbes Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                            Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER                                           and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu                             lt20@andrew.cmu.edu

Ciprian Domnisoru
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94702
ciprian.domnisoru@gmail.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25000
1       Introduction
Societies aspire to equality of opportunity—the goal that all children have the chance to
achieve a prosperous life. An effective system of public education can play a key role in
pursuit of this ideal. In the U.S. widespread access to public elementary schools opened a
pathway to prosperity for many children by 1900. Even more remarkably, over the next
40 years the “high school movement” led to sustained public investments that enabled the
U.S. to jump ahead of other nations in the share of students with a secondary education
(Goldin and Katz, 2008).1 This era of increasing human capital investment set the stage
for rising incomes and stable or even declining inequality in the decades following World
War II, resulting in what Goldin (2001) has called America’s “human-capital century.”
    Despite the large gains in average educational attainment in the early twentieth century,
not all families benefited equally. Black students in the South were particularly disadvan-
taged by the low quality of segregated schools and limited access to high school.2 For
instance, as late as 1938, South Carolina (a state in which nearly half of the student-aged
population was black) had only 20 accredited high schools for blacks, compared to 306
for whites.3 White children in many rural areas also faced limited access to high-quality
schooling.
    We study the intergenerational links between parent and child schooling in this era of
expanding, but unevenly distributed, educational opportunity. Specifically, we use 100%
population records from the 1940 Census to study education choices of young people (in
the 14–18 age range) who were living with at least one parent. In 1940 the Census Bureau
collected for the first time information on educational attainment for essentially the entire
population, enabling us to study intergenerational links within millions of families. We
combine these data with information on local schools, which, in the states with de jure
segregation, was recorded by race. Importantly, in 1940 most young people completed
their education before leaving home. By age 18, for example, nearly 60% of white men had
left school but almost 90% were living with their parents—only slightly below the fraction
at age 5. This allows us to construct simple measures of educational attainment that
capture upward mobility relative to parents, and to estimate censored regression models
of desired education that flexibly condition on parental education.
    The transmission of economic success between generations has engaged social scientists
for over a century.4 Most recently, an important series of studies by Chetty et al. (2014a,
    1
     The fraction of 14-17 year olds enrolled in high school rose from 10% in 1900 to over 70% in 1940 (US
Department of Education,1993, Table 9).
   2
     As we discuss below, black students outside the South were also often relegated to separate schools, as
were some Chinese and Mexican American students.
   3
     See South Carolina State Superintendent of Education (1938), pp. 98–103.
   4
     Galton (1869) posed the issue as (largely) one of inherited ability. Prominent contributions circa
1970, focusing on the role of educational and other institutions, included Coleman et al. (1966), Blau and
Duncan (1967) and Jencks et al. (1972). A large subsequent literature on intergenerational links in economic
wellbeing has emerged, including studies in the U.S. and elsewhere (see reviews by Solon, 1999, and Black


                                                     2
2014b) has shown that the rate of intergenerational mobility for children born in the early
1980s varies widely across areas of the U.S., and is correlated with measures of school
quality and other local factors.5 Our work provides an historical counterpart to this work,
albeit using education rather than income as the measure of socioeconomic status, while
offering two new contributions to the literature:
    First, we conduct our analyses separately by race. We show that average mobility
rates at mid-century were substantially lower for black families than for whites or Asian
Americans—a pattern that contributed to the persistence of lower education levels for
African Americans for at least another generation. Nevertheless, in some parts of the
country (specifically in the West) mobility rates for blacks were as high as those for whites.
    Second, we go beyond a purely observational analysis of the factors associated with
upward mobility by studying the effects of school quality on educational attainment of
black children in the South. In the era of Jim Crow and political disenfranchisement,
most school resource decisions were made by whites, with little input from local black
families.6 To address remaining concerns over causality, we focus on the effects of state
laws setting minimum salaries for teachers. Consistent with patterns noted by Jones (1928)
and Bond (1934), salaries paid to black teachers were generally lower in Deep South states
(Alabama, Louisiana, Georgia, Mississippi, and South Carolina) than in other segregated
states; race-specific minimum teacher salary policies reinforced these inequalities. This
sets the stage for a cross-border research design (Dube et al., 2010) that uses differences
between contiguous counties to isolate the effects of teacher salaries while differencing out
unobserved local factors.
    At a conceptual level, our research builds on a theoretical literature originating with
Becker and Tomes (1979 and 1986) and Loury (1981). Indeed, we frame our empirical
analysis using a model in the spirit of these papers. We assume that parents face a trade-
off between current consumption and investment in their children’s human capital. More
prosperous parents choose higher levels of education for their children, bequeathing some
of their socioeconomic advantage to the next generation. Using this model we argue that
in the 1920s and 1930s a key factor mediating the strength of this intergenerational link
was the quality of local schools. To the extent that higher quality schools yield higher
returns per year of schooling, parents of a given family background status will invest more
when their children have access to better schools. On the cost side, observed enrollment
patterns suggest there was a discrete jump in the marginal cost of schooling between high
and Devereux, 2011).
   5
     Previous U.S.-based work on the topic (e.g., Solon, 1992, and Mazumder, 2005) typically relied on
relatively small samples, making it impossible to document differences in mobility rates at the local level.
   6
     See Margo (1985, 1990) for detailed historical overviews and references to the literature on disenfran-
chisement and black schooling. While black families had little power over public school resources, there
were some mechanisms for local input. For example, the Rosenwald school construction program (Donohue
et al., 2002; Aaronson and Mazumder, 2011) required co-funding by local black organizations, which po-
tentially created an endogenous local component of school quality. We are able to control for exposure to
Rosenwald schools: like Carruthers and Wanamaker (2013) we find that by 1940 the impacts were small.


                                                     3
school and college that induced many families to stop schooling at 12th grade.7 In this
setting, increases in school quality will tend to have larger effects on children who would
have otherwise stopped schooling prior to completing high school, reducing between-family
differences in schooling attainment by “leveling up” the lower tail.
    We begin our empirical analysis by documenting a strong positive gradient between
parental education and the schooling outcomes of children in the 1940 Census. Among
white females aged 16–18, for instance, those with better-educated parents—at least one
parent graduating from high school—had a 95% probability of completing 9th grade,
whereas those with poorly-educated parents—neither parent beyond a 4th grade educa-
tion—had only a 40% probability. Similar patterns are present for white males and for
black children of both genders.
    We next document wide geographic variation in the relationship between parent and
child education, and in the rate of upward mobility in human capital levels between gen-
erations. As a benchmark, we measure upward mobility using the 9th grade completion
rate of children aged 16–18 whose parents have 5–8 years of school (i.e., roughly in the
middle of the parental educational distribution). At the state level upward mobility rates
are highly correlated with average pupil-teacher ratios and average teacher salaries. At the
county level upward mobility rates for children born in the 1920s are also highly correlated
with measures of upward mobility in income constructed by Chetty et al. (2014a) for chil-
dren born in the early 1980s, underscoring the potential value of understanding the local
determinants of upward mobility in the earlier time period, and suggesting considerable
persistence in the local forces that shape upward mobility.
    To focus more narrowly on the relationship between desired education and local school
characteristics we use censored regression (Tobit) models of schooling attainment that
control for other family characteristics (e.g., living on a farm, and having parents that
were born in a different state). Specifically, we fit models separately by race/gender and
parental education level, treating children who are not enrolled at the census date as
having completed their schooling, and those who are enrolled as censored. We include
unrestricted state dummies that measure the relative educational attainment of children in
different states in a specific parental education group. In a second stage, we then relate the
estimated state dummies to administrative measures of average school quality at the state
level. This analysis points to two main conclusions. First, within narrowly-defined parental
education groups, school quality metrics are strongly related to schooling attainment for
children born in the 1920s. Second, these estimated effects are largest for children with the
least educated parents and smallest for those with the most educated parents. Thus higher
average school quality in a state contributed to a narrowing of human capital disparities
between generations.
    Finally, we turn to a detailed analysis of schooling attainment among black children in
   7
    In 1939 only 9% of 19–24 year olds were enrolled in college (Snyder, 1993, Table 24), nearly half at
private institutions.



                                                   4
the segregated South, using county-level data on pupil teacher ratios and average teacher
salaries. Our key focus is on the effects of average teacher salaries, which we show are
strongly related to the average education of teachers in each county.8 Many Southern
states set minimum wages for public school teachers, with rates that were generally lower
for black teachers, particularly in the Deep South states. The minimum annual salary in
1940 in Georgia, for example, was $280 for white teachers and $175 for black teachers,
while in neighboring Tennessee, the minimum was $320 for both groups.
    To isolate the effects of these salary differences while controlling for local economic op-
portunities, we construct contiguous county pairs on either side of the borders of Southern
states, focusing on pairs for which average education levels of white adults were similar on
each side. We then fit two sets of models: one using within-pair difference in estimated
county effects from Tobit models for observed education of teenage children; the other
using within-pair differences in upward mobility rates. OLS models show a strong partial
correlation between both sets of outcomes and the within-pair difference in average teacher
wages. Instrumental variables estimates using the difference in state minimum salaries to
instrument the difference in average teacher wages are similar or slightly larger, as would
be expected if black teacher wages in a border county are largely exogenous to unobserved
determinants of the desired schooling of black children, but are measured with some error.
Interestingly, the magnitudes of the estimated teacher wage effects from these models are
close to those from our state-level models, suggesting that there may be relatively little
endogeneity bias in those models.
    The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2 we provide some historical context and
a descriptive overview of the main patterns of intergenerational schooling outcomes that
motivate our paper. We set up a theoretical framework in section 3, with the intention of
imposing some order on our thought process as we head into the empirical inquiry. We
report state-level empirical analyses in section 4, then our analysis of Southern border
counties in section 5. We summarize and discuss in section 6.


2       Historical Setting
We study the intergenerational transmission of human capital during the first half the 20th
century—a period during which average schooling was increasing by nearly one year per
decade (see Goldin and Katz, 2008, Figure 1.4). Our focus is on educational outcomes
for teenage children who were living with their parents in 1940.9 The two generations we
study are thus parents, who were born from roughly 1880 through 1910, and their children,
born in the 1920s.
    Two broad features of the historical landscape make these generations especially at-
    8
    See Margo (1990) for an earlier analysis emphasizing the importance of teacher salaries.
    9
    We defer to Section 4 an analysis of the leaving-home process that leads to our choice of specific age
ranges for sons and daughters.



                                                    5
tractive for studying the forces that shape the intergenerational transmission of human
capital.
    The first is wide variability in human capital within the parent generation. This het-
erogeneity reflects, in part, the way the U.S. public school system evolved during the late
19th and early 20th centuries. Most Americans born between 1880 and 1910 had access
to public elementary schools. Access to public high schools, however, was very much de-
pendent on the time and place of their childhood. This variation was the legacy of the
decentralized structure of public schooling. As Goldin and Katz (2008) document, local
finance and control was a defining feature of American public education from its inception,
and the timing of the emergence of publicly funded high school was dependent on many
local factors.10
    Racial segregation also contributed to the inequality of schooling in the parent’s gen-
eration. Segregation was legally mandated throughout the South and in Arizona and
Kansas, and was permitted in many other states at the discretion of local school boards
(see Petersen, 1935; Wright, 1941; and Knox, 1954).11 Several states, including California,
also allowed de jure segregation of Mexican Americans (Wollenberg, 1974) and Chinese
Americans (Kuo, 1998). Educational opportunities afforded black, Hispanic, and Chinese
Americans were thereby often limited as a matter of official policy.
    All told, it is not surprising that we observe dramatic differences in educational attain-
ment within the parent generation by birth cohort, region, and race. We report relevant
statistics, calculated from 1940 Census data, in Appendix A Table A. (All appendices are
available from the authors.) We find, for example, that among black men and women born
in the South in 1880–89, only about 13% completed at least 8 grades of education, and
only 9% reached grade 12. Among whites born in the West in 1900–09, in contrast, close
to 90% completed eighth grade, and over 40% completed high school.
    A second feature of the historical landscape that is valuable for our research design is
inequality in educational resources available at the local level to the children’s generation.
By the time these children were in school (in the late 1920s and 1930s) some states had
adopted equalization and standardization policies, but local taxes remained the dominant
form of school finance.12 And between states there were very large differences in resources
  10
     See chapters 4–6 of Goldin and Katz (2008), which provide a detailed account of the provision of primary
and secondary public education in the U.S. in the 19th and 20th centuries. As to the high school movement
specifically, these scholars argue, “The high school movement was, above all, a grassroots movement. It
sprung from the people and was not forced upon them by a top-down campaign” (p. 245).
  11
     Peterson (1935) reports that in the early 1930s all 18 Southern states, the District of Columbia, Arizona
and Kansas mandated racially segregated schools. Separate schools were explicitly allowed in Indiana, New
York, and Wyoming; and no legal impediment existed to segregation at the local level in 13 other states.
  12
     Nationwide, the average local share of school spending was 83% in 1930 and 68% in 1940. See Bensen
and O’Halloran (1987) for an overview of historical trends. Wallis (2000) provides a broad historical
overview of fiscal centralization in the U.S., while Coen-Pirani and Wolley (2018) give an economic analysis
of changes in fiscal centralization during the 1930s.




                                                      6
devoted to primary and secondary education.13 As a broad generalization, schools outside
the South were better financed than those in the Southern states. The problem was com-
pounded for black students by lower levels of resources in the black schools, particularly in
the Deep South. In contrast, most Asian Americans in the children’s generation attended
regular public schools in California, which were among the highest-quality in the country,
and had been desegregated for some years.

2.1    Geographic Patterns in Schooling and Upward Mobility
Schooling of Parents and Children
With these generalizations in mind, we provide some initial descriptive evidence on the
relationship between parent and child education in the series of panels in Figure 1. In
constructing these figures we focus on children aged 16–18 who reside with at least one
parent.14 For these children we construct a simple metric of educational attainment—the
fraction who have completed at least ninth grade (whether still enrolled or not). The
panels in Figure 1 graph this outcome as a function of “parental schooling”—a variable
equal to the higher of the parents’ education, when both parents are present, or the parent’s
education in single-parent families. In all panels except F and G, and in all the subsequent
analysis below, we focus exclusively on families with native-born parents.
    Panel A shows that at every level of parental education, the share of children with
at least nine grades of education is substantially higher for white children than for black
children, and is higher for daughters than sons (of either race). Panels B and C document
regional variation in schooling outcomes for whites. These graphs show that education
levels are much lower in the South than in other regions, with a wider gap for children of
poorly educated parents. Panels D and E compare the gradients in the Deep South and
the other Southern states (sometimes called the Peripheral South) for daughters and sons
of both races.15 Importantly, the educational outcomes for white children (conditional on
parental education) are essentially the same in the two sets of states, whereas for black
children, schooling outcomes are lower in the Deep South. This simple comparison points
  13
      In this respect our work stands in contrast to the prominent stream of research on intergenerational
mobility emerging from Nordic counties (made possible by linked administrative records in those coun-
tries), e.g., Black et al. (2005), Meghir and Palme (2005), Aakvik et al. (2010), Meghir et al. (2013),
Meghir et al. (2014), Lundborg, Nilsson, and Rooth (2014), and Carneiro et al. (2015). In our setting—the
U.S. in 1940—we have far greater levels of racial and cultural diversity, and also greater geographic variation
in educational resources available to children.
   14
      Here we follow Goldin and Katz (1999), who evaluated the education of children aged 14–18 who lived
with parents in the 1915 Iowa Census. Hilger (2017b) takes a similar approach though his focus is on
educational outcomes among older children (aged 26–29) who co-reside with parents. (We refine our age
limits in the models presented in section 4.)
   15
      Margo (1986) concludes that completed schooling levels of black adults in the 1940 Census were over-
stated relative to whites, a pattern that serves to widen the racial gap in child educational attainment
conditional on parental education. This issue is presumably less important for comparisons between black
families, particularly within regions.


                                                      7
to the potential importance of school quality, which was broadly similar for whites in the
two sets of states but of lower quality for blacks in the Deep South (see Card and Krueger,
1992b).
    Although our primary focus is on native-born families, for the sake of interest in Pan-
els F and G we show parallel evidence for families with at least one immigrant parent.
There is a common perception that immigrants move to the U.S. in hopes of improving
prospects for their children. Evidence in Panel F is consistent with that idea: children of
poorly-educated immigrants have much higher levels of educational attainment than their
native-born counterparts.16 Like the children of native-born parents, children of immigrant
parents had lower educational attainment in the South, suggesting that some common fea-
ture of the Southern education system may have been partly to blame for the disparities
for both groups.

Upward Mobility
There are many ways of measuring upward mobility in educational attainment. Motivated
by the patterns in Figure 1, we consider parents with 5-8 years of education—approximately
in the middle of the parental education distribution—and calculate the fraction of their
children who “move up the educational ladder” by completing at least nine years of educa-
tion. Figure 2 shows large regional differences in this simple measure of upward mobility,
and quantifies a disadvantage for black children, most prominently in the South. In con-
trast, in the West the black-white gap is negligible, though both blacks and whites have
slightly lower upward mobility than Japanese American families.17
    Panels A and B of Figure 3 show upward mobility rates by state for white daughters and
sons, respectively, and reveal striking geographic variation in mobility. Among sons, for
example, upward mobility is lowest in Tennessee and Kentucky (0.35 and 0.37 respectively)
and highest in California (0.82) and Utah (0.85). Panels C and D report comparable state-
wide mobility rates for black daughters and sons.18 Upward mobility was generally much
lower for blacks than whites, particularly in the Deep South, with rates for black sons of
only 0.09 in Mississippi, and 0.15 in South Carolina and Georgia. In contrast, black sons’
upward mobility rates were quite high in Nebraska (0.79), California (0.83), and Minnesota
(0.83). The near equality of upward mobility rates for white and black children in California
suggests that lower average black mobility rates in other states may have been driven more
by ecological factors than by inherent differences in the value of education among black
  16
     Using data measured in the 1970 Census for children of roughly the same cohort, Card, DiNardo and
Estes (2000) show that the conditional education gap between children of immigrants and children with
U.S. born parents is present even in adulthood.
  17
     See Hilger (2017a) for an interesting analysis of upward mobility among Asian American families fo-
cusing on California.
  18
     We give results only for states for which we have a sample of at least 50 child-parent pairs among
families in which parental education is 5–8 grades.




                                                   8
families.19
    Given the large sample sizes available in the 1940 Census, we can also estimate upward
mobility rates at much finer levels of geography. Panel A of Figure 4 presents county-level
estimates for a pooled sample of black and white families, using different colors for counties
with upward mobility rates in different deciles of the national distribution. For sake of
comparison, Panel B shows a similar map using measures of intergenerational mobility in
income for the cohort of children born 1980–83 constructed by Chetty et al. (2014a), again
distinguishing counties by their deciles in the overall distribution of mobility rates.20 The
similarities in the geography of upward mobility between these two cohorts are striking:
the correlation across counties between the two mobility rates is 0.45, suggesting a high
degree of persistence in local factors affecting intergenerational mobility rates in the U.S.,
though the rate of upward mobility appears to have fallen in California.
    These maps show that average upward mobility rates for children born in the early
1920s and early 1980s are both lower in the South. Panels C and D show that when we
measure mobility rates separately by race in 1940, the rates for both race groups are lower
in the South and higher in the Northeast and West. Indeed, the correlation across counties
between the upward mobility rates of whites and blacks is 0.53, so there is clearly a strong
common component of geographic variation in mobility rates for both races.

2.2    An Initial Look at Upward Mobility and School Quality
As a final descriptive exercise we correlate state-level upward mobility rates with measures
of school quality. We use two simple measures of school quality—the pupil-teacher ratio
and average annual teacher wages—originally assembled by Card and Krueger (1992a,
1992b).21 Average pupil-teacher ratios range from just under 20 (in the Dakotas) to 36 (in
Kentucky), while average teacher salaries range from $600 per year (in Arkansas) to $2400
per year (in New York).22
    Panels A and B of Figure 5 show that upward mobility rates of white daughters and
sons are correlated with each of the quality measures in the expected direction. Panels C
and D repeat this exercise for black daughters and sons, using data on school quality for
the segregated black schools in the 18 Southern states with de jure segregation.23 We note
  19
     The relatively high upward mobility rates among black families outside the South may in part be the
result of high upward mobility more generally among geographically mobile parents. If so this complicates
interpretation of our comparisons. In our models below we therefore control for parental geographic mobility.
  20
     These maps use a measure by Chetty et al. that gives the predicted income percentile (at age 26) for
children born to parents at the 25th percentile of the income distribution.
  21
     Histograms showing the distributions of these measures across the 48 mainland states and the District of
Columbia, but excluding schools for black students in segregated states, are shown in Appendix Figure A1.
Card and Krueger also assembled data on average term lengths but in their analysis and our own analysis
this variable adds little once the other two measures are included so we focus only on the two main measures.
  22
     For reference, the CPI has risen by a factor of about 17 from 1940 to today, while average wages of
non-supervisory workers in manufacturing have risen by a factor of approximately 38.
  23
     Kansas and Arizona also operated separate schools for black students but we have have been unable to


                                                     9
that the horizontal scales differ for black and white students, reflecting the large variation
in school quality for black students across the 18 states (e.g., the pupil/teacher ratio ranges
from 25 to 50). All panels reveal striking correlations between the two measures of quality
and the upward mobility rates.
    Motivated by this descriptive evidence, we take a digression to develop a more fully
specified conceptual framework that will guide our inquiry.


3     A Benchmark Model
Our goal is to build a simple model to study plausible links between the intergenerational
transmission of human capital and the quality of schooling available to families. We work
with a variant of the household model of Becker and Tomes (1979, 1986) and Loury (1981),
in which the utility of a parent-child family depends on current consumption and the future
consumption of the child.
    We assume that parents choose a level of schooling E for their child, given their own
resources and the potential earnings of the child. Parents have income y0 per period, which
is assumed to remain constant over time, and pay out-of-pocket costs c(t) for the tth period
of schooling, which includes tuition and living costs for post-secondary education.24 For
simplicity we assume the child’s earnings 0 while in school and y1 (E) per period after
completing E years of school. We assume that children live with parents until age L > E,
after which point they are on their own. Ignoring (for the moment) any borrowing or
lending, parents maximize
              Z   E                                Z   L                                  Z   ∞
                                      −rt                                    −rt
    U (E) =           u(y0 − c(t))e         dt +           u(y0 + y1 (E))e         dt +           θv(y1 (E))e−rt dt, (1)
              0                                    E                                      L

where u maps parental income to parental utility in period t, v maps the child’s income to
the child’s utility in period t, θ ≥ 0 is an altruism factor reflecting the value of the child’s
utility to the parent, and r is a discount factor.
    The marginal value of an additional unit of child’s education is
                                        0                             
                          0        −rE y1 (E)
                        U (E) = e              λ1 − (y1 (E) + c(E))λ0 ,                      (2)
                                           r

where
                       λ1 = u0 (y0 + y1 (E))(1 − e−r(L−E) ) + θv 0 (y1 (E))e−r(L−E) ,
find race-specific data on school quality for these states.
   24
      For students in areas with no local high school the out-of-pocket costs of secondary school may also
include living and travel costs.




                                                             10
and
                                 u(y0 + y1 (E)) − u(y0 − c(E))
                           λ0 =
                                           y1 (E) + c(E)
                                  0
                                    y0 ) for ye0 ∈ [y0 − c(E), y0 + y1 (E)].
                               = u (e

                                                                       y 0 (E)
The first term on the right hand side of equation (2), e−rE 1 r λ1 , is the marginal benefit
of an additional unit of education, which yields a flow of income y10 (E) per year starting
in period E and is valued using the marginal utility λ1 .25 The second term, e−rE (y1 (E) +
c(E))λ0 , represents the marginal cost of schooling, which includes an opportunity cost
y1 (E) and a direct cost c(E), both of which are incurred in period E and are valued using
the marginal utility λ0 .
    We note that if a parent simply maximizes the sum of parental and child income (as
would be the case with access to perfect credit markets) then λ0 = λ1 = 1. Otherwise,
for families that cannot easily borrow against their children’s future income, or that are
less than perfectly altruistic, the marginal utility of $1 paid as a lump sum at the end of
schooling will be higher than the marginal utility of $1 paid as a perpetuity to the parent
and the child, implying that λ0 > λ1 .
    Ignoring any discontinuities in schooling, an optimal choice for E sets U 0 (E) = 0,
leading to the condition
                                   y10 (E)    λ0
                                           = r [1 + d(E)] ,                             (3)
                                   y1 (E)     λ1
where d(E) = c(E)/y1 (E) is the ratio of the direct cost of the E th year of schooling to
the opportunity cost. The left hand side of (3) is the proportional return to an additional
unit of schooling, while the right hand side is the annuitized proportional cost, adjusted
for any disparity between λ0 and λ1 . In the case where parents maximize the sum of
parental and child income and there are no direct costs of schooling, the right hand side
of (3) is just r, yielding the well-known condition for optimal schooling derived by Mincer
(1958). More generally, r λλ01 represents an “adjusted discount rate” for the family, reflecting
credit constraints and/or imperfect altruism. Assuming that better educated parents have
lower values of r λλ01 , and that the proportional return to schooling is decreasing, the model
implies that better educated parents will invest in more child education, providing an
intergenerational linkage as in Becker and Tomes (1986) and Mulligan (1999).

3.1    Mapping the Model to the Empirical Analysis
The implications of this model depend on how the proportional returns to the E th year
                        y 0 (E)
of schooling, MR(E) ≡ y11 (E) , and the proportional marginal costs of schooling, MC(E) ≡
  25
    Note that λ1 is a weighted average of u0 (y0 + y1 (E)) and θv 0 (y1 (E)), where the weights depend on the
fraction of the child’s life outside the parental home after completion of education.



                                                     11
r λλ01 [1 + d(E)] , vary across families. Consider a simple linearized model that focuses on
the effects of two key observable factors: the average quality of local public schooling, Q,
and the level of parental education, P. Specifically, suppose that

                             MR(E) = γ0 + γE E + γQ Q + γP P + φ,                                   (4)

where φ is an unobserved component in the return to schooling, while

                             MC(E) = δ0 + δ E E + δQ Q + δP P + ξ,                                  (5)

where ξ is an unobserved component of marginal cost. We assume that γE ≤ 0, (i.e.,
the marginal return to additional years of schooling is non-increasing), that δ E ≥ 0 (i.e.,
the marginal cost is non-decreasing), and that δE − γE > 0. In addition, we assume
that γQ > 0 (so higher quality schooling increases the return to additional schooling) and
that δQ ≤ 0 (i.e., higher quality public schools, if anything, lower the marginal cost of
schooling). Finally, we assume that children of better educated parents have the same
or higher marginal returns to schooling, i.e., γP ≥ 0, but strictly lower marginal costs of
schooling (δP < 0). Equations (4) and (5) imply a linear model of optimal schooling:

                                    E = β0 + βQ Q + βP P + η,                                       (6)
              γ −δ                   −δP
with βQ = δEQ−γQ  E
                     ≥ 0, βP = δγEP −γ E
                                           > 0, and η = δEφ−ξ −γE .
                                                                   26 This very simple model

implies that for a given quality of local schools, children’s schooling is linearly increasing in
parent’s schooling, and that better quality schools lead to a parallel shift in the mapping
from parent’s education to child’s education. Thus, higher quality schooling raises schooling
levels but does not differentially affect children from more- or less-educated families.
    It also implies that the unobserved component of optimal schooling reflects a combina-
tion of the unobserved components of M R and M C, which could in principle be correlated
with Q (or P ). This is the main threat to a causal interpretation of the observed relation-
ship between schooling choices and observed quality measures, motivating our cross-border
analysis in Section 5.
    A more nuanced set of predictions arise if the marginal cost of schooling rises discontin-
uously at the end of high school. This case is illustrated in Figure 6, where we consider the
optimal schooling choices for two children who face the same marginal returns to schooling
but different marginal costs because of different family backgrounds. The MC schedule for
the child with lower-educated parents (shown in blue) is relatively high, reflecting the high
cost of additional investment for the family (i.e., a higher value of r λλ10 ) whereas the schedule
for the child with higher-educated parents (shown in red) is relatively low. Both schedules,
however, discontinuously jump up for post-secondary schooling levels (E > 12), reflecting
  26
    More generally, interpreting the coefficients of equations (4) and (5) as derivatives of M R and M C
taken around an optimal choice for E, βQ and βP can be interpreted as the derivatives of the optimal
schooling choice with respect to Q and P .


                                                  12
the additional direct costs of college. In this setting, children of families with P in some
range (say P1 ≤ P ≤ P2 ) all stop schooling at the end of high school; only the most highly
educated parents send their children to college. Higher school quality, which shifts up the
MR schedule in Figure 6, leads to rising education for children of lower-educated parents
(from E ∗ to E ∗∗ in the example shown), but will not necessarily change the education
choices for families that previously selected E = 12.
    We suspect that the intuition in Figure 6 is highly relevant for many families in the
1930s. Data on 25 year olds from the 1940 Census, for example, shows a striking mass
point in the distribution of education at exactly high school completion, representing 28%
of young adults in this cohort. Less than a third of those who completed high school had
any college education. This suggests that most families faced a substantial jump in costs
of education beyond the completion of high school. In our empirical analysis we therefore
fit models for schooling attainment of children separately by parental education group,
allowing for the possibility that the effect of school quality differs by the level of parental
education.
    Another factor that could contribute to differences in the effect of average school quality
across parental education groups is the systematic sorting of better-educated families to
higher-spending school districts. To illustrate, let Qs represent the average quality of
schooling in a given state s, and let Qsk represent the average quality in the k th school
district of that state, where a given family with parental education P actually lives. The
incentives for higher-educated parents to seek out the better-quality districts are arguably
higher in states with lower average quality. Thus, we expect that

                              E[Qsk |Qs , P ] = τQ Qs + τP P + τQP Qs P

with τQP < 0, implying that the actual level of school quality experienced by better-
educated families varies less across states than that experienced by poorly educated fam-
ilies. Combining this with equation (6) leads to a model for the child’s education that
includes a negatively-signed interaction between average school quality and parental edu-
cation.


4     Empirical Analysis of Parental-Child Links in Education
4.1    Children in 1940 U.S. Census
We noted that in 1940 most children completed schooling prior to leaving home. Consider
the bar graphs in Figure 7: here, the blue bars represent the proportion of individuals at
each age between 5 and 20 that we can identify as living with a parent,27 and the dark
  27
     Young children not living with a parent often instead were residing with a grandparent or other relative,
but some also lived in a household with unrelated adults. At older ages, especially at age 18 and older,
individuals not living with a parent more typically were in households of their own.



                                                     13
red bars represent the proportion of children who live with a parent and are enrolled in
school. Focusing, for the moment, on white males (Panel B), we see that the proportion
living with a parent is stable at around 90% until age 17, then declines slightly to 87% at
age 18 before falling off more quickly at ages 19 and 20. School enrollment rates of white
sons who live with a parent are relatively stable between ages 8 and 14, but fall steadily
after age 14; by age 18 less than 40% are in school.28 Relative to sons, white daughters
(Panel A) begin leaving home a little earlier, presumably reflecting the gender gap in age
at marriage, though their enrollment rates conditional on living with a parent are similar.
The patterns for black daughters and sons, in Panels C and D, show a similar stability
in the fraction of boys living with their parents until age 18, and of girls until age 16,
though on average black children have about 10 percentage points lower rates of parental
cohabitation, and also begin to leave school at earlier ages.
     Table 1 presents a quantitative summary of the same information, focusing on children
aged 14–18. Our reading of the data in Figure 6 and Table 1 is that for boys, there is
little threat of selection bias in conditioning on living with one or both parents up to age
18. For girls, similar reasoning applies to samples up to age 16. Since we want to study
attainment of at least 9th grade, in our analysis below we therefore focus on samples of
sons aged 14–18 and daughters aged 14–16.

4.2    Measures of School Quality
We use two main measures of the quality of local public schools—the pupil-teacher ratio,
and average annual wages of teachers. A concern with interpreting the teacher wage as
a quality metric is that it reflects differences in the cost of living, rather than in the real
wage paid to teachers. To address this, we used the full count 1940 Census data to extract
information on wage earners with at least one year of post-secondary schooling who were
working in occupations other than teaching. We then fit simple earnings equations for these
non-teachers that include controls for education, race, gender, and experience, as well as
dummy variables for each state. We then use the estimated state dummies to deflate
observed teacher salaries.29 This adjustment effectively assumes that in the absence of
other factors, teacher wages would have varied across states proportionally to non-teacher
   28
      There are a number of possible explanations for the <100% enrollment rate of younger children, in-
cluding children with disabilities, children being home-schooled, children on break from school (though this
is likely to be small because the 1940 Census was taken in April), and miscoding.
   29
      To be slightly more precise, we begin with a data set of all white workers aged 22–65 who (i) had at
least one year of college education, (ii) reported earnings in the 1940 Census, and (iii) had an occupation not
“teachers, n.e.c.” (category 18). This gives a sample of 3.24 million observations—26.8% female, average
age 36.1, mean years of education 14.9, mean annual earnings $1703 (standard deviation 1179) and mean
log earnings 7.18 (standard deviation 0.78). We then fit a regression model for log earnings, including a
dummy variable for female, dummies for each category of education, a cubic in potential years of experience,
and unrestricted state dummies, with New York state as the omitted state. Denote the estimated fixed
effect for state s as δ̂s . These provide estimates of the deviation in mean wages for a representative worker,
relative to earnings in New York (in 1939). Our adjustment factor for each state is then exp(δ̂s ).


                                                      14
wages. Panel A of Figure 8 shows that mean adjusted and unadjusted wages are highly
correlated. In our models in the next section we use the adjusted wage data, but we have
also estimated all models using the unadjusted series, and find very similar coefficients.
    Panel B of Figure 8 provides some evidence that higher teacher wages were associated
with a higher quality pool of teachers. We calculate the fraction of teachers in the 1940
Census with a college degree in each state, and plot this variable against the mean state
teacher wage (taken from the administrative data). In general, states with higher wages
also have better educated teachers.
    Finally, in Panel C we plot the relationship between median earnings of teachers in a
state and the median earnings of non-teachers (again restricting attention to those who
attended at least one year of college). In most states, teachers earned less than non-
teachers, but there are notable exceptions, including California, New York, and the District
of Columbia. The graph also shows that there is large variation in teacher wages among
states with similar non-teacher wages, suggesting that there was substantial variation in
the willingness of communities with similar average incomes to pay for better-qualified
teachers.

4.3     Modeling the Effects of School Quality on Education Choices—White
        Families
The reasoning illustrated in Figure 6 and the availability of very large sample sizes from
the 1940 Census (in white families, 2.15 million daughters aged 14–16 and 3.67 million
sons aged 14–18) leads us to consider empirical models in which the relationship between a
child’s educational outcomes and the quality of local schools varies by parental education.
We begin by dividing households into four parental education groups: 0–4, 5–8, 9–12, and
more than 12 years of education. We then fit statistical models separately for sons and
daughters in each group.
    We use a two step procedure. First, we estimate a model of educational attainment for
children in parental education group g:
                                 ∗
                                Eig = Aig αAg + Cig αCg + αs(i)g + uig ,                                     (7)

where Aig is a set of age dummies for the ith child in parent education group g; Cig are
additional family-level control variables,30 αsg are state dummies for education group g,
and s(i) is the state of residence of family i. We estimate this model as a Tobit (i.e.,
censored regression model), treating children who are not enrolled at the Census date as
having completed their schooling, Eig∗ = E , and those who are enrolled as being censored,
                                            ig

   30
      These controls are an indicator for only mother present, an indicator for only father present, an indicator
for both parents born in a different state, an indicator for one parent born in a different state, an indicator
for urban area, an indicator for living on a farm, indicators for parents’ age (in 5 year intervals), and
single-year indicators for parental education.



                                                       15
  ∗ ≥ E . We adopt a normalization that sets the (weighted) sum of the state dummies
Eig      ig
to zero for each g.
    We note that since the oldest children in our samples are 16 (for females) or 18 (for
males), the censoring rates are fairly high for children in the highest parental education
groups. In Appendix Table B1 we report the mean, median, and modal education levels
observed for each parental education and gender group, as well as the fraction of children
in each group who are still enrolled (and are therefore treated as censored). The censoring
rate is 85% for males whose best-educated parent has 12 years of education and 89% for
those whose best-educated parent has > 12 years. For females the corresponding rates are
94% and 96%. These high rates mean that our models have limited power to discern the
desired schooling of children in the highest parental education groups. Nevertheless, we
can still measure differences across states in the attainment of at least one year of high
school for all of our parental education groups.
    In a second stage, we then estimate models that relate the estimated state dummies
to our two state-level school quality measures: P Ts , the average pupil-teacher ratio in
state s, and Ws , the average level of teacher salaries (adjusted for state-level differences in
average pay as described above). Specifically, we estimate three versions of the following
specification:

                               α̂sg = π0g + P Ts πP T g + Ws πW g + ξsg .                                (8)

In the first variant (“model 1”) we include only the pupil-teacher ratio. In the second
(“model 2”) we include only the teacher wage. In the third (“model 3”) we include both
measures of local school quality. We estimate these models by weighted least squares,
weighting the data for state s by the inverse sampling variance of the estimated state
dummy for group g.31
    Table 2 presents parameter estimates. We observe several interesting features. First,
school quality is strongly related to schooling attainment for most parental education
groups, with effects that are largest for children with the least educated parents and small-
est for those with the most educated parents. The general pattern suggests that higher
school quality contributes to a closing of between-family gaps in human capital.32
    A second interesting feature is that the estimated effects of the individual school quality
measures are only slightly attenuated when we fit a model that includes both (model 3),
  31
     If our first stage model was linear and there were no other control variables this weighting would lead
to second stage estimates that are numerically identical to those from a one-step procedure in which we
included the school quality measures directly in the first stage model (Hanushek, 1974).
  32
     To investigate further, we broke down our parental education bins even further, forming 11 parental
education groups g, and then repeated our exercise, again for daughters and sons separately. We find that
the “school quality effects” (πP T g and πW g ) for our 11 parental education groups g decline in importance,
almost monotonically, as parental education increases. See Appendix Tables B3 and B4. We also provide
parameter estimates for the other control variables for a subset of the Tobit first-stage models in Appendix
Table B2. Finally, Table B5 reports unweighted estimates, which are preferred by some analysts, and which
are very similar.


                                                     16
reflecting the limited correlation between P T and W across states (ρ ≈ 0.2).
    A third feature is that the estimated effects of school quality are only slightly larger
(10–20%) for sons than daughters. Given the lower maximum age for daughters (16 vs. 18),
this is reassuring, and suggests that the higher fraction of censoring for daughters does not
substantially attenuate the effects of school quality.
    A final feature we notice from Table 2 is that estimates of teacher effects are little
affected by the addition of several state-level controls—the average level of education of
whites aged 25–55, the state-level white male unemployment rate (among those aged 16
and older), and the mean value of homes in the state.33 However, the addition of these
covariates leads to greater attenuation in the estimated coefficients of the pupil-teacher
ratio. We conclude that the effects of teacher wages are reasonably robust to other controls,
whereas the pupil-teacher effects are more sensitive, and are likely overstated in the simplest
models.
    To get a sense of the magnitudes implied by the estimates in Table 2, recall that the
state effects from equation (7), which form the dependent variable in the second stage
model, are scaled in years of education. Teacher salaries are scaled in hundreds of dollars
per year. Thus a coefficient of 0.15 on annual teacher salary—as is approximately the case
in families with parental education of 5–8 grades—implies that a $500 increase in average
teacher salaries is associated with a 0.75 year increase in completed education. This is a
relatively large effect, and implies that moving from a low school quality state like Alabama
to a high school quality state like California would lead to an extra two years of education
for the children of parents who have 5–8 years of schooling. Assuming a 7% return to each
year of education, this would yield about 15% higher earnings per year of work, as well as
other potential benefits.34
    One concern with these models is that the Tobit functional form is incorrect. To test
the robustness of our conclusions, we re-estimated our first stage models using a probit
specification, treating education beyond high school as a single top category. We then used
the estimated state effects from these models as dependent variables in our second stage
models. The results are summarized in Appendix Table B8. The estimated effects of P T
and W are qualitatively very similar to the effects in Table 2, though all the coefficients
are re-scaled by a factor of roughly 0.1.35 Thus the estimates imply that a $500 increase in
average teacher salaries is associated with a roughly six to eight percentage point increase
in the probability of achieving at least 9th grade for children whose parents have eight
years of schooling.
  33
      See Appendix Tables B6 and B7 for the full set of estimated coefficients.
  34
      As for the coefficients on the pupil-teacher ratio, the largest effect in the multiple regression models
(with covariates) is approximately -0.10, for sons of very poorly educated parents. This too is quite a large
effect; a 5-pupil reduction in the pupil-teacher ratio is associated with a 0.5 year increase in completed
education.
   35
      The correlation of the estimated effects of teacher wages on the state effects from ordered probit models
for white males (in Appendix Table B8) with the corresponding effects of teacher wages on the state effects
from first stage Tobit models in Appendix Table B4 is 0.95.


                                                      17
    In the extant literature a common way of characterizing the parent-child education link
is with a regression of the child’s education Ei on the parent’s education Pi .36 The models
summarized in Tables 2 and 3 suggest that higher school quality affects the slope of this
relationship, since increased quality has a differential affect on the schooling attainment
of children with more and less-educated parents. To illustrate this directly, we estimate
separate Tobit models relating desired child education to parental education for states with
high, medium, and low levels of average teacher wages, including dummies for parental
education and the same controls included in our main first-stage models. Panel A of
Figure 9 shows the coefficients of the parental education dummies in these three models.
In states with relatively high teacher wages, an increase in parental education from Pi = 2
to Pi = 12, leads to about a 3.5 year gain in child education, i.e., the slope of the parent-
child gradient is approximately 0.35. In states with low teacher wages, on the other hand,
the corresponding slope is approximately 0.75. (We discuss Panel B of Figure 9 below.)

4.4    School Quality and Education Choices—Black Families
We proceed with an analogous exercise for black families located in the South. In compar-
ison to white parents, relatively few black parents have more than elementary education,
so our top education bin is now for parental education > 8 grades.
     Results for black daughters and sons are presented in Table 3.37 As with white fam-
ilies, we observe the expected negative relationship between the pupil-teacher ratio and
educational attainment and positive relationship between the teacher wage and education.
However, for black families the relationship between school quality and education does not
vary substantially according to parental education.
     There are two complementary explanations for this finding. First, few black students
in the South attended college in the late 1930s. Thus the discontinuity in marginal costs
for E > 12 was largely irrelevant, leading to an expected empirical relationship closer to
equation (6). Second, in our discussion above we posited that within-state sorting may
have flattened the relationship between average school quality and the expected quality
of schooling children of highly-educated parents. Black families in the South may have
been an exception. Disenfranchisement meant that African Americans had little control
over the quality of their schools, weakening the sorting effect. These observations suggest
an empirical strategy in which we simply pool all parental education groups in the same
first-stage Tobit model. We do so, and give the results in the final rows of Panel A and
Panel B in Table 3.
     Although the models in Table 3 are estimated on only 18 observations, they point to
relatively precisely estimated effects of local school quality on the educational attainment
  36
    The coefficient on parental education ranges from 0.14 to 0.45 in eight papers cited by Mulligan (1999).
  37
    Interested readers can find estimated coefficients for the Tobit first stage in Table B9. Unweighted
variants of regression (3) from Table 3 are in Table B10. Estimates of the covariate coefficients are in
Tables B11 and B12.



                                                    18
of black sons and daughters, with similar effects for the two gender groups. The estimated
effects are comparable in magnitude to the effects we obtained for white children with
parents in the middle of the white parent’s education distribution (5–8 years of schooling);
in various specification for black students, the average teacher wage effect is approximately
0.10–0.20. Thus a $500 increase in teacher salary is associated with a 0.5 to 1 year increase
in complete schooling. Taking such estimates at face value, the $2000 per year gap in
teacher salary gap between Georgia and the District of Columbia would be associated with
a two to four year gap in completed schooling for black children.
    As with white families, we estimated a probit variant of our model, in which the object
of interest is 9th grade attainment. Results are reported in Appendix Table B13. Inferences
using this approach correspond closely to those in our main analysis (Table 3).
    Further insights are offered in Panel B of Figure 9, where we show the relationship be-
tween the educational attainment of black children and their parent’s education, following
the same steps we used to construct Panel A of this figure for white children. We show
the estimated relationship separately for the Deep South states, which had very low school
quality metrics for black students; the Peripheral Southern states, where observable school
quality measures were higher, and more similar for blacks and whites; and states outside of
the South, where most black students attended non-segregated schools. For families outside
the South the relationship is quite similar to the profile for white families in high-teacher-
wage states shown in panel A, and suggests a remarkable degree of upward mobility in
human capital for blacks. The profiles in the South—especially the Deep South—are much
lower and show far less upward mobility. To appreciate just how unfavorable the estimated
outcomes are for African American children in the Deep South, it is important to realize
that about one-half of black parents in these states had 4 grades or less of schooling. For
these families, predicted child schooling is only about 6 years—a very modest gain when
compared to the gains of 4 or more years for the children of white parents with comparable
levels of schooling.

4.5   Interpretation of State-Level Analysis: the Role of Minimum Teacher
      Salary Standards
Our analysis of the relationship between parental and child schooling takes advantage of
the near-population data in the 1940 Census: our first stage models are estimated using
data for millions of families. But our inferences about the mediating role of school quality
depend on state-level variation, giving us only 49 observations for white children and 18
for black children. While the relationships between the schooling attainment and school
quality are suggestive of a causal link, there are concerns with this interpretation. One is
that the use of state-level school quality measures leads to biases (Hanushek, Rivkin and
Taylor, 1996). Another is that we cannot fully control for other local factors that vary
across states. The limited set of covariates included in our richest models in Table 2, for
example, may not adequately control for differences in labor market opportunities that


                                             19
induced children to acquire more (or less) education and are correlated with school quality
measures.
    To push further, in the next section we study the quality of schooling at the county
level, focusing on adjacent counties that lie along the borders of Southern states. The
idea is that these neighboring counties likely share similar economic and social conditions,
while being subject to substantially different state-level policies. To set the stage for this
cross-border design, and to provide additional clarity to our state-level regressions, it is
worth considering the origins of the variation we observe in state schooling policies.
    We have already noted that during the first few decades of the 20th century, many
states implemented public schooling reform—a process leading to greater equalization and
standardization within states. As of 1940 most school spending was still at the local level
(approximately 68%, according to Bensen and O’Halloran, 1987), but in many states key
local decisions were unmistakably shaped by state-level policies. For instance, in 1940
a total of 23 states set a floor on teacher salaries, including a number of states in the
South, where the minimum salary schedules were usually lower for black teachers than their
white counterparts. These provisions were typically part of broader legislation through
which states provided supplementary funding for local schools. In exchange, counties were
required to adhere to the minimum salary scale, which most counties were doing by 1940.
We provide a brief summary of the history of minimum salaries regulations in Appendix A,
and provide empirical evidence for the importance of minimum wage regulation in pushing
up the lower tail of wages for both black and white teachers.38
    Figures in Appendix A provide visual evidence of the importance of minimum salary
policies in driving statewide teacher salaries. In Figures A4 and A5 we plot the distribution
of earnings of full-time public school teachers (from the 1940 Census) for each state with a
mandated minimum, again separately by race, along with a line representing the minimum
salary. When looking at these figures it is helpful to note that earnings are generally
thought to be noisily measured in the 1940 Census—a fact that will lead to apparent non-
compliance with the law.39 Those figures show strong visual evidence that minimum wage
laws were pushing up the lower tail of wages for black teachers in states like Alabama,
Delaware, Georgia, and Mississippi, and doing the same for white teachers in states like
Alabama, Kentucky, Missouri, and North Carolina.
    With all this in mind, consider the simple bivariate regressions shown in Table 4. In
the first column is an OLS regression of the state dummies from regression (7) on the
state teacher salaries, just as in the second column of Tables 2 and 3, but for states with
minimum teacher-salary regulations. Results are quite similar to those found with the full
sample. We implement a 2SLS procedure using the state’s minimum teacher salary as an
  38
     National Educational Association (1940) provides a useful contemporary discussion of the laws.
  39
     Miller and Paley (1958) conducted a reliability analysis of reported incomes in the 1950 Census using a
large sample of Census households matched to corresponding Federal tax records. They found substantial
measurement error in the Census. For example, among households who reported $2500–2999 income in tax
filings, 12.6% report income of $1000–1499 to the Census.


                                                    20
instrument. The first stage fits remarkably well.40 The 2SLS estimates are quite similar to
their OLS counterparts.
    In Table 5 we repeat this analysis, but now include both the state pupil-teacher ratio
and state teacher salary variables. For white students, a group for which n = 23, results
are little changed from the bivariate 2SLS results of Table 4. Given the small sample of
black students (n = 10), it is unsurprising that we make no headway with 2SLS when we
include both school quality measures; we do not report 2SLS results because of a failure
at the first stage (low F statistics).
    In broad terms our analyses demonstrate robust state-level associations between teacher
salaries and educational attainment, and the 2SLS estimates suggest a key role for state-
level policies in shaping these relationships. Estimated teacher salary effects are largest for
black families and for white families with poorly educated parents. This is striking because
during the era we study neither Southern black families nor poorly educated white families
had much in the way of political control over state educational policy.


5        Comparisons at the County Level: A Cross-Border Design
In our final set of analyses we evaluate the schooling choices of children from families in
adjacent counties that lie along the borders of the Southern states. Figure 10 shows the
borders in question, highlighting the counties on each side. Relative to the statewide com-
parisons in Tables 2–5, these border county comparisons have two key advantages. First,
the matched counties along each border have similar socioeconomic conditions, including
local demand factors that may have influenced the schooling decisions of children. Second,
the number of border counties is relatively large, enabling us to expand the list of controls
included in our models.
     Table 6 provides an overview of the differences in teacher wages in the states included
in our border sample, with four columns of data for black teachers and four for whites. The
first two columns for each race represent mean wages of teachers in the 1940 Census for the
border counties and for the state as a whole.41 The third column shows the average salary
for the state in the Card-Krueger data, collected from administrative reports. Finally, the
fourth column shows the minimum wage applying to teachers in the state, or in states with
no minimum, the 10th percentile wage for teachers, estimated over all teachers in the state.
We give the 10th percentile as a benchmark, indicating the approximate highest minimum
salary that would leave the extant salary structure unchanged (bearing in mind that many
especially low earnings reports are due to measurement error).
    40
     If we instead regress the log of state teacher-salary average on the log of the state teacher minimum
salary, the coefficient is 0.58 for whites and 0.64 for blacks. These results imply that a 10% increase in the
minimum salary generated an increase in average salaries of around 6%.
  41
     We classify individuals as “teachers” if their 1940 and 1950 occupation codes are “teacher” and they
are over the age of 14 with at least fifth grade education and are employed at the Census date in the
“educational services” industry (according to the 1950 Occupational classification).


                                                     21
    Although the Census data and administrative data likely contain substantial measure-
ment errors, at the state level the two series are highly correlated. When we regress the
Census average on the administrative average we obtain a coefficient of 0.69 (s.e. 0.04)
and R2 = 0.97 for whites, and a coefficient of 0.71 (s.e. 0.04) and R2 = 0.89 for blacks.
At the county level, we collected administrative data (where available) on average teacher
salaries for our border counties.42 Figure 11 shows a high correlation (0.83) between these
administrative salaries and mean teacher salaries estimated from the 1940 Census. Because
there are some states with no county-level administrative data, we proceed in this section
using teacher wages as calculated using Census data.
    We notice that between-state differences in wages were particularly large for black
teachers. Using Census data we find that annual teacher earnings ranged from $295 in
Mississippi (a state with a minimum salary for black teachers of $80) to $1223 in Delaware
(where the minimum was $1000). Also, we confirm that there were often large gaps be-
tween the minimum wages for white and black teachers. For example, the minimum wage
for black teachers was 75% of the minimum for white teachers in Alabama, 63% in Georgia,
58% in Maryland, 77% in North Carolina, and 74% in Virginia. In contrast, in several Pe-
ripheral states the minimum teacher wages were the same across race (Delaware, Kentucky,
Oklahoma, Tennessee, and West Virginia).

5.1    Identifying and Characterizing Border County Pairs
We use the county adjacency file published by the Census Bureau,43 to identify contiguous
counties along the borders between Southern states.44 To avoid comparing counties with
widely different economic conditions, we eliminate all pairs with more than a one-year
absolute difference in the mean education of white residents. We also exclude counties
with fewer than five black residents between 16 and 18 years of age, and those with no
resident black teachers. These restrictions narrow our data set to 208 county pairs along
28 distinct border segments. We conduct a parallel analysis for white families with poorly-
educated parents, yielding 270 border county pairs along 32 distinct border segments.
    Some basic summary statistics for the border segments are presented in Table 7.45 We
show average levels of adult education on each side of the border segment as well as the
average proportion of adults living on farms or in urban areas and average incomes. In
each case the first state listed has the higher minimum teacher salary or 10th percentile of
teacher wages.
  42
     We have data on border counties in Alabama, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland, Mis-
souri, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia. Administrative data not available
at the county level (or not available by race) for other states.
  43
     U.S. Census Bureau, County Adjacency File (2010).
  44
     Some counties on one side of a border can be paired with two counties on the other side.
  45
     To streamline this table, we present only border segments for which there are at least 100 black 16–18
year olds on each side of the border, though we do not exclude less-populated borders in our analysis.




                                                    22
    Consider the first border segment in the Panel A of Table 7, which includes counties
along the Alabama (AL)–Florida (FL) border. This segment has 4 counties in AL and 5
in FL. In terms of demographic characteristics, we note close similarities in the two sets
of counties, e.g., in mean annual incomes for whites ($619 in AL vs. $642 in FL) and
for blacks ($310 in AL vs. $330 in FL). We also show our baseline measure of upward
mobility—the fraction of children aged 16–18 with at least 9th grade education among
those whose parents have 5–8 years of schooling—for white and black families on each side
of the border. For white families upward mobility is not much different in the AL counties
(0.44) and FL counties (0.47), but for black families upward mobility is much lower in
AL (0.17) than FL (0.31). The border segments in Panel A are between Deep South and
Peripheral South states. In seven out of eight segments the state with the lower black
teacher minimum salary (or 10th percentile) has lower upward mobility for black students,
and the state with the lower minimum salary (or 10th percentile) is generally the Deep
South state.
    Panel B of Table 7 reports statistics for other well-populated border segments used in
our analysis. Again, in most cases the state with the lower minimum teacher salary (or 10th
percentile) for black teachers has lower average upward mobility among black students.

5.2   Econometric Approach
We proceed with an analysis of the impact of teacher compensation policies on educational
attainment for families in the border counties. We focus on teacher salaries for three
reasons. First, as noted in the discussion of Tables 2 and 3, the measured effect of teacher
salaries across states appears to be relatively robust to the inclusion of other measures of
school quality and other potential controls. Second, one might be concerned that differences
in enrollment choices of black children lead to (inversely correlated) changes in the number
of pupils per teacher, creating an endogeneity bias in the measured effect of the pupil
teacher ratio. A third key reason is that we can use differences in state-wide teacher salary
laws as an instrument for the difference in teacher wages.

Model Specification
We have two approaches for measuring the effects of school quality on educational choices
and upward mobility, both of which parallel our state-level analyses.
    With our first approach, we begin with a Tobit model, estimated for black sons age
14–18 and black daughters age 14–16 who live with their parent(s) in a Southern state.
The models are similar to the specifications in Table 3, but pool parental education groups
and include unrestricted county dummies, as well as controls for the age and gender of the
child, whether the family lives on a farm or urban area, whether the family is headed by a
single mother or a single father, whether at least one parent was born in a different state,



                                             23
and single-year indicators for the highest level of parental schooling.46
   In the second stage we then form the difference ∆yp in the estimated dummies for the
two counties in matched pair p and fit the following model:

                                ∆yp = π0 + ∆Wp πW + ∆Xp πX + p ,                                       (9)

where ∆Wp is the with-pair difference in average teacher wages for border pair p, and ∆Xp
is a vector of within-pair differences in a set of controls, including

     the differences in the fractions of black families living on a farm or in urban areas,

     the differences in mean parental earnings and parental education of black families,

     the difference in mean education of white adults, and

     the difference in the county-average number of Rosenwald teachers per black student
      in the 1931 birth cohort (from Aaronson, et al., 2017).

We estimate equation (9) both by OLS and by instrumental variables, using the within-
pair difference in state-wide minimum teacher salaries as an instrument for ∆Wp . Standard
errors are clustered at the border segment level.47
    Our second approach focuses directly on the probability of attaining at least 9th grade.
We again use a two-step approach. We begin with a linear probability model for border-
county families with chidren aged 16–18: the dependent variable is 9th grade attain-
ment, and the explanatory variables include our family-level characteristics and the county
dummy variable. Then we proceed by estimating equation (9), now setting ∆yp to be the
within-pair difference in county dummies from our 9th grade attainment regression.

Teacher Salaries: Sources
As we have mentioned, in our analyses we use the county-level average public school teacher
earnings as calculated in the Census. Since our design looks at adjacent counties, we do
not normalize wages by local economic conditions.48
   46
      Since we are evaluating counties in bordering states, we might be concerned that there is some cross-
border migration which contaminates our evaluation. Thus we also tried including a dummy variable
indicating that a parent was born in the neighboring state. This specification choice made virtually no
difference to estimated coefficients reported below.
   47
      There are 28 such border segments, so we are close to the edge of respectability with regard to the
number of clusters we have for our regression analysis.
   48
      Nonetheless, in work not reported here, we also formed “adjusted teacher earnings” by pooling “teach-
ers” (identified as described above) with better-educated “non-teachers” (people age 18–64 with at least
9th grade education) and fit a model with individual controls, a set of county dummies, and a parallel set
of interactions of the county dummies with a teacher indicator. The latter represent county-specific teacher
wage premiums relative to other better-educated workers in the county. Results using these adjusted wages
were extremely similar to results reported below.


                                                    24
    State-level averages of the county-specific teacher wage premiums are interesting. See
Figure 12. In all states white teachers in the Southern border counties were paid less than
non-teachers (controlling for their age, education and gender), with considerable variation
in the extent to this disadvantage. Black teachers, however, earned more than comparable
non-teachers in some states, including four of the five states in which the minimum teacher
salary was the same for black and white teachers (Delaware, Oklahoma, Tennessee, and
West Virginia).

5.3    Results
Panel A of Table 8 shows estimates of equation (9). We report OLS estimates in the first
column, the estimated first stage and reduced form effects in the second and third columns,
and then the 2SLS estimate, along with the F-statistic for the first stage model. We have
208 county pairs lying along 28 distinct border segments. Standard errors are clustered at
the border segment level.
    Row 1 reports our baseline specification. The dependent and independent variables
in this specification are comparable to the ones for our state-level models reported in the
second column of the bottom rows in Panels A and B Table 3. OLS estimates in those
models suggest that a $100 increase in teacher salaries is associated with an increase in
schooling attainment of approximately 0.21–0.22 years; the corresponding estimate from
the border county analysis is slightly higher, 0.28 years.
    Our 2SLS procedure is predicated on the assumption that state minimum wages had
a strong effect on teacher salaries in the border counties. This is confirmed in Appendix
Figures A2 and A3, which plot average teacher salaries for the border counties against the
state minimums (for the set of states with a minimum teacher wage).
    To implement the 2SLS procedure on our entire sample of border counties, we need
to define a “proxy minimum wage” for states with no law. We proceed by using the 10th
percentile of teacher wages. This corresponds to the assumption that in the absence of any
law (and any measurement error), teacher wages would be at least as high as the observed
10th percentile of wages in the state. As shown in the second column of Table 8 the first
stage estimate under this assumption is 0.8, and is relatively precisely estimated, while the
reduced form estimate is 0.27, and is also precisely estimated. The resulting 2SLS estimate
of 0.33 is not too different than the OLS estimate, as would be expected if the unobserved
determinants of the within-county-pair difference in black children’s desired educational
attainment were orthogonal to the corresponding within-pair difference in black teacher
wages, conditional on the controls.49
    A potential objection to this procedure is that our use of the 10th percentile as a proxy
  49
    We have re-estimated the OLS model with alternative subsets of the control variables and found that
none of the added controls has a large effect on the estimated teacher wage coefficient. Altonji, Taber, and
Todd (2005) and Oster (2017) suggest that this invariance can be taken as evidence that other unobserved
determinants of educational attainment are unlikely to lead to substantially different estimates.



                                                    25
minimum wage is inappropriate. To check this concern, we constructed an average of the
county effects for counties on each side of the 10 border segments for which we have a
minimum wage on both sides. We then formed 10 cross-border differences, and estimated
a simple OLS model relating these to the cross border difference in the minimum wage.50
The estimate from this procedure is 0.23 (s.e. 0.11), which is very similar to the reduced
form estimate across all border-pairs reported in column 3 of Table 8.
    In row 2 of Table 8 we provide estimates for the case in which we limit the first-stage
Tobit model to families living in the rural areas of each border county. We conduct this
analysis because rural schools were plausibly poorer than urban schools, and more likely to
have salaries shifted by state minimum teacher salary policies. In fact we see little change
from our baseline specification.
    Panel B of Table 8 presents estimates intended to examine the relationship depicted
in Figure 5. That figure shows a strong correlation across states between average teacher
wages and 9th grade attainment among 16–18 year old black children whose parents had
5–8 grades of education. Here we examine this relationship in our border counties, but to
build sample sizes within counties, we use all black families (not just those with parental
education of 5–8 grades, as is the case in Figure 5). In so doing we note from Table 7
that black adult education was very low in our border counties, so 9th grade attainment
represents substantial “upward mobility” in most families. The effect of teacher salary
on 9th grade attainment is positive, as expected, but these results have relatively low
statistical significance.51 Still, taken at face value our 2SLS estimates are quite large. A
$500 increase in teacher salary is estimated to increase 9th grade attainment by 7 to 9
percentage points.
    A possible concern about the analysis at the county level is that our sample period
(1940) coincides with the latter stages of the Great Migration of African Americans from the
South.52 Some black families likely migrated out of the South because of poor educational
prospects, and such migration was plausibly largest in counties with poor schools. If so,
this could complicate the interpretation of our results, since parents remaining behind
in counties with poor schools would have been negatively selected in terms of parental
aspirations for their children, i.e., had disproportionately low values of the altruism factor
θ in the model represented by equation (1).
    We evaluate this concern by constructing a simple measure of net out-migration for
black families in our border counties—the ratio of black 14–18 year olds in 1940 relative to
4–8 year olds in 1930—and look for a relationship between out-migration and black teacher
  50
     We proceed this way, rather than by fitting a model at the county-pair level, because with only 10
border segments we cannot cluster the standard errors at the segment level.
  51
     In South Carolina, high school began with grade 8 (not grade 9) during the period we study. In our
regression analyses we tried substituting “8th grade attainment” for “9th grade attainment” in that state,
and found that results are little changed. The same is true for our analysis of white children below.
  52
     See Boustan (2016) for a recent economic history of the Great Migration, and an overview of previous
work on the topic. Black, et al. (2015) and Aaronson, et al. (2017) study selection into migration during
the Great Migration.


                                                   26
wages. Panel A of Figure 13 shows that there was no relationship between our measure of
out-migration and teacher earnings.53 We conclude that selective out-migration is probably
not seriously biasing our estimates. (Panel B of Figure 13 shows that the same observation
holds true for white families. This is relevant for the analysis below.)
    In summary, our analysis shows that policies that increased teacher salaries substan-
tially improved educational attainment among black children in the South in 1940. We
believe additional research will be useful to help fully develop our understanding of the
mechanisms whereby these policies affected educational outcomes. One important possi-
bility is that the higher salaries for black teachers in states with high minimum salaries led
to a better-educated teacher workforce. Panel A of Figure 14 provides evidence consistent
with this hypothesis; among our border counties, those with higher teacher earnings gen-
erally had better-educated teachers. Panel B shows a similar pattern for white teachers in
our border counties.54

Additional Results—White Families
The primary focus of our cross-border design is black families. This focus makes sense
in our context because of the very large differences in state policies as they pertained to
black students in the South. Nonetheless, as a final exercise we repeat our border county
analysis using data for white sons and daughters. Table 9 presents a replication of the
specifications in Tables 8 for white families, with one key modification. In our analysis of
black children we include all families, regardless of parental education, which is sensible
given that estimated effects are found to be similar across parental education breakdowns
for black families (see Table 4). For white children, in contrast, the estimated effects of
school quality in our cross state models are much larger for families with poorly educated
parents, so we estimate our cross-border models for families with parental education 0–4
and 5–8. As with black families we estimate models for the county pairs in general (our
“baseline”) and also for a subset of families living in rural areas.
    Our OLS estimated teacher salary effects are positive (and statistically significant),
but are somewhat smaller than those estimated at the state level (Table 2). Consistent
with the pattern in Table 2, we find that the effects of higher teacher wages are larger
for children of parents with only 0–4 years of schooling versus those with 5–8 years of
schooling. Turning to the 2SLS estimates, for families with poorly-educated parents, we
note two things. First, the first stage effect of minimum teacher salaries on white teacher
average salaries (0.48) is substantially lower than the corresponding first stage effect for
black teachers (0.80 from row 1 of Table 8). Second, for whites the 2SLS point estimate
  53
      See Appendix Table B14 for a regression analysis showing that the relationship between the two variables
is actually negative, though far from statistically significant.
   54
      In viewing these graphs it is useful to note that the number of black teachers per county was typically
much lower than the number of white teachers. This partially explains the race-specific differences in the
number of counties in which the share of college-educated teachers was exactly 0 or 1.



                                                     27
is substantially larger than the corresponding OLS estimate, and is closer in magnitude to
the OLS and 2SLS estimates for black students. As with our estimates for black families,
it appears that any upward biases in the OLS specification caused by endogeneity of local
teacher wages may be small, and indeed OLS estimates may be downward biased due to
measurement error.
     On the basis of the 2SLS estimates, it appears that the impacts of teacher wages in the
border counties were only moderately lower for white children of poorly-educated parents
than for black children.
     With regard to 9th grade attainment, for white families we restrict attention to fam-
ilies with parental education 5–8. Our border analysis is consistent with our state-level
analysis for families in the middle of the parental education distribution; higher teacher
salaries substantially improve the prospects of children moving up the educational ladder
by completing at least grade 9.


6        Conclusion
This paper provides the most comprehensive evaluation to date of the intergenerational
transmission of human capital during the “golden age” of upward mobility in the United
States. We find systematic variation in upward mobility in education by race and by loca-
tion. A plausible explanation for observed patterns relates to location-specific differences
is the quality of educational opportunities. In a state-level analysis we find that educa-
tional outcomes for children in white families with poorly-educated parents are strongly
tied to school quality measures, more so than for children in families with well-educated
parents. Our state-level analysis similarly finds a strong relationship between upward mo-
bility and school quality metrics for black families. Finally, an investigation of adjacent
counties across state borders reinforces this basic message, and increases our confidence in
an interpretation that assigns a causal role to school quality.
    Our work shows that there were important consequences of inequalities in public school-
ing in the U.S., especially disparities due to racial segregation in education. In many
Southern states, black public school teachers earned less than half of what white teachers
earned—a disparity that is all the more striking given that white teachers in the South
were relatively poorly paid. In 1940 a substantial majority of black children were educated
in the South, and thus the median black child lived in a state in which the cost-of-living ad-
justed salary of black teachers was only $649 (in Virginia), while the corresponding median
white student had a teacher with cost-of-living adjusted salary of $1727 (in Wisconsin).55
    55
     In calculating these statistics, we assigned state average teacher wages from administrative records for
all children aged 6–18 in the state in which the child lived, making adjustments as described in footnote 28.
Given that more than half of black children lived in the South, the median teacher salary for black students
was in a segregated state, Virginia, which paid lower salaries to black public school teachers than their
white public school teachers.



                                                     28
Taking our baseline IV estimate for black children at face value (0.33 from row 1 of Ta-
ble 8), this gap translates to a disadvantage in completed schooling of approximately 3.5
years. Assuming a 7% return to each year of education, an increase in resources allocated
to the median black child (to the median level of white children) would have resulted in
27% higher earnings per year of work. But this calculation may well understate the dis-
advantage to black cohorts born in the 1920s because, as Card and Krueger (1992a) show,
low schooling quality also reduces the return to schooling. A rough calculation that incor-
porates their estimate suggests that our counter-factual increase in schooling quality for
black students might have increased annual earnings by approximately 35%.56
    Of course, in addition to higher earnings, increased education has many other poten-
tial benefits, including a longer work life, lower lifetime unemployment, higher status and
gains in education for the grandchildren’s generation. The low upward mobility in human
capital experienced by black children during the first half of the twentieth century was
likely an important precursor to the persistence of racial inequality in labor markets over
the remainder of the century (Bayer and Charles, forthcoming), and the similarly disad-
vantageous patterns of income mobility experienced by African Americans in the late 20th
century (Chetty et al., 2018).
    On a more positive note, in our paper’s introduction we reflected on the potential role
of rapidly rising levels of human capital during the first half of the twentieth century for
general prosperity and declining inequality in the decades following World War II. As an
empirical matter, we then document that especially among children in poorly-educated
white families, but also for many black families (especially those outside of the South),
educational quality appears to be a key factor driving upward mobility in human capital.
In general terms our findings thus draws attention to high-quality public education as a
viable means of improving equality of opportunities across generations.




  56
     Card and Krueger (1992a) find that a 10% increase in teachers’ pay is associated with a 0.1 percentage
point increase in the return to schooling. So a doubling of teacher pay is associated with a one point increase
in the return to schooling. If we evaluate this gap for an individual with eight years of years of schooling,
this amounts to differential in annual earnings on the order of 8%.


                                                      29
     Table 1: Characteristics of Individuals Aged 14–18, Living with a Parent in 1940

          White Female                White Male                Black Female                Black Male
                    Med.                       Med.                       Med.                       Med.
Age     Home Sch. Gr.              Home Sch. Gr.              Home Sch. Gr.              Home Sch. Gr.

14       0.92    0.92       8       0.93     0.92        7     0.82     0.88      6       0.82     0.84       5
15       0.91    0.88       9       0.92     0.87        8     0.80     0.81      7       0.82     0.76       6
16       0.88    0.80      10       0.91     0.76        9     0.77     0.69      7       0.81     0.60       6
17       0.82    0.69      11       0.90     0.63        10    0.70     0.53      8       0.80     0.42       7
18       0.71    0.45      11       0.87     0.42        11    0.60     0.36      8       0.77     0.27       7

Note: Authors’ calculations, 1940 U.S. Census. “Home” reports the proportion of all children (of the given
age) living with at least one parent, “Sch.” reports the proportion of children in school among those living with
a parent, and “Med. Gr.” gives the median grade attained among these same children.




                                                    30
Table 2: The Relationship between State-Level School Quality Measures and Educational
Attainment—White Families

                 Models (1) and (2)                    Model (3)                Model (3) with Covariates
 Parental      Pupil-Teacher Teacher            Pupil-Teacher Teacher           Pupil-Teacher   Teacher
 Education        Ratio       Salary               Ratio         Salary            Ratio         Salary
 A. Daughters


 0–4              -0.189***        0.307***       -0.113***        0.273***         -0.063*         0.231***
                   (0.039)          (0.030)        (0.034)          (0.029)         (0.033)          (0.059)
 5–8              -0.117***        0.180***       -0.084***        0.160***         -0.036*         0.137***
                   (0.034)          (0.025)        (0.025)          (0.019)         (0.021)          (0.031)
 9–12             -0.050***        0.071***       -0.041***        0.066***          -0.018          0.047**
                   (0.017)          (0.014)        (0.014)          (0.012)         (0.013)          (0.017)
 > 12                -0.007          0.018           -0.005          0.018           0.002            0.004
                    (0.016)         (0.014)         (0.015)         (0.013)         (0.014)          (0.020)


 B. Sons


 0–4              -0.232***        0.303***       -0.155***        0.254***        -0.107***        0.259***
                   (0.033)          (0.034)        (0.027)          (0.032)         (0.030)          (0.057)
 5–8              -0.152***        0.190***       -0.116***        0.162***        -0.068***        0.169***
                   (0.026)          (0.027)        (0.016)          (0.023)         (0.016)          (0.031)
 9–12             -0.060***        0.087***       -0.050***        0.080***        -0.019**         0.082***
                   (0.014)          (0.016)        (0.010)          (0.014)         (0.009)          (0.014)
 > 12                0.006         0.020**           0.008          0.021**         0.020**           0.015
                    (0.010)        (0.009)          (0.010)         (0.009)         (0.009)          (0.015)

 Note: Authors’ calculations, 1940 U.S. Census. Dependent variable is the state fixed effect from equation (7),
 and reflects years of child schooling. (1) and (2) are bivariate regressions; (3) are multiple regression. For
 regression (3) we have two versions, the second of which adds the following state-level covariates: education
 (white adults), income (whites), and housing values. n = 49. Significance: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.




                                                  31
Table 3: The Relationship between State-Level School Quality Measures and Educational
Attainment—Black Families

                  Model (1) and (2)                    Model (3)                Model (3) with Covariates
 Parental      Pupil-Teacher Teacher            Pupil-Teacher Teacher           Pupil-Teacher   Teacher
 Education        Ratio        Salary              Ratio         Salary            Ratio         Salary
 A. Daughters


 0–4              -0.131***        0.211***       -0.072***        0.121***        -0.068**          0.186**
                   (0.021)          (0.037)        (0.028)          (0.031)         (0.028)          (0.070)
 5–8              -0.107***        0.208***       -0.072***         0.068*          -0.067*          0.112*
                   (0.017)          (0.031)        (0.027)          (0.036)         (0.032)          (0.057)
 >8               -0.104***        0.129***        -0.082**          0.040          -0.076*           0.061
                   (0.016)          (0.028)         (0.027)         (0.027)         (0.036)          (0.067)
 All              -0.145***        0.211***        -0.091**         0.105**         -0.085*          0.181*
                   (0.023)          (0.037)         (0.036)         (0.042)         (0.039)          (0.084)


 B. Sons


 0–4              -0.132***        0.211***        -0.070**         0.125**        -0.061**          0.220**
                   (0.022)          (0.038)         (0.029)         (0.040)         (0.024)          (0.080)
 5–8              -0.116***        0.168***        -0.072**         0.084**        -0.056**          0.179**
                   (0.019)          (0.038)         (0.026)         (0.027)         (0.024)          (0.069)
 >8               -0.116***        0.151***        -0.078**         0.067*           -0.066           0.126
                   (0.018)          (0.031)         (0.029)         (0.035)         (0.042)          (0.087)
 All              -0.150***        0.223***        -0.086**         0.122**         -0.071*          0.234**
                   (0.026)          (0.042)         (0.036)         (0.045)         (0.036)          (0.096)

 Note: Authors’ calculations, 1940 U.S. Census. Dependent variable is the state fixed effect from equation (7),
 and reflects years of child schooling. (1) and (2) are bivariate regressions; (3) are multiple regression. For
 regression (3) we have two versions, the second of which adds the following state-level covariates: education
 (white adults), income (whites), and housing values. n = 18. Significance: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.




                                                  32
Table 4: The Relationship between Teacher Salaries and Educational Attainment: Bivari-
ate 2SLS Analyses (with Minimum Teacher Salary as Instrument)
 Parental                           First     Reduced
 Education             OLS          Stage      Form          2SLS       F-Stat         n
 A. White Daughters
 Grades 0–4          0.300***     1.365***    0.401***     0.293***      111.7        23
                      (0.036)      (0.129)     (0.076)      (0.040)
 Grades 5–8          0.196***     1.365***    0.273***     0.200***      100.4        23
                      (0.032)      (0.136)     (0.061)      (0.033)
 Grades 9–12         0.089***     1.324***    0.135***     0.102***        88.8       23
                      (0.018)      (0.140)     (0.030)      (0.021)
 > 12 Grades         0.031**      1.312***    0.047***     0.035***        87.5       23
                      (0.019)      (0.140)     (0.024)      (0.016)
 B. White Sons
 Grades 0–4          0.287***     1.367***    0.394***     0.288***      118.7        23
                      (0.036)      (0.125)     (0.072)      (0.040)
 Grades 5–8          0.192***     1.345***    0.282***     0.209***        96.6       23
                      (0.030)      (0.136)     (0.058)      (0.033)
 Grades 9–12         0.093***     1.286***    0.146***     0.114***        77.2       23
                      (0.019)      (0.146)     (0.031)      (0.021)
 > 12 Grades         0.029**      1.277***    0.043***     0.033***        78.0       23
                      (0.012)      (0.144)     (0.021)      (0.016)
 C. Black Daughters
 0–4 Grades           0.220**     1.329***    0.336***     0.253***        32.2       10
                      (0.065)      (0.234)     (0.098)      (0.068)
 5–8 Grades           0.170**     1.342***    0.298***     0.222***        33.3       10
                      (0.072)      (0.232)     (0.072)      (0.061)
 > 8 Grades           0.179**     1.359***    0.307***     0.226***        35.5       10
                      (0.081)      (0.228)     (0.070)      (0.058)
 D. Black Sons
 Grades 0–4          0.249***     1.328***    0.372***     0.282***        28.9       10
                      (0.070)      (0.238)     (0.094)      (0.064)
 Grades 5–8          0.211***     1.328***    0.338***     0.255***        30.8       10
                      (0.075)      (0.238)     (0.086)      (0.054)
 > 8 Grades           0.192*      1.328***    0.354***     0.262***        35.9       10
                      (0.081)      (0.238)     (0.080)      (0.067)
 Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p <
 0.10.
                                                 33
Table 5: The Relationship between Teacher Salaries and Educational Attainment: Multi-
variate 2SLS Analyses (with Minimum Teacher Salary as Instrument)
 Parental                        OLS                              2SLS
 Education           PT Ratio    Teacher Salary       PT Ratio     Teacher Salary      F-Stat     n
 A. White Daughters
 Grades 0–4           -0.101*         0.265***         -0.094*         0.282***         111.9    23
                      (0.054)          (0.034)          (.052)          (0.037)
 Grades 5–8            -0.067         0.176***          -0.060         0.196***         109.2    23
                      (0.039)          (0.025)         (0.039)          (0.029)
 Grades 9–12           -0.030         0.082***          -0.024         0.101***         103.8    23
                      (0.021)          (0.015)         (0.023)          (0.017)
 > 12 Grades           -0.010          0.029*           -0.008         0.035**          105.7    23
                      (0.023)          (0.015)         (0.022)          (0.016)
 B. White Sons
 Grades 0–4           -0.131**        0.237***         -0.116**        0.267***         110.1    23
                       (0.046)         (0.039)           (.047)         (0.037)
 Grades 5–8          -0.099***        0.161***        -0.084***        0.209***         102.8    23
                       (0.026)         (0.028)          (0.031)         (0.026)
 Grades 9–12         -0.041***        0.083***          -0.031*        0.113***           91.2   23
                       (0.014)         (0.018)          (0.018)         (0.018)
 > 12 Grades            0.006          0.030**           0.007         0.033**            97.2   23
                       (0.013)         (0.011)          (0.012)         (0.016)
 C. Black Daughters
 Grades 0–4             -0.064          0.139              –               –               3.9   10
                       (0.048)         (0.087)
 Grades 5–8             -0.083          0.051              –               –               3.5   10
                       (0.055)         (0.107)
 > 8 Grades           -0.100**          0.021              –               –               3.1   10
                       (0.039)         (0.053)
 D. Black Sons
 Grades 0–4             -0.064          0.161              –               –               3.4   10
                       (0.053)         (0.110)
 Grades 5–8             -0.076          0.103              –               –               3.2   10
                       (0.049)         (0.111)
 > 8 Grades           -0.118**          0.011              –               –               3.1   10
                       (0.043)         (0.097)
 Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Results not reported for 2SLS when first-stage F < 10.
 Significance: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10.
                                                 34
          Table 6: Teacher Wages and State Minimum Wages in Southern States

                           Black Teachers                                     White Teachers
                Census Earnings: Admin. Minimum/                   Census Earnings: Admin. Minimum/
                Border   State    Salary  10th per.†               Border   State    Salary  10th per.†

Alabama           412         457         412          262.5         784         864         878          350
Arkansas          374         416         375          210†          678         644         636          320†
Delaware          1003       1223        1500          1000         1189        1388        1715          1000
Florida           489         548         585          360†          849        1023        1148          640†
Georgia           458         438         404           175          831         879         924          280
Kentucky          628         835         522           525          737         902         853          525
Louisiana         413         522         509          245†          947        1063        1197          670†
Maryland          776        1185        1446           585         1208        1471        1689          1000
Mississippi       280         295         232           80           751         769         776          392†
Missouri          551        1130        1153          450†          831         997        1153          530†
N. Carolina       687         670         737           504          911         968        1027          656
Oklahoma          704         787         993           585          847         940        1016          585
S. Carolina       438         464         371          260†          885         923         953          657†
Tennessee         676         676         580           320          859         873         909          320
Texas             567         584         705          330†          967        1035        1138          640†
Virginia          547         635         605          400†          806         992         987          540†
W. Virginia       982        1048        1170           585         1024        1056        1170          585

Note: Authors’ analysis. “Census earnings” are from the 1940 Census (with averages given for border counties only
and for the state); state average are also reported from administrative sources; and minimum statutory salaries,
for states with minimum mandated teacher salaries are described in Appendix A. † These states have no statutory
minim salary. Instead we give the 10th percentile of the race-specific statewide earnings among public school
teachers working at least 16 weeks the previous year.




                                                 35
Table 7: Comparisons of Cross-Border Counties, State with the Lower Minimum Black Teacher
Salary (or 10th Percentile) Listed First

 State             Education                             Mean            Upward        Coun-   Blacks
 Border            of Adults         Farm    Urban      Income          Mobility        ties   16–18
                  White Black                         White Black      White Black
 A. Borders between a Deep South State and a Peripheral South State
 Alabama           7.68     4.63      0.55   0.13         619    310   0.44     0.17     4      439
 Florida           7.44     4.82      0.45   0.12         642    330   0.47     0.31     5      249
 AL-FL Gap         0.24     -0.19     0.09   0.01         -23    -20   -0.03   -0.14
 Alabama           7.57     4.34     0.68    0.17         635    257   0.37     0.19     2      546
 Tennessee         7.77      5.31    0.72    0.12         688    351   0.40     0.21     3      271
 AL-TN Gap        -0.20     -0.97    -0.04   0.06         -53    -94   -0.03   -0.01
 Arkansas          8.72      5.08     0.63   0.14         930    332   0.51     0.22     4      970
 Louisiana         8.71      4.42    0.73    0.10         1004   355   0.62    0.22      5      830
 AR-LA Gap         0.01      0.65    -0.10   0.04          -74   -23   -0.11   -0.00
 Georgia           8.10      4.15    0.51    0.14         796    319   0.49    0.21      8      508
 Florida           8.09      4.15    0.58    0.13         773    323   0.49    0.20      6      431
 GA-FL Gap         0.01      0.00    -0.07   0.01          23     -4   0.00    0.01
 Louisiana         8.43     4.47     0.50    0.23         971    404   0.61     0.23     6     1096
 Texas             8.36     5.51      0.63   0.16         812    348   0.59     0.32     6     685
 LA-TX Gap         0.07     -1.04    -0.13   0.07         159     56   0.02    -0.07
 Mississippi       8.58      4.14     0.88    0.00        1007   264   0.38     0.05     3     1810
 Arkansas          8.05      4.72     0.77   0.10          870   300   0.38     0.15     4     1241
 MS-AR Gap         0.53     -0.58     0.11   -0.10        137    -35   0.05    -0.10
 Mississippi      8.25      5.06      0.81    0.06         480   230   0.43     0.11     5     466
 Tennessee         8.32     5.46      0.65    0.15         769   301   0.46     0.26     5     2031
 MS-TN Gap        -0.07     -0.40     0.17   -0.09        -290   -72   -0.03   -0.15
 S. Carolina       7.77      4.64    0.57    0.14         887    384    0.46   0.24      9     1240
 N. Carolina       7.84     5.12      0.61   0.13         872    405    0.54    0.33    12      749
 SC-NC Gap        -0.06     -0.48    -0.04   0.01          15    -21   -0.08   -0.09

 Note: Table continues on the next page.




                                                     36
Table 7: Comparisons of Cross-Border Counties, State with the Lower Minimum Black Teacher
Salary (or 10th Percentile) Listed First—Table Continued

 State              Education                                  Mean                Upward            Coun-      Blacks
 Border             of Adults           Farm     Urban        Income              Mobility            ties      16–18
                   White Black                              White Black          White Black
 B. Borders Not between a Deep South State and a Peripheral South State
 Arkansas            7.73      6.06      0.62      0.09       545       373       0.42      0.28        4         141
 Oklahoma            7.14      5.57      0.55      0.03       509       280       0.43      0.23        2         326
 AR-OK Gap           0.58      0.49      0.07      0.05        36        93       0.00      0.05
 Arkansas            8.53      5.36     0.54       0.29       835       354      0.49        0.21       1         608
 Texas               8.85     6.12      0.62       0.14       833       332      0.55        0.34       2         924
 AR-TX Gap          -0.32     -0.76     -0.08      0.15        2         22      -0.06      -0.13
 Georgia             7.78      4.56     0.57       0.21       792       351       0.47      0.21       13         453
 Alabama             7.54      4.50     0.69       0.12       778       295       0.40      0.17        9         593
 GA-AL Gap           0.24      0.06     -0.12      0.09        14        56       0.07      0.04
 Georgia            8.37       4.52     0.60       0.21       865       322      0.50       0.20       11         816
 S. Carolina        8.61       4.30     0.64       0.07       902       299      0.55       0.18       9          978
 GA-SC Gap          -0.25      0.22     -0.04      0.15       -37        22      -0.05      0.02
 Maryland            8.09      5.67      0.40      0.16       857       455       0.60      0.51        4         333
 Delaware            8.90      5.66      0.48      0.15      1078       472       0.57      0.42        2         443
 MD-DE Gap          -0.81      0.01     -0.08      0.01      -221       -17       0.03      0.09
 Mississippi         8.61      5.10      0.65      0.11       627       293       0.51       0.18       8         548
 Alabama             7.92      4.99      0.57      0.16       693       360       0.41       0.23       6         794
 MS-AL Gap           0.69      0.11      0.09     -0.05       -65       -67       0.10      -0.05
 Mississippi         9.14      4.74      0.74      0.12       804       307      0.53       0.13        9         638
 Louisiana           8.92      3.94      0.72      0.12      941        291       0.58       0.15       8         572
 MS-LA Gap           0.22      0.80      0.02      0.00      -137        17      -0.05      -0.02
 Tennessee          7.31       5.40      0.68     0.11        619       366       0.37      0.23       11         193
 Kentucky            7.42     5.68       0.66     0.11        568       300       0.37      0.24       15         134
 TN-KY Gap          -0.11     -0.27      0.02     -0.01        51        66       0.00      -0.01
 Tennessee          6.94       4.12      0.63      0.00      406        236      0.25        0.02       1         171
 Missouri           6.96       4.94      0.70      0.00       528       281      0.35       0.18        1         415
 TN-MO Gap          -0.02     -0.83     -0.07      0.00      -122       -46      -0.10      -0.15
 Virginia            8.17     4.81       0.54     0.01        981       476      0.58       0.26        7         346
 Maryland            8.16     5.31       0.41      0.22       973       402      0.59        0.49       4         419
 VA-MD Gap           0.01     -0.51      0.14     -0.21        8         73      -0.00      -0.23
 Virginia            7.47     4.54       0.75     0.04        856       383      0.46       0.21       10         779
 N. Carolina         8.05      5.11      0.69     0.07        938       409      0.58       0.28       11         745
 VA-NC Gap          -0.59     -0.57      0.05     -0.03       -87       -26      -0.12      -0.06

 Note: Authors’ analysis, 1940 U.S. Census. Summary statistics are displayed for border county pairs for which the
 difference in the average educational attainment of whites aged 25–55 is less than one year. We list cases with at least
 100 black 16–18 year olds on each side of the border. “Upward mobility” is the fraction of 16–18 year olds attaining
 9th grade in families with parental education 5–8.      37
Table 8: Effect of Teacher Salaries on Educational Attainment among Black Children,
Border County Analysis

                                      First       Reduced
                        OLS           Stage        Form           2SLS       F-Stat        n     nc

 A. Effects on Years of Schooling


 1. Baseline          0.285***      0.800***      0.265***      0.331***       66.8      207     28
                       (0.057)       (0.097)       (0.061)       (0.064)

 2. Rural Areas       0.327***      0.814***      0.295***      0.362***       65.9      206     28
                       (0.074)       (0.100)       (0.076)       (0.080)


 B. Effects on 9th Grade Attainment


 1. Baseline           0.012**      0.845***        0.012        0.014*        69.0      208     28
                       (0.005)       (0.102)       (0.008)       (0.009)

 2. Rural Areas         0.010       0.860***       0.016*       0.018**        66.4      207     28
                       (0.007)       (0.105)       (0.008)      (0.009)

 Note: Author’s analysis, 1940 Census and state administrative records. The sample is restricted
 to county border pairs for which the difference in the education of whites is less than one year,
 there are at least five black individuals aged 16–18 in each county, and at least one black teacher
 in each county in the 1940 Census. Our instrument is the mandated minimum salary (or the
 10th percentile of earnings for states with no minimum salary). Teacher salaries are measured
 from the Census. Controls include differences between counties in high schools, Rosenwald Fund
 exposure, fraction urban, fraction living on farm, average black parental income and education,
 and average education of whites. n gives the number of border pairs; nc is the number of
 borders. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the border level; ***p < 0.01,
 **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10.




                                                      38
Table 9: Effect of Teacher Salaries on Years of Education among White Children, Border
County Analysis

                                   First       Reduced
                       OLS         Stage        Form          2SLS       F-Stat       n    nc

 A. Effects on Years of Schooling (Parental Education 0-4 Grades)


 1. Baseline         0.149**      0.477***     0.114**      0.238**       31.4     269     32
                     (0.059)       (0.085)     (0.053)      (0.110)

 2. Rural Areas      0.138***     0.483***     0.111**      0.231**       32.3     269     32
                      (0.059)      (0.085)     (0.053)      (0.103)


 B. Effects on Years of Schooling (Parental Education 5-8 Grades)


 1. Baseline         0.098***     0.483***       0.054        0.112       30.1     269     32
                      (0.033)      (0.088)      (0.050)      (0.095)

 2. Rural Areas      0.102***     0.488***       0.060        0.123       30.8     269     32
                      (0.035)      (0.087)      (0.050)      (0.092)


 C. Effects on 9th Grade Attainment (Parental Education 5–8 Grades)


 1. Baseline         0.009**      0.477***     0.012**      0.027**       29.1     270     32
                     (0.004)       (0.088)     (0.005)      (0.010)

 2. Rural Areas       0.009*      0.486***     0.014***     0.029***      31.2     269     32
                      (0.005)      (0.087)      (0.005)      (0.010)

 Note: Author’s analysis, 1940 Census. The sample is restricted to county border pairs for
 which the difference in the education of whites is less than one year. Our instrument is the
 mandated minimum salary (or the 10th percentile of earnings for states with no minimum
 salary). Teacher salaries are measured from the Census. Controls include differences between
 counties in fraction urban, fraction living on farm, average parental income of whites, and
 average education of whites. n gives the number of border pairs; nc is the number of borders.
 Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the border level; ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05,
 *p < 0.10.
                                                  39
Figure 1: Relationship between Parent and Child Education, Children Aged 16–18 in 1940,
by Race

           Panel A. Differences among Black and White Children by Gender




                                          40
Panel B. Regional Differences for White Daughters




  Panel C. Regional Differences for White Sons




                       41
Panel D. Racial Differences in the South for Daughters




  Panel E. Racial Differences in the South for Sons




                         42
Panel F. Differences among Immigrant and Native-Born Families




      Panel G. Differences among Immigrants by Region




                             43
Figure 2: Upward Mobility for Children Aged 16–18 in 1940, by Region




                                         44
Figure 3: Proportion with 9+ Grades of Education, Children Aged 16–18 whose Parents
Have 5–8 Years of Education

               Panel A. Upward Mobility for White Daughters by State




                 Panel B. Upward Mobility for White Sons by State




                                        45
Panel C. Upward Mobility for Black Daughters by State




  Panel D. Upward Mobility for Black Sons by States




                         46
Figure 4: The Geography of Upward Mobility at the County Level

               A. Upward Mobility in Education, 1922-26 Birth Cohorts




      B. Upward Mobility in Income, 1980-93 Birth Cohorts (Chetty et al., 2014a)




                                         47
C. Upward Mobility in Education, 1922-26 Birth Cohorts, Black Families




D. Upward Mobility in Education, 1922-26 Birth Cohorts, White Families




                                 48
Figure 5: Relationship between Upward Mobility in Education and School Quality Mea-
sures

                             Panel A. White Daughters




                                        49
Panel B. White Sons




        50
Panel C. Black Daughters in Southern States




                    51
Panel D. Black Sons in Southern States




                 52
Figure 6: Educational Choice as School Quality Increases—MR(E) Shifts Upward




                                                            MC(E)
 Proportional
                                                        poorly
 Marginal Cost                                      educated
 or Return         HH                        
                                                
                                                 parent
                   H HH
                    HH H
                                              MC(E)
                                                 
                       H HH                
                         HH H
                                            well
                            HH
                               H   
                                                   educated
                             H    H
                              HH H
                                                   parent
                                   H
                                   HH H
                                   H HH
                                   
                                       HH H
                                      H H
                                         HH6HH
                   
                                              HHHH
                                                HH MR(E)

                               E ∗ E ∗∗ 12            Education E




                                     53
Figure 7: Proportion of Individuals Aged 5 to 20 Living with a Parent and Enrolled in
School

                             Panel A. White Daughters




                                Panel B. White Sons




                                         54
Panel C. Black Daughters




  Panel D. Black Sons




          55
Figure 8: Observations about Teacher Wages in 1940 (Whites Only)

                 Panel A. Mean Teacher Wages and Adjusted Wages




            Panel B. Mean Teacher Wages (1940 Administrative Records)
          and the Fraction of Teachers with a College Degree (1940 Census)




              Panel C. Teacher and Non-Teacher Annual Earnings in the
                   1940 Census, with One or More Years of College




                                        56
Figure 9: Relationship between Predicted Child Education and Parental Education

                              Panel A. White Families




                               Panel B. Black Families




                                         57
Figure 10: Border Counties Used in the County-Level Analysis




                                         58
Figure 11: County-Level Teacher Salaries in Border Counties, Deep South and Peripheral
South—Census Data and Administrative Records




Note: Border counties in Alabama, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland, Mis-
souri, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia.




                                          59
Figure 12: Earnings of Teachers Relative of Non-Teachers with Similar Education, Border
Counties




                                          60
Figure 13: Relationship between County Child-Cohort Population Changes 1930–1940 and
Teacher Earnings

                               Panel A. Black Children




                               Panel B. White Children




Note: Data from the 1930 and 1940 U.S. Census. Teacher earnings are from the 1940
Census. The sample is restricted to counties included in the border analysis, with more
than 20 children aged 14–18 in 1940.

                                          61
Figure 14: Relationship between Teacher Earnings and Teacher Education in Southern
Border Counties

                             Panel A. Black Teachers




                             Panel B. White Teachers




                                       62
References
Aakvik, Arild, Kjell Gunnar Salvanes, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2010. “Measur-
   ing Heterogeneity in the Returns to Education Using an Education Reform,” European
   Economic Review, 54(4): 483-500.
Aaronson, Daniel, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2011. “The Impact of Rosenwald
   Schools on Black Achievement,” Journal of Political Economy, 119(5): 821-888.
Aaronson, Daniel, Bhashkar Mazumder, Seth G. Sanders and Evan J. Tay-
   lor. 2017. “Estimating the Effect of School Quality on Mortality in the Presence of
   Migration: Evidence from the Jim Crow South,” Working Paper.
Abbott, Edith. 1908. “A Study of the Early History of Child Labor in America,”
   American Journal of Sociology, 14(1): 15-37.
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. “Selection on
   Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools,”
   Journal of Political Economy, 113(1): 151-184.
Bayer, Patrick and Kerwin K. Charles. forthcoming.“Divergent Paths: A New Per-
   spective on Earnings Differences Between Black and White Men Since 1940,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. 1979. “An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution
   of Income and Intergenerational Mobility,” Journal of Political Economy, 87(6): 1153-
   1189.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. 1986. “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of
   Families,” Journal of Labor Economics, 4(3), Part 2: S1-S39.
Benson, Charles S., and Kevin O’Halloran. 1987.“The Economic History of School
   Finance in the United States,” Journal of Education Finance, 12(4): 495-515
Bergeron, Paul, Stephen Ash, and Jeanette Keith. 1999. Tennesseans and Their
   History, University of Tennessee Press.
Black, Dan, Seth G. Sanders, Evan J. Taylor and Lowell J. Taylor. 2015. “The
   Impact of the Great Migration on Mortality of African Americans: Evidence from the
   Deep South,” American Economic Review, 105(2): 477-503
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2005. “Why the Apple
   Doesn’t Fall Far: Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital.”
   American Economic Review, 95(1): 437-449.
Black, Sandra E., and Paul J. Devereux. 2011. “Recent Developments in Inter-
   generational Mobility.” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (ed.), Handbook of Labor
   Economics, volume 4. Amsterdam: North-Holland: 1487-1541.
Blau, Peter M., and Otis Dudley Duncan. 1967. The American Occupational
   Structure. New York: Wiley.
Bond, Horace Mann. 1934. The Education of the Negro in the American Social Order.
   Octagon Books.



                                          63
Boustan, Leah Platt. 2016. Competition in the Promised Land: Black Migrants in
  Northern Cities and Labor Markets. Princeton University Press.
Card, David. 1995a. “Earnings, Schooling and Ability Revisited,” in Solomon Polachek,
  ed., Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 14. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT: 23-48.
Card, David. 1995b. “Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the
  Return to Schooling,” in Louis N. Christofides, E. Kenneth Grant, and Robert Swidin-
  sky, eds., Aspects of Labour Market Behaviour: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp.
  University of Toronto Press, Toronto, Canada: 201-222.
Card, David. 1999. “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,” in Orley Ashenfelter
  and David Card (ed.), Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 3. Amsterdam: North-
  Holland: 1801-1863.
Card, David. 2001. “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent
  Econometric Problems,” Econometrica, 69(5): 1127-1160.
Card, David, John E. DiNardo, and Eugena Estes. 2000. “The More Things
  Change: Immigrants and the Children of Immigrants in the 1940s, the 1970s, and the
  1990s,” in George Borjas, editor, Issues in the Economics of Immigration. Chicago:
  University of Chicago Press for the NBER.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1992a. “Does School Quality Matter? Returns
  to Education and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 100(1): 1-40.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1992b.“School Quality and Black-White Relative
  Earnings: A Direct Assessment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1): 151-200.
Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. 1996. “School Resources and Student Outcomes:
  An Overview of the Literature and New Evidence from North and South Carolina,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10(4), 31-50.
Carneiro, Pedro, Italo Garcia, Kjell Salvanes, Emma Tominey. 2015. “Intergen-
  erational Mobility and the Timing of Parental Income,” Working Paper.
Carruthers, Celeste and Marianne H. Wanamaker. 2013. “Closing the Gap? The
  Effect of Private Philanthropy on the Provision of African-American Schooling in the
  U.S. South,” Journal of Public Economics, 101: 53-67.
Clay, Karen, Jeff Lingwall, and Melvin Stephens Jr. 2012. “Do Schooling Laws
  Matter? Evidence from the Introduction of Compulsory Attendance Laws in the United
  States,” NBER Working Paper No. 18477.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014a.
  “Where is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in
  the United States,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1553-1623.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez, and Nick
  Turner. 2014b. “Is the United States Still a Land of Opportunity? Recent Trends
  in Intergenerational Mobility,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
  104(5): 141-147.
Chetty, Raj Chetty and Nathaniel Hendren. 2016a. “The Effects of Neighborhoods

                                          64
   on Intergenerational Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects,” NBER Working Paper
   No. 23,001.
Chetty, Raj Chetty and Nathaniel Hendren. 2016b. “The Impacts of Neigh-
   borhoods on Intergenerational Mobility II: County-Level Estimates.” NBER Working
   Paper No. 23,002.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter.
   2018. “Race and Economic Opportunity in the United States: An Intergenerational
   Perspective,” NBER Working Paper No. 24,441.
Coen-Pirani, Daniele and Michael Wooley. 2018. “Fiscal Centralization: Theory
   and Evidence from the Great Depression,” American Economic Journal: Economic
   Policy, 10(2): 39-61.
Coleman, Ada. 1947. “The Salary Equalization Movement,” Journal of Negro Educa-
   tion, 16(2): 235-241.
Coleman, James S., et al. 1966. Equality of Educational Opportunity. Washington:
   Government Printing Office.
Davis, Harwell G., editor. 1927. Alabama School Code. Department of Education,
   State of Alabama.
Donohue, John, James Heckman, and Petra Todd. 2002. “The Schooling of
   Southern Blacks: The Roles of Legal Activism and Private Philanthropy, 1910–1960,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1): 225-68.
Dube, Arindrajit, William T. Lester and Michael Reich. 2010. “Minimum Wage
   Effects across State Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties,” Review of Eco-
   nomics and Statistics, 92(4): 945-964
Education, A. D., United States Bicentennial Intern Program in Education
   Alabama Pilot Project, and Board, S. R. (n. d.). 1975. “History of Education
   in Alabama.”
Eichenlaub, Suzanne C., Stuart E. Tolnay, and J. Trent Alexander. 2010.
   “Moving Out but Not Up: Economic Outcomes in the Great Migration,” American
   Sociological Review, 75(1): 10125.
Fitzgerald, Stephanie. 2007. The Scopes Trial: The Battle Over Teaching Evolution,
   Compass Point Books.
Galton, Francis. 1869. Hereditary Genius: An Inquiry into its Laws and Consequences,
   London: Macmillan.
Goldin, Claudia. 1998. “America’s Graduation from High School: The Evolution
   and Spread of Secondary Schooling in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Economic
   History, 58(2): 345-374.
Goldin, Claudia. 2001. “The Human-Capital Century and American Leadership:
   Virtues of the Past,” Journal of Economic History, 61(2): 263-292.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1998. “The Origins of State-Level Differ-
   ences in the Public Provision of Higher Education: 1890–1940,” American Economic
   Review, 88(2): 303-308.

                                         65
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1999. “Human Capital and Social Capital:
  The Rise of Secondary Schooling in America, 1910–1940,” Journal of Interdisciplinary
  History, 29(4): 683-723.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Tech-
  nology. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Hanushek, Eric A. 1974. “Efficient Estimators for Regressing Regression Coefficients,”
  The American Statistician, 28(2): 66-67.
Hanushek, Eric A., Steven G. Rivkin, and Lori L. Taylor. 1996. “Aggregation
  and the Estimated Effects of School Resources,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
  78(4): 611-27.
Hilger, Nathaniel G. 2017a. “Upward Mobility and Discrimination: the Case of Asian-
  Americans,” Working Paper, Brown University.
Hilger, Nathaniel G. 2017b. “ The Great Escape: Intergenerational Mobility in the
  United States, 1930–2010,” Working Paper, Brown University.
Jencks, Christopher. 1972. Inequality: A Reassessment of the Effect of Family and
  Schooling in America. New York: Basic Books.
Jones, Eugene K. 1928. “Social Work Among Negroes,” Annals of the American
  Academy of Political and Social Science, 130: 287-293.
Knox, Ellis O. 1954. “Racial Integration in the Public Schools of Arizona, Kansas and
  New Mexico,” Journal of Negro Education, 23(3): 290-295.
Kuo, Joyce. 1998. “Excluded, Segregated and Forgotten: A Historical View of the
  Discrimination of Chinese Americans in Public Schools,” Asian American Law Journal,
  5(7): 181-212.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2002. “Were Compulsory Education and Child Labor Laws
  Effective? An Analysis from 1915 to 1939 in the U.S.” Journal of Law and Economics,
  45(2): 401-435.
Loury, Glenn C. 1981. “Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings,”
  Econometrica, 49(4): 843-867.
Lundborg, Petter, Anton Nillson and Dan-Olof Rooth. 2014. “Parental Education
  and Offspring Outcomes: Evidence from the Swedish Compulsory School Reform,”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(1): 253-278
Maloney, Thomas N. 1994. “Wage Compression and Wage Inequality between Black
  and White Males in the United States, 1940–1960,” Journal of Economic History, 54
  (2): 358-81.
Margo, Robert A. 1985. Disfranchisement, School Finance, and the Economics of
  Segregated Schools in the United States South, 1890-1910. New York: Garland Press.
Margo, Robert A. 1986. “Race, Educational Attainment, and the 1940 Census,” Journal
  of Economic History, 46(1): 189-198.
Margo, Robert A. 1990. Race and Schooling in the South, 1880–1950: An Economic
  History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



                                         66
Margo, Robert A. 1995. “Explaining Black-White Wage Convergence, 1940–1950,”
  Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 48(3): 470-481.
Mazumder, Bhashkar, 2005. “Fortunate Sons: New Estimates of Intergenerational
  Mobility in the U.S. using Social Security Earnings Data,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 87(2): 235-255.
Meghir, Costas and Martin Palme. 2005. “Educational Reform, Ability and Parental
  Background,” American Economic Review, 95(1): 414-424.
Meghir, Costas, and Pierre-André Chiappori. 2014. “Intrahousehold Inequality,”
  NBER Working Paper No. 20,191.
Meghir, Costas, Mårten Palme, and Emilia Simeonova. 2013. “Education,
  Cognition and Health: Evidence from a Social Experiment,” NBER Working Paper
  No. 19,002.
Mincer, Jacob. 1958. “Investment in Human Capital and Personal Income Distribu-
  tion,” Journal of Political Economy, 66(4): 281-302.
Miller, Herman P., and Leon R. Paley. 1958. “Income Reported in the 1950
  Census and on Income Tax Returns,” in An Appraisal of the 1950 Census Income
  Data. Princeton University Press.
Mulligan, Casey B. 1999. “Galton versus the Human Capital Approach to Inheritance,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 107(S6): S184-S224.
National Education Association of the United States. 1940. State Minimum-Salary
  Standards for Teachers, Washington, D.C.
North Carolina, Department of Justice. 1922. Biennial Report of the Attorney-
  General of the State of North Carolina. Raleigh: Edwards & Broughton and E. M. Uzzell,
  State Printers.
Oster, Emily. 2017. “Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and
  Evidence,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 1-18.
Peterson, Gladys T. 1935. “The Present Status of the Negro Separate School as Defined
  by Court Decisions.” Journal of Negro Education, 4(3): 351-374.
Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew
  B. Schroeder, and Matthew Sobek. 2010. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:
  Version 5.0. Machine-Readable Database. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Shiver, Lee A. 1983. “A Historical Review of the Development of Florida’s School
  Finance Plan and the Fiscal Equalization Effects of the Florida Education Finance
  Program,” Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Florida.
Smith, James P., and Finis R. Welch. 1989. “Black Economic Progress after Myrdal,”
  Journal of Economic Literature, 27(2): 519-564.
Snyder, Thomas D. 1993. 120 Years of American Education: A Statistical Portrait.
  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and
  Improvement, National Center for Education Statistics.
Solon, Gary. 1992. “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States,” American
  Economic Review, 82(3): 393-408.

                                          67
Solon, Gary. 1999.“Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market,” in Orley Ashen-
  felter and David Card (ed.), Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 3, Amsterdam:
  North-Holland: 1761-1800.
South Carolina, State Department of Education. 1938. Annual Report of the State
  Superintendent of Education of the State of South Carolina, volume 70-71.
Trow, Martin. 1961. “The Second Transformation of American Secondary Education,”
  International Journal of Comparative Sociology, 2(2): 144-166.
United States Census Bureau. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States, Colo-
  nial Times to 1970. Washington, D.C.
United States Census Bureau. 2010. County Adjacency File. https://www.census.gov
  /geo/reference/county-adjacency.html
Wallis, John Joseph. 2000. “American Government Finance in the Long Run: 1790 to
  1990,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(1): 61-82.
Wilson, Charles H. 1947. Education for Negroes in Mississippi since 1910. Boston,
  MA: Meador.
Wollenberg, Charles. 1974. “Mendez v.Westminster: Race, Nationality and Segrega-
  tion in California Schools.” California Historical Quarterly 53:317-332.
Wollenberg, Charles. 1995. “The Yellow Peril in School,” in D. Nakanishi and
  T. Yamano-Nishida (ed.), The Asian-American Educational Experience: A Source Book
  for Teacher and Students, New York: Routledge.
Wright, Richard. 1941. 12 Million Black Voices: A Folk History of the Negro in the
  United States, New York: Viking.




                                        68
