                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MEDICARE PAYMENT TO SKILLED NURSING FACILITIES:
                  THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE THREE-DAY RULE

                                        Ginger Zhe Jin
                                          Ajin Lee
                                        Susan Feng Lu

                                      Working Paper 25017
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25017


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




We use the State Inpatient Databases from the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP),
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, provided by the Arizona Department of Health
Services, the Florida Agency for Health Care Administration, the New York State Department of
Health, and the Washington State Department of Health. We also use the American Hospital
Association (AHA) Annual Survey Databases. We thank Jean Roth at the National Bureau of
Economic Research for assistance with the data. John Bowblis and the participants at the 2018
ASHEcon conference and the 2018 Bates White Life Science Symposium have provided valuable
comments on an earlier draft. All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Ginger Zhe Jin, Ajin Lee, and Susan Feng Lu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Medicare Payment to Skilled Nursing Facilities: The Consequences of the Three-Day Rule
Ginger Zhe Jin, Ajin Lee, and Susan Feng Lu
NBER Working Paper No. 25017
September 2018
JEL No. D8,H51,I13,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

Medicare does not pay for a skilled nursing facility (SNF) unless a fee-for-service patient has
stayed in the hospital for at least three days. Discharges after the three-day cutoff consistently
result in more transfers to SNFs. Using the three-day rule as an instrument, we find that SNF
discharges decrease hospital readmission for patients with comorbidities. However, for knee and
hip replacement patients, we find significant increases in readmission. This perverse effect is
more severe when local SNFs have lower quality. Back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that
the three-day rule may have generated extra Medicare payments to SNFs by $100-447 million per
year.

Ginger Zhe Jin                                  Susan Feng Lu
University of Maryland                          KRA 441
Department of Economics                         Krannert School of Management
3115F Tydings Hall                              Purdue University
College Park, MD 20742-7211                     Rochester, NY, 14620
and NBER                                        lu428@purdue.edu
jin@econ.umd.edu

Ajin Lee
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
486 W. Circle Drive
110 Marshall-Adams Hall
New York, NY 10027
East Lansing, MI 48824
leeajin@msu.edu
1. Introduction
    Medicare is the largest single purchaser of personal health care in the US. The total
Medicare spending has nearly doubled in the last decade, with 22% devoted to fee-for-
service (FFS) inpatient care and 9.5% to FFS post-acute care (MEDPAC 2017). Facing
an aging population, 1 Medicare spending is projected (by CBO) to reach $1 trillion in
2021, and the Medicare Hospital Insurance Trust Fund, which helps to pay for FFS
inpatient and post-acute care, is projected to be insolvent by 2028. These alarming
predictions call for a better understanding of potential wastes and savings in the Medicare
system.
         To answer this call, we focus on a specific reimbursement rule that Medicare
imposes on the intersection between inpatient and post-acute care: Medicare does not pay
for the fee-for-service (FFS) care provided in a skilled nursing facility (SNF) unless the
patient has stayed in the hospital for at least three days. This rule applies by number of
midnights that a patient stays in a hospital, not the number of hours. For example, a
patient admitted at 10 pm on day 1 and discharged 9 am on day 4 satisfies this condition,
but a patient admitted at 9 am on day 1 but discharged 10 pm on day 3 is not qualified.
         We study the effect of the three-day rule in a framework of difference-in-
differences (DID). In particular, we compare regular Medicare patients (65-79) with non-
Medicare patients (60-79), and focus on the patients that are initially discharged from a
hospital within 24 hours before or after the three-day cutoff. After a long list of controls, 2
we examine how the three-day rule affects Medicare patients’ discharge to SNFs and the
subsequent hospital readmission rate within 30 or 60 days.
         Using 2.9 million hospital inpatient discharge records from four states (2004-
2013), we find that Medicare patients discharged 0-24 hours after the three-day-cutoff are
6.8 percentage points more likely to be discharged to a SNF than those discharged 0-24
hours before the cutoff. This effect is enormous, considering the fact that only 9.4% of
Medicare patients (and 8% of all patients) in our sample were discharged to SNFs. When
we use the three-day Medicare rule as an instrumental variable (IV) for SNF discharge,



1
  Population Reference Bureau Report (2016). https://assets.prb.org/pdf16/prb-wpds2016-web-2016.pdf
2
  As detailed in Section 5, we control for age, demographics, insurance type, health conditions, hospital
fixed effects and time fixed effects.


                                                     2
SNF discharge is found to have a negative effect on 30- or 60-day hospital readmission
rate in the whole sample, but this beneficial impact is entirely driven by sicker patients
with an above-median Elixhauser Comorbidity Index. 3 If we focus on patients with no or
fewer comorbidities, the IV results find no significant readmission difference between
those discharged to SNFs and those discharged anywhere else.
        To better understand these results, we develop a conceptual framework that
incorporates both the hospital’s discharge decision and the potential differences across
SNFs. In addition to the three-day payment rule, Medicare also calculates payment to a
SNF based on the patient’s need for labor-intensive and non-labor services inside a SNF
(CMS 2017a). Though the Medicare payment strives to reflect wage and other costs
across geographic areas, it does not differ by SNF quality within the same geographic
area (conditional on the same patient). As a result, even if a hospital has decided to
discharge the patient to a SNF, every patient prefers higher quality SNFs and the cost-
plus structure of Medicare payment may motivate SNFs to prefer patients that need more
high-margin services. These settings imply further sorting across SNFs, with less
profitable patients – for example, the healthier ones that cannot justify a lot of care or
those that require many low-margin services – to be more exposed to the capacity
constraint of high quality SNFs. Together, the conceptual framework predicts that (1) the
three-day rule is likely to affect the relatively healthy patients that are on the margin of
going to SNF or going home, (2) relative to staying home, adverse health outcomes are
more likely to occur in low-quality SNFs that have capacity to admit the marginal
patients, and (3) the financial burden on Medicare can come from overtreatment, adverse
health outcomes, or both.
        Consistently, we find the effect of the three-day rule on SNF discharge is the
largest (14 percentage points) for knee and hip replacement (KHR), a major health
condition that on average has much lower hospital readmission rate and much lower
Elixhauser Comorbidity Index than heart disease, stroke and other conditions.
Furthermore, among these four categories, KHR is the only one for which we find a
significant increase in hospital readmission rate as a result of the three-day rule. This


3
  We compute Elixhauser Comorbidity Index according to Elixhauser et al. (1998) and the corresponding
software developed by AHRQ (https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/comorbidity/comorbidity.jsp).


                                                  3
perverse effect is larger in the health service areas (HSAs) where the average SNFs have
a lower-than-state-median occupancy rate or a higher-than-state-median total deficiency
count. These findings suggest that many KHR patients go to SNF simply because
Medicare will pay for it and there is a bed available in nearby low-quality SNFs.
       Back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that the three-day Medicare rule has
the potential to generate significant overuse of SNF services. Pooling all conditions and
projecting from our sample to the whole Medicare system, we estimate that the three-day
rule may have generated an extra Medicare payment to SNFs of $100-447 million per
year, without a significant reduction in hospital readmissions. The range reflects whether
we focus on patients with no comorbidity at all or patients with a below-median
Elixhauser Comorbidity Index. They correspond to 0.32-1.43% of Medicare’s annual
payment to SNFs as of 2016. For KHR only, the three-day rule is estimated to cost
Medicare $83.7 million per year, including payment to SNFs and the subsequent increase
in hospital readmission. This number corresponds to 1.2% of Medicare’s annual payment
for KHR as of 2014.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the Medicare
payment rules and reviews the related literature. Section 3 presents a simple analytical
framework for the potential effects of the three-day rule on hospital readmission. Section
4 describes our data. Section 5 defines our main econometric specification and presents
empirical results. Section 6 concludes with back-of-the-envelope calculations for the
potential implication of our analysis for Medicare spending.


2. Background and Literature
       The US healthcare expenditure continues to grow rapidly. By 2016, it has
exceeded $3 trillion per year, contributing to 16.9% of the GDP. By 2030, one in every
five US residents will be 65 years or older due to the aging of the baby boomer
generation. Moreover, the composition of the elderly population will change with
increase in the population over 85 years, as people live longer. In the face of an aging
population and rising costs, the US healthcare system is in transition from volume-based
reimbursement models (e.g., fee-for-service) to value-based reimbursement models (e.g.,
prospective payment system or bundled payment). How to contain costs and improve



                                             4
health outcomes via reimbursement reforms is an important and urgent issue for the US
healthcare system.


2.1 Medicare’s three-day rule for skilled nursing care
       Medicare’s three-day rule requires a patient to spend at least three consecutive
days in hospital inpatient care in order to qualify for the Medicare-covered discharge to a
SNF for post-acute care. This rule dates back to 1965 when inpatient hospital stays
dominated healthcare. The original intention of the rule was to give doctors enough time
to evaluate the severity of a patient’s health condition, screen out healthier patients, and
cover patients who need skilled nursing care. Another intention of the rule is to
discourage hospitals from quickly discharging patients without careful observation and
admitting new patients just for the sake of providing another billable service.
       Since 1998, SNF services are no longer paid on a volume-determined rate, but
rather on the basis of a prospective payment system (PPS). The PPS payment rates are
case-mix adjusted and cover all costs of furnishing covered SNF services, where the costs
are calculated according to labor and non-labor costs by geographic areas. Beginning in
the summer of 2009, several states implemented a pay-for-performance reimbursement
policy, which intended to reward SNFs that provide good quality services. However, SNF
quality changed little after the policy and the results on cost savings are mixed (Werner et
al. 2011, Arling et al., 2013 and Grabowski et al. 2017). Because it is hard to measure
quality and establish a clear link between effort, performance and rewards, quality-
adjusted reimbursement is not widely adopted. Furthermore, rewarding health care
providers based on their quality performance may give them perverse incentives to
cherry-pick healthier patients and shun sicker ones. This explains why the current
Medicare payment to SNFs is adjusted by patient risk and local cost but not by SNF
quality.


2.2 SNF Operations
       SNFs mainly serve three types of patients based on their insurance type.
According to the Nursing Home Compare, 60% of SNF care is paid by Medicaid, 20% by
Medicare, and the rest by private insurers or patients themselves. Medicare residents



                                              5
generate the highest revenue per resident per day (~$500), while Medicaid residents
generate the lowest revenue per resident per day (under $194). 4 High revenue does not
necessarily imply high profit margin, because the cost of delivering the services that bear
a higher CMS reimbursement rate may also be high. However, CMS adjusts the
reimbursement rate according to local labor and non-labor cost across regions, and thus
we believe revenue and margin are positively correlated. Moreover, SNFs do not
independently evaluate patient need for SNF care when they admit patients from
hospitals. Rather, they rely on the patient’s hospital discharge record, including
diagnosis, treatment, inpatient stay, demographics, insurance type, etc. Once a patient is
admitted, the SNF determines the category of services the patient needs and the therapy
minutes in that category. Bowblis and Brunt (2014) show that SNFs upcode patients by
providing additional therapy minutes to increase revenue, but do not upcode related to
patient functionality scores. Above all, SNFs usually prefer Medicare and privately
insured patients to Medicaid patients. As shown by Nyman (1993), non-Medicaid
patients typically gain admission first when there are not enough beds. According to a
New York Times article in 2015, the entire industry is chasing those lucrative consumers
while quality of care is said to lag. 5
        To assure quality of care, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
launched the Nursing Home Quality Initiative in 2002 and initiated the Five Star Quality
Rating System (FSQRS) in 2008. These quality disclosure policies motivated SNFs to
improve quality at least along the reported dimensions (Lu, 2012, 2016; Huang and Hirth,
2016; Zhao, 2016; Brickley et al, 2018). It is noteworthy that the FSQRS is constructed
mainly using deficiency citations. The CMS weights deficiency citations more than other
quality measures in calculating star ratings since they are produced by government
inspections, as opposed to self-reports (CMS 2017c). Moreover, the count of deficiency
citations is also widely used as a proxy of SNF quality in the literature (e.g. Harrington et
al, 2000; Lu and Wedig, 2013).

4
  The information is obtained from Lu, Rui and Seidmann (2018), footnote 2. “These daily rates are taken
from the quarterly report filed by Genesis Healthcare on May 8, 2015.
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1351051/000110465915036326/0001104659-15-036326-
index.htm.”
5
  https://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/15/business/as-nursing-homes-chase-lucrative-patients-quality-of-
care-is-said-to-lag.html.


                                                    6
          On average, a SNF has 104 beds. 6 Due to the Certificate of Need Law, SNFs are
not allowed to change their bed size without approval from state authority. According to
the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission’s 2015 report to the Congress, the average
length of stay for a Medicare resident in a SNF is 37 days (MedPAC 2015, p. 200). There
exist severe excess demand issues from Medicaid patients (Ching et al, 2015). Therefore,
the utilization of SNF beds is very high with an overall occupancy rate of 88.8%.
          Because most patients do not pay for SNF care themselves, they all prefer high
quality SNFs to low quality SNFs. In addition, due to the state certificate of need laws, it
is difficult for nursing homes to expand capacity. Naturally, SNFs with high occupancy
rates usually provide good quality. A recent study by Hackman and Pohl (2018) shows
that SNFs tend to discharge Medicaid patients in order to admit lucrative patients when
occupancy rates increase. These lucrative patients tend to demand high quality services,
which give SNFs an incentive to promote quality. In the annual OSCAR data of SNF
characteristics (to be described in Section 4), we find a negative correlation between
occupancy rates and deficiency citations (-0.147).


2.3 Literature Review
          Our study contributes to a broad literature on the impact of Medicare
reimbursement rules on healthcare spending and outcomes. Finkelstein (2007) shows that
the introduction of Medicare in 1965 increased healthcare spending six times more than
what was predicted. However, the fee-for-service payment adopted by Medicare at that
time had no discernable impact on elderly mortality (Finkelstein and McKnight 2008).
Duggan and Morton (2010) find that the introduction of Medicare Part D significantly
reduces out-of-pocket prices and results in a substantial increase in utilization of
Medicare-intensive drugs. Brown et al. (2014) show that the risk adjustment in the
Medicare Advantage (MA) program significantly lowers healthcare costs conditional on
patients’ health risk. Duggan et al. (2016, 2017) and Curto et al. (2017) investigate the
impact of MA and find that health spending is lower for enrollees in MA than in the
traditional Medicare, but it has no association with any measurable reduction in hospital
quality or patient mortality. In this study, we investigate Medicare’s three-day

6
    https://meps.ahrq.gov/data_files/publications/rf4/rf4.shtml


                                                   7
reimbursement rule on SNF discharge and the subsequent hospital readmission. We find
that the three-day rule increases the likelihood of discharging Medicare patients to SNFs,
which increases healthcare spending but does not necessarily reduce readmission rates.
       Most relevant to our study is a small but growing literature on the impact of
reimbursement rules on coordination care. Grebla et al. (2015) study the three-day rule
within Medicare Advantage (MA) patients. Unlike Medicare FFS patients, MA patients
may or may not be subject to the three-day rule depending on their MA plan. By
comparing hospital discharges in the MA plans with and without the three-day rule,
Grebla et al. (2015) find that eliminating the three-day rule may reduce the hospital
length of stay (before discharge to SNF) by 0.7 days. But this reduction is from an
average of more than 6 inpatient days, which is way over the key margin of discharging a
patient on day 2 or day 3. Our study focuses on this particular margin, and includes all
discharge outcomes after an inpatient stay, not just the discharge to SNFs. Unfortunately,
only two of the four states in our data distinguish MA from Medicare FFS, and none of
them spell out the identity of the MA plan or whether the MA plan adopts the three-day
rule or not. For these reasons, we keep all Medicare patients as one group in the
empirical analysis. Later on, we show that our results are robust if we exclude MA
patients from the sample in Session 5.4.1.
       More broadly on coordination care, Gornick and Hall (1988) document the trend
in Medicare use of post-hospital care. Grabowski (2007) points out that Medicare and
Medicaid provide conflicting incentives for long-term care. Meyers et al. (2018) shows
that MA patients are more likely to enter lower-quality nursing homes compared to FFS
enrollees. Recent research by Einav et al. (2017) investigates the effect of a payment
“jump” on the timing of discharge and mortality in long-term acute-care hospitals
(LTCHs). They find that the share of LTCH stays increases significantly at the precise
day of the jump. However, the timing of discharge does not have significant effects on
patient mortality. By contrast, Eliason et al. (2017) find that the gaming of discharge
timing leads to worse outcomes for patients in LTCHs. Doyle et al. (2017) explore a
random assignment of patients by ambulance companies to hospitals. They find that lack
of productivity in post-acute care could be a possible reason for the waste in healthcare.




                                             8
We directly test whether SNF care in fact produces substantial waste in healthcare using
the three-day rule as an instrument for SNF discharges.
   Navathe et al. (2017) examine the impact of Medicare’s bundled payments in joint
replacement. They find that the implementation of bundled payment significantly reduced
Medicare payment and almost half of the savings come from less spending in post-acute
care. Our study tackles the impact of the three-day rule on SNF discharge, including
patients with knee or hip replacement (KHR). We find a significant increase in hospital
readmission rate for KHR patients as a result of the three-day rule. This perverse effect is
larger in the HSAs where the average SNFs have a lower-than-state-median occupancy
rate or a higher-than-state-median total deficiency count. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first study that examines the impact of the Medicare three-day rule on SNF
discharge and hospital readmission, and quantifies this impact in Medicare overspending.


3. Conceptual Framework
       The key question is how the three-day cutoff could create deviations from
efficient allocation of health care. We propose a simple conceptual framework to address
this question.
       Suppose Medicare is a social planner aiming to maximize patient utility of health
care minus post-acute care cost. Denote the net value as V(x|s)=U(x|s)-C(x), where x is
the type and amount of post-acute care (hospital, SNF, home) and s is patient sickness
before treatment. Obviously, patients may differ in many dimensions beyond sickness.
For model simplicity, we summarize all patient heterogeneity in the single parameter of s,
and assume a monotonic relationship between s and the need for health care. In empirical
analysis, we will control for an extensive list of patient characteristics. If we normalize
V(home|s)=0 for every s, then V(hospital|s) represents the net utility of receiving
inpatient care with initial condition s and V(SNF|s) represents the net utility of receiving
care from SNF with initial condition s, all relative to staying home.
       As shown in Figure 1, we further assume both V(hospital|s) and V(SNF|s) are
positively sloped, i.e. the value of receiving either care is higher when the patient is
sicker. And V(hospital|s) is more steeply sloped than V(SNF|s), so that the sicker the
patient is, the more utility she will derive from inpatient care than from SNF care. The



                                              9
intercept of each line is determined by the difference between patient utility and cost of
the corresponding care. Inpatient care is the most expensive while staying home is the
least among the three types of post-acute care. When the patient is sick enough, inpatient
and SNF care are both better than staying home. However, when the patient is healthy
enough, V(hospital|s) and V(SNF|s) can be negative, implying that it is better (for the
social planner) that the patient stays home rather than consume costly care from a
hospital or SNF. When patient sickness is somewhere in the middle, it is possible that
V(SNF|s)>V(hospital|s)>V(home|s).
       In short, Figure 1 shows a monotonic sorting where patients with s>s 1 should be
hospitalized, s 2 <s<s 1 should go to SNF, and s<s 2 should stay home. To the extent that
patient sickness is observable (to Medicare and hospital) and the hospital is a perfect
agent of Medicare, the hospital should keep s>s 1 inpatient, discharge s 2 <s<s 1 to a SNF,
and send s<s 2 home. In reality, patient sickness is observable to the hospital but not
observable to Medicare. Given the non-trivial agency problem between Medicare and the
hospital, Medicare proxies the true patient sickness at hospital discharge by an observable
variable such as length of inpatient stay.
       To the extent that the three-day rule is an imperfect proxy for patient sickness, it
can make two errors: first, those with s 2 <s<s 1 (who should go to a SNF in the ideal
world) does not satisfy the three-day rule, and they end up going home instead of to SNF.
This is suboptimal because patients suffer from inadequate care at home although
Medicare saves money. This error is denoted by a green diamond in Figure 1. Second,
those with s<s 2 (who should go home in the ideal world) satisfy the three-day rule, and
the patient may prefer unnecessary SNF care because the care is free. This is a typical
moral hazard problem, which wastes money for Medicare, as the cost that Medicare pays
to the SNF is more than the utility that the patient receives from the SNF (relative to
home). The second error is denoted by a blue circle in Figure 1. To ease future
discussion, we refer to the two types of errors as Error 1 (resulting in insufficient care)
and Error 2 (driven by moral hazard).
       So far, we take the timing and sickness at discharge as given. In reality, both are
under the control of the hospital, and the hospital’s discharge decision could be distorted
by the three-day rule. One may concern whether this will mitigate or exacerbate the



                                             10
above two errors. Let us consider Error 1 first: those with s 2 <s<s 1 cannot go to SNFs
because they have not stayed long enough in the hospital. If the hospital is not capacity
constrained, allowing the patient to stay longer in the hospital could generate revenue to
the hospital 7 and help the patient to receive the optimal care (SNF) at discharge. This
inducement behavior moves the error from the green diamond to the red triangle, which
wastes Medicare money in inpatient care. If the hospital is so capacity constrained that it
cannot keep the patient in the hospital in order to satisfy the three-day rule, the error stays
in the green diamond and the cost is the same as before – the patient is discharged home
and suffers from inadequate care after discharge. This could generate worse patient
outcomes (such as hospital readmission) in the future. As for Error 2, patients with s<s 2
prefer SNF care because it is free. If the hospital is more of an agent for the patient than
for Medicare, the patient will be discharged to SNF, generating unnecessary expenditure
for Medicare as illustrated in the blue circle. Since we assume SNF care is better than
home (before accounting for the cost), this suboptimal discharge to SNFs should only
affect patient outcomes positively, if it has an effect at all.
        Now let us add a third layer of complication. Suppose some SNF services are of
high quality, and some are of low quality. For illustration, assume all SNFs in Figure 1
are high quality. Figure 2 repeats Figure 1, but adds a line below and parallel to the line
of V(SNF). Now the two parallel lines represent high and low quality SNFs (SNF high and
SNF low ) respectively. The cost of these two types of SNFs is the same in the eyes of
Medicare, because Medicare pays the same rate regardless SNF quality. For simplicity,
we assume the actual cost of care is also the same for all SNFs and all health conditions. 8
By definition, V(SNF high )>V(SNF low ). If SNF high has no capacity constraint, SNF low does
not matter at all because it is always dominated by SNF high . In that case we go back to
Figure 1.
        But in a world where the capacity constraint of SNF high becomes binding at s c
(s 2 <s c <s 1 ), Medicare would prefer a sorting such that s>s 1 stay inpatient, s c <s<s 1 go to
SNF high , s’ 2 <s<s c go to SNF low , and s<s’ 2 go home. Note that the new cutoff for going


7
  Whether this will generate more revenue for the hospital depends on whether Medicare pays the hospital
by procedure (DRG) or by length of stay.
8
  Under this assumption, high revenue implies high profit margin. Because sicker patients need more units
of care, sicker patients bring in more revenue and more profits.


                                                   11
home, s’ 2 , is higher than s 2 , because it is determined by V(SNF low ) rather than
V(SNF high ). In other words, because of low quality SNF services, Medicare would prefer
to send more patients home, as a social planner.
        The three-day rule of Medicare is independent of SNF quality. If the rule attempts
to proxy s 2 in Figure 1, it fails to adjust for the existence of low quality SNFs. This alone
will generate a new error as more patients should go home rather than go to SNF low . We
denote this new error caused by low quality SNF care as Error 3, in a yellow pentagon in
Figure 2. The presence of low quality SNFs also exacerbates the value loss from the
overuse of SNF (as denoted in the blue circle), because the overuse occurs in low quality
SNFs rather than high quality SNFs. If the quality of SNF low is so low that the patient
may suffer more from SNF low than staying home (say higher infection rate), it could
increase the risk of adverse patient outcomes. The three types of errors, and their
distortion on the health care system, are summarized in Table 1.
        In addition to the information and incentive challenges facing Medicare, the
presence of SNF high and SNF low also creates an incentive wedge between patients and
SNFs. Because we assume SNF high provides better quality care (at the same cost) than
SNF low , every patient prefers SNF high to SNF low. However, Medicare commits to a higher
SNF reimbursement rate for a sicker patient (to the extent that the sickness is observable).
Under the (oversimplified) assumption that the cost of SNF care is the same for all SNFs
and all conditions, SNF high is incentivized to accept sicker patients first before it hits the
capacity constraint. Bowblis and Brunt (2014) shows that nursing homes prefer patients
with more therapy minutes. Since sicker patients tend to require more therapy minutes
conditional on the diagnosis, it is reasonable to assume that profit-seeking nursing homes
may have incentives to admit sicker patients. The same financial incentive exists for
SNF low , but there may be enough SNFs in some market so that SNF low never hits its
capacity constraint. In that world, SNF high will admit sick patients until it is full, whereas
SNF low accepts all the remaining patients for whom Medicare is willing to pay for SNF
care. Such sorting across SNFs with different quality levels is also aligned with patient
selection behavior that severe patients are more likely to seek for high quality SNFs for
treatment.
        The SNF admission priority by patient sickness is in the same order as the sorting



                                               12
by net value in Figure 2. However, it implies that, when the capacity constraint of
SNF high is binding at s c and the three-day rule is a local proxy for s 2 ’<s<s c , those that
suffer most from the low quality of SNF low will be the relatively healthy patients that
should have gone home but end up discharged to SNF low (the yellow pentagon and blue
circle).
           Overall, we have three predictions:
           Prediction 1: The three-day rule may generate extra Medicare expenditure
because of overtreatment at SNFs, late discharge at hospitals and adverse health
outcomes. All of them tend to focus on relatively healthy patients who are on the margin
of a wrongful discharge decision.
           Prediction 2: Adverse health outcomes such as hospital readmission will
disproportionally affect the relatively healthy patients, because of either over-treatment in
low quality SNFs or under-treatment at home. Which one dominates depends on the
quality difference between SNFs and home care.
           Prediction 3: If we have a good measure of SNF quality, adverse outcomes
(conditional on being discharged to SNFs) should be disproportionally concentrated in
low quality SNFs. If we do not have a good measure of SNF quality, SNF occupancy rate
might be an indirect measure. In that case, adverse outcomes (conditional on being
discharged to SNFs) should be disproportionally concentrated in SNFs with a low
occupancy rate.


4. Data Summary
           We use three databases. The main one is the inpatient discharge data from
Arizona (2004-2007), Florida (2005-2013), New York (2005-2013), and Washington
(2004-2013) State Inpatient Databases (SID) of the Healthcare Cost and Utilization
Project (HCUP). 9 These datasets contain all inpatient records and thus capture all
Medicare patients who have qualifying hospital stays for SNF coverage in our sample
states and years. The data also contains important information such as the primary
expected payer, length of stay, and discharge destination. In addition, the data provides



9
    The National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) provided access to the HCUP data.


                                                  13
encrypted person identifiers, which allow us to track readmissions of the same individual
over time.
        We merge the SID with the American Hospital Association’s (AHA) Annual
Survey of Hospitals, 10 which provides additional information about the hospitals in our
sample, such as hospital location and facilities.
        The third database is the 2003-2013 Online Survey Certificate and Reporting
Database (OSCAR), which includes all Medicare and Medicaid certified nursing homes
operating in the US. This database provides nursing home characteristics such as facility
locations, deficiency citations and occupancy rate. Since OSCAR is collected at the SNF-
year level, we cannot link it to the SID data at the individual patient level. To address this
shortcoming, we use the discharge hospital’s health service area (HSA) to match with the
average deficiency count and occupancy rate of SNFs in that HSA. 11
        Total deficiency count is a well-known measure of SNF service quality (Castle
and Ferguson 2010). If the SNFs in a HSA have on average a higher number of
deficiency citations 12 than the median of the corresponding state in the preceding year,
we classify the HSA as above-median deficiency. Similarly, if the SNFs in a HSA have
on average a lower occupancy rate than the median of the corresponding state in the year
preceding the admission year, we classify the HSA as below-median occupancy. We use
predetermined values of deficiency and occupancy to address potential endogeneity
between these quality measures and patients’ actual discharge destination.
        We restrict our main analysis sample to patients with age between 60 and 79 who
                                                                                 13
are discharged within 24 hours before and after the three-day cutoff.                 We also focus on
new episodes of hospitalization, where an episode is new if the patient has not been
hospitalized in the past 180 days. This way, readmissions following a new episode are not
included in the sample, but they are used to construct the 30-day and 60-day readmission
outcomes for that episode. We drop observations missing the key variables such as


10
   The National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) also provided access to the AHA data.
11
   We drop SNFs with 100% Medicaid patients in computing the average deficiency and occupancy rate
since these SNFs focus on long-term care instead of post-acute care.
12
   We right-censor deficiency citations at top 1 percentile to exclude outliers.
13 We extend the age range from 65-79 to 60-79 by including some young non-Medicare patients mainly
because there are few non-Medicare patients above 65. In the robustness checks (section 5.4), we shorten
the age range and the results remain robust.


                                                   14
discharge destination, primary expected payer, encrypted person identifiers, and average
SNF quality at the HSA level. We also exclude patients whose initial visit ended with
death and thus cannot be tracked over time.
       Table 2 presents the share of patients discharged to various destinations, by
whether their hospital discharge is above or below the three-day cutoff and whether their
insurer is Medicare or non-Medicare. Home discharges are more common for patients
discharged on the second day than those discharged on the third day. Non-Medicare
patients are more likely to be discharged home than Medicare patients. In contrast,
discharges to SNF are more common for discharges on the third day, especially for
Medicare patients. Home health care (HHC) is also more common for those who are
discharged on the third day, and the share is higher for Medicare patients.
       Table 3 compares patient demographics, health conditions, and readmission rates
by discharge destination (home or HHC vs. SNF), above/below threshold, and
Medicare/non-Medicare. For patients who are discharged to SNF, Panel B also compares
SNF characteristics by above/below threshold and Medicare/non-Medicare.
Unsurprisingly, Medicare patients are older, more likely to have heart disease, stroke, and
various comorbidities. Readmission rates are also higher for Medicare patients than non-
Medicare patients. Knee or hip replacement is more common for non-Medicare patients,
and patients with knee or hip replacement are much more likely to be discharged on the
third day.
       Patients discharged to SNFs are generally older than those discharged home or
HHC. More than 50% of the patients discharged to SNFs on the third day had knee or hip
replacement. Patients discharged on the second day to SNFs are more likely to have
comorbidities and are more likely to be readmitted than patients discharged home.
However, patients discharged on the third day to SNFs are relatively similar to those
discharged home in terms of the probability of having comorbidities and readmission
rates. Among patients discharged to SNFs on the third day, Medicare patients tend to stay
in HSAs with slightly higher deficiency citations and slightly lower occupancy rates.
       Table 4 shows SNF discharge rates and readmission rates by health condition,
above/below the cutoff, and Medicare/non-Medicare. The SNF discharge rates are the
highest for Medicare patients discharged on the third day for all health conditions. This



                                              15
pattern is most pronounced for knee or hip replacement (KHR) patients. The 30-day
readmission rates are the highest for patients with heart disease (9.1-13.7%), followed by
other conditions (7.4-10.3%), stroke (6.5-9%), and knee or hip replacement (2.4-4%).
The same order holds for the 60-day readmission rate. Consistently, KHR patients have
the lowest Elixhauser Comorbidity Index, no matter whether we compute the Index in
readmission score or mortality score. These patterns suggest that KHR patients are
healthier than patients with heart disease, stroke and other conditions. Therefore,
according to our conceptual framework, they should be more on the margin of
discharging to SNFs versus home and more exposed to the capacity constraint of high
quality SNFs.


5. Empirical Analysis
         We examine the effects of the three-day rule in a difference-in-differences (DID)
framework. Specifically, we first examine discharge destinations of Medicare patients
(65-79) and non-Medicare patients (60-79), comparing patients who are discharged from
a hospital within 24 hours before vs. after the three-day cutoff:
           Y i = δ Day3 i *Medicare i + α 1 Day3 i + α 2 Medicare i + X i + e i              (1)
where i denotes a patient. Day3 i is an indicator for discharges within 24 hours after the
three-day cutoff. Medicare i is an indicator for patients with Medicare as the primary
expected payer. Day3 i *Medicare i is the interaction between the two variables. X i is a
vector of discharge characteristics including patients' demographics such as age, age
squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis
Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities 14), as well as
hospital fixed effects. We also control for discharge year and discharge month fixed
effects. Moreover, to account for different discharge probabilities throughout the day, we



14
   The list of comorbidities is: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) comorbidity measure
for acquired immune deficiency syndrome, alcohol abuse, deficiency anemias, rheumatoid
arthritis/collagen vascular diseases, chronic blood loss anemia, congestive heart failure, chronic pulmonary
disease, coagulopathy, depression, diabetes (uncomplicated), diabetes with chronic complications, drug
abuse, hypertension, hypothyroidism, liver disease, lymphoma, fluid and electrolyte disorders, metastatic
cancer, other neurological disorders, obesity, paralysis, peripheral vascular disorders, psychoses,
pulmonary circulation disorders, renal failure, solid tumor without metastasis, peptic ulcer disease
excluding bleeding, valvular disease, weight loss.


                                                    16
include a dummy for each discharge hour as well as a dummy for missing discharge hour.
We report robust standard errors clustered at the HSA level.
       The key coefficient of interest is δ, which captures the difference between day 3
and day 2 discharges among Medicare patients relative to the difference among non-
Medicare patients conditional on patient demographics, health conditions, seasonality,
and discharge hour. We consider the probability of discharges to four different
destinations as an outcome Y i : home or home health care (HHC), SNFs, other facilities
(including another short-term hospital and a long-term care hospital), and discharge
against medical advice (AMA).
       We are ultimately interested in examining the effects of SNF discharges on
readmission rates.
              R i = β SNF i + α 1 Day3 i + α 2 Medicare i + X i + e i       (2)
where R i denotes whether the patient is readmitted to a hospital. We consider readmission
within 30 days as well as 60 days. The estimate β will be biased upwards if a discharge
SNF is correlated with (unobserved) sickness. We instrument SNF i with
Day3 i *Medicare i to estimate the causal effect of SNF discharge on readmission rates
using a two stage least squared (2SLS) method. The 2SLS estimate β describes the local
average treatment effect for compliers, i.e. patients who are induced to be discharged to a
SNF due to the three-day rule.
       The key identification assumption is that all control variables – including hospital
fixed effects, patient attributes, major diagnosis, comorbidities, day 3 alone and insurance
type alone – are sufficient to capture observable and unobservable health conditions that
may affect a hospital’s discharge decision. As the result, the interaction of
day3*Medicare mainly captures the financial incentive of discharging Medicare patients
to different destinations. This assumption will be tested by robustness checks in Section
5.4.
       We prefer DID to the alternative approach of regression discontinuity (RD),
mostly because only a small percent of hospitalization is around the midnight cutoff.
Around 90% of patients are discharged from the hospital between 10 am and 6 pm, with
the most at 2 pm (13.2%). In Section 5.4, we show that the impact of the three-day rule
on discharge to SNF is robust when we zoom in 5 hours before and 5 hours after the



                                              17
midnight cutoff. However, this window only accounts for 3% of our main sample, and
patients discharged in this window are systematically different from other patients in
health conditions and local SNF characteristics. Also, because discharge to SNF requires
paperwork between hospital and SNF, such paperwork is unlikely to occur around the
midnight, which explains why the probability of discharge to SNF in this time window
(3%) is much lower than the overall probability of SNF discharge (8%). We worry that
severe sample selection could potentially bias the estimation of the overall impact of SNF
discharge on hospital readmission.
       Including all new hospitalization episodes that are discharged 24 hours before and
after the midnight cutoff alleviates the selection problem, but it also make our
identification rely more on the comparability between Medicare and non-Medicare
patients in this relatively large time window. In Section 5.4, we show that our results are
robust if we narrow the age range from 60-79 to 62-67, and the differential effects we
observe between Medicare and non-Medicare patients only occur around the three-day
cutoff, not around the cutoff on day 4, day 5, day 6 and day 7.


5.1. Results in the pooled sample
       We first estimate the effect of the three-day rule on discharge destinations. Table
5 reports δ from equation (1) for each of the four different discharge destinations.
Medicare patients who are discharged after the three-day cutoff are 6.8 percentage points
more likely to be discharged to a SNF than those who are discharged before the three-day
cutoff. This effect is enormous, considering the fact that only 9.4% of Medicare patients
(and 8% of all patients) in our sample were discharged to SNFs. The increase in
discharge rate to SNFs is offset by a decrease in home and home health care discharges.
       Subsequently, we estimate the effect of a SNF discharge on readmission rates
using both OLS and 2SLS approaches. Table 6 summarizes the results. Columns 1 and 2
of Panel A show that patients who are discharged to SNF have higher readmission rates,
if we use simple OLS. If patients with more severe conditions tend to be discharged to
SNF, the unobserved differences in sickness may bias the OLS estimates upwards. Panel
B shows that once we instrument the SNF discharge with Day3*Medicare, the estimates
on 60-day readmission rates become negative and statistically significant. This suggests



                                            18
that holding health conditions constant, SNF care may be more beneficial than home care
in terms of reducing hospital readmissions.
       We unveil the negative readmission effects further by patient comorbidity.
Columns 3 and 4 show that for patients without any comorbidity (12% of the sample),
SNF discharge has no effect on readmission rates. Patients with at least one comorbidity
drive the negative readmission effects (Columns 5 and 6 in Table 6). If we split the full
sample by whether a patient has above- or below-median Elixhauser Comorbidity Index,
the significant, negative readmission effects only persist in the above-median subsample
for 60-day readmission. In the below-median subsample, discharge to SNF has no
significant effect on readmission (Columns 7 and 8 in Table 6). This suggests that SNF
service is only effective in reducing hospital readmission for sicker patients.


5.2. Results by health conditions
       We further examine the effects of the three-day rule and SNF discharges by health
conditions. We separately consider heart disease, stroke, and knee or hip replacement
since they are common conditions that may benefit from post-acute care at a SNF
(MEDPAC 2010). Other conditions are grouped as the fourth category.
       As shown in Table 7, the discharge effect of the three-day rule is the largest for
knee or hip replacement. Medicare patients with knee or hip replacement discharged after
the three-day cutoff are 14 percentage points more likely to be discharged to a SNF than
those who are discharged before the three-day cutoff. This increase in SNF discharges is
entirely offset by a decrease in home or HHC discharges. The discharge effect is the
smallest for heart disease patients with a 1.8 percentage point increase. The increase in
SNF discharges is also offset by a reduction in home discharges for heart disease, stroke,
and other conditions. In short, finding the largest SNF discharge effect in KHR patients is
consistent with Prediction 1, because KHR patients are healthier than other patients and
therefore more on the margin of being discharged to SNFs or going home.
       Table 8 presents OLS estimates on readmission rates by health conditions. Given
the large discharge effect for KHR patients, we separately examine knee and hip
replacement and pool the other conditions. The OLS estimates show that the positive
coefficient of SNF discharge on readmission rates is lower for KHR patients than for all



                                              19
other conditions. This is not surprising because KHR patients have the lowest
readmission rates in the raw data.
       Table 9 shows the corresponding 2SLS estimates. When we instrument SNF
discharge with the three-day rule, we find a significant increase in readmission rates for
KHR patients. We generally do not find a significant effect on readmission for other
conditions. Within knee and hip replacement, the perverse effect of SNF discharge on
readmission is larger for KHR patients without comorbidity. This pattern is consistent
with Prediction 2, where we argue that healthier patients are more exposed to low quality
SNF services because they are closer to the margin of a wrongful discharge decision.


5.3. Results by local SNF characteristics
       We further break down the sample by local SNF characteristics, using deficiency
citation and occupancy rate. Panel A of Table 10 shows that the increase in readmission
rates for Medicare KHR patients is driven by low occupancy HSAs. Panel B shows that
the increase in readmission rates is higher and only significant in high deficiency areas,
consistent with the fact that areas with high deficiency are often areas with low
occupancy. Consistent with Prediction 3, these results suggest that KHR patients are
relatively healthy and on the margin of going to SNF simply because Medicare will pay
for it and there is a bed available in nearby low-quality SNFs. Not only does the over-
consumption of SNF care increase post-acute care expenditure for Medicare, but it also
generates a higher readmission rate, which requires even more spending from Medicare.
We will quantify these costs for Medicare when we conduct our back-of-the-envelope
calculation in Section 6.


5.4. Robustness checks
5.4.1. Alternative sampling
       One key identification question is whether Medicare and non-Medicare patients
are truly comparable. They obviously differ in age as Medicare patients are 65 and above
but most non-Medicare patients are 60-65, with only a small fraction spreading above 65.
We have controlled for a polynomial function of age in all regressions, but one still
wonders whether our results could be driven by Medicare patients being systematically



                                            20
sicker than non-Medicare patients, rather than the three-day rule of Medicare.
       To consider this possibility, we employ an event study approach to examine pre-
trends, by the exact discharge hour. That is, instead of Day3*Medicare in equation (1),
we include a series of interactions between Medicare and each discharge hour within the
24 hour window before and after the three-day cutoff. Panel (a) of Appendix Figure A.1
shows that there is little evidence of pre-trends between Medicare and non-Medicare
patients, while the SNF discharge rate increases significantly 10-24 hours after the three-
day cutoff. Similar results hold for the subsample of KHR patients only (panel (b) of
Appendix Figure A.1), though the parallel shift of SNF discharge rate after the cutoff is
less powerful for this subsample.
       We then plot the same graph for the hypothetical cutoff at midnight of day 4, day
5, day 6 and day 7. If Medicare patients are systematically sicker than non-Medicare
patients, we should observe the effects at these hypothetical cutoffs similar to the three-
day cutoff. As shown in Appendix Figure A.2, the difference between Medicare and non-
Medicare patients is mostly muted for day 4, day 5, day 6 and day 7.
       Appendix Table B.1 runs the same regressions as our main results for these
alternative cutoffs. Thanks to our enormous sample, the probability of discharge to SNFs
is significantly different between Medicare and non-Medicare patients for day 4, day 5,
day 6 and day 7, but the magnitude of this difference is much smaller than for the day 3
cutoff (-0.7 to 1.1 percentage points as compared to 6.8 percentage points). These results
suggest that the Medicare-versus-non-Medicare difference is much more salient for the
day 3 cutoff, likely because of the three-day rule of Medicare.
       Another way to ensure comparability between Medicare and non-Medicare
patients is adopting a narrower age range. Tables B.2-B.5 repeat the same regressions as
our main results but use the age range 60-69 instead of 60-79. Tables B.6-B.9 further
narrow the age range to 62-67. In both scenarios, the estimated impact of the three-day
rule on SNF discharge is smaller (5 and 4.4 instead of 6.8 percentage points) but remains
significant at 99% confidence. In the second stage, we still observe a contrast between
KHR and other conditions, where KHR patients suffer from a higher readmission rate
because of the three-day rule but other patients have either similar or significantly lower
readmission rate after staying at a SNF. The perverse readmission outcome for KHR



                                             21
patients continues to concentrate in the HSAs with a higher-than-state-median total
deficiency count or a lower-than-state-median occupancy rate.
       Similar robustness is achieved when we expand the sample to include all
hospitalization episodes instead of new episodes only (Appendix Tables B.10-B.13); drop
MA patients (Appendix Tables B.14-B.17); or reduce the sample to 12 hours (instead of
24 hours) before and after the three-day cutoff (Appendix Tables B.18-B.21). Moreover,
when we use a regression discontinuity (RD) design focusing on Medicare patients
discharged between 5 hours before and after the three-day cutoff, we still find a robust
increase in SNF discharge rates above the threshold (Appendix Table B.22).


5.4.2 Selection on patient condition
       We also investigate whether selection of patient condition can explain our results.
In our main estimations, we already control for all observable differences in patient
condition using the DRG fixed effects and indicators for comorbidities. Alternatively, we
examine each comorbidity as an outcome using equation (1) (without the comorbidity
controls) and find that 15 out of 29 comorbidities have significant difference between
Medicare patients who are discharged after vs. before the three-day cutoff relative to non-
Medicare patients. We drop patients with these 15 comorbidities so that the remaining
sample does not have any comorbidity difference across the threshold on average. For
this subsample, we find similar lift in the probability of discharge to SNFs (Appendix
Table B.23), and either zero or negative impact of SNF stay on readmission rates for the
full sample (Appendix Table B.24). However, we still find significant, positive
readmission effects for KHR patients, which are larger for KHR patients without
comorbidities and stronger in low occupancy HSAs (Appendix Tables B.25-B.26).
       In Appendix B.27-B.30, we examine whether our estimates are robust to an
additional set of controls. Patients who intend to take advantage of the three-day rule may
differ in their method of admission, admission time, or the total hours in the hospital. We
find that our estimates barely change when we include admission time, total hours in the
hospital, and whether the initial hospital admission was through the emergency room
(ER). Similar results arise when we further restrict the sample to ER admissions only
(Appendix B.31-B.32). Such robustness suggests that patients are unlikely to manipulate



                                            22
their stay in the hospital due to the three-day rule.
        To further test the validity of our instrument, we include Day3*Medicare in the
OLS equation (2). In theory, this addition should not have a significant impact on
readmission outcomes because the OLS regression already includes the endogenous
variable, the SNF discharge. Appendix Table B.33 shows that the coefficients on SNF are
almost identical to our main OLS estimations in Panel A of Table 6, although the
coefficients on Day3*Medicare are statistically significant in the full sample as well as
the subsample with any comorbidity. For the subsample without any comorbidity – where
we find no readmission effects of SNF discharge due to the three-day rule – we find that
adding Day3*Medicare to the OLS has no significant effect on readmission rates. This
highlights our findings that SNF care may not improve health outcomes for patients with
less severe conditions.


5.4.2. Hospital Bed Availability
        We also concern that hospitals could manipulate the length of stay of Medicare
patients for SNF coverage. Though Medicare is unlikely to pay for extra length of stay
(because Medicare pays by DRG), the doctor may “help” a Medicare patient to stay
longer in order to qualify for the SNF coverage. Such “help” is more feasible when the
hospital beds are underutilized. Accordingly, we define hospital bed availability as
months in which total inpatient days are below the median in a given hospital-year.
Appendix Table B.34 shows that the likelihood of discharging Medicare patients to SNFs
after the three-day cutoff is 5.2 percentage point more than before the cutoff for hospitals
with different levels of bed utilization. Since the discharge effect varies little by hospital
bed availability, we believe that hospitals are very unlikely to manipulate the length of
stay for SNF coverage.


6. Conclusion and Policy Implications
        Overall, we find alarming signs that suggest unnecessary Medicare spending and
adverse health outcomes, all related to the three-day rule that Medicare imposes on its
FFS reimbursement to SNFs.




                                              23
         More specifically, in the pooled sample, the three-day rule leads to a 6.8
percentage point increase in the probability of discharging a Medicare patient to SNFs
within 24 hours after the three-day-cutoff. This effect is enormous, considering the fact
that only 9.4% of Medicare patients (and 8% of all patients) in our sample were
discharged to SNFs. However, among those that have no comorbidity or below-median
Elixhauser Comorbidity Index, there is no significant readmission difference between
those discharged to SNF and those discharged somewhere else.
         More than 50% of the patients discharged to SNFs on the third day had knee or
hip replacement (KHR). For KHR patients alone, the three-day rule increases the
probability of SNF discharge by 14 percentage points. Though KHR patients are on
average healthier than patients with heart disease, stroke and other conditions, KHR is the
only category for which we find a significant increase in hospital readmission rate as a
result of the three-day rule. This perverse effect is larger and only significant in the
HSAs, where the average SNFs have a lower-than-state-median occupancy rate or a
higher-than-state-median total deficiency count. This suggests that many KHR patients
are discharged to SNFs simply because Medicare will pay for it and there is bed available
in nearby SNFs. Unfortunately, discharging KHR patients to SNF is associated with a
greater likelihood of hospital readmission within 30 and 60 days.
         What do these findings imply for Medicare expenditure? Table 11 presents two
sets of back-of-the-envelope calculations, one for the pooled sample, and one for knee
and hip replacement only. On the pooled sample, we focus on the patients with no or
below-median comorbidities because, within these patients, SNF discharge makes no
difference in hospital readmission. Thus, Medicare expenditure on their SNF discharge
could be unnecessary. Assuming Medicare pays $500 a day for FFS care in SNFs and an
average Medicare patient stays in a SNF for 37 days per episode (Lu, Rui and Seidmann
2018), a 6.6 percentage point 15 increase in the probability of SNF discharge implies an
extra payment of $139.6 million in our sample. Translating it into the annual spending of
the whole Medicare, it amounts to $99.74 million per year if we only count patients with


15
   We use 6.6 percentage points instead of 6.8, because the former is the estimated effect of the three-day
rule on the probability of SNF discharge for patients with no comorbidities, while the latter is the effect for
all patients (Table 5).


                                                      24
no comorbidities, or $446.86 million per year if we include patients with below-median
comorbidities. These numbers correspond to 0.32 to 1.43% of total Medicare payment to
SNFs. 16
        Turning to knee and hip replacement only, we focus on two sources of
unnecessary Medicare expenditure. The first one is Medicare payment for SNF discharge,
and the second one is Medicare payment for the increased hospital readmission after the
SNF discharge. For both of them, we focus on KHR patients with no complications,
which accounts for 97.4% of the KHR patients in our sample. 17
        Assuming an average KHR patient discharged to a SNF will stay there for 15 days
(DeJong et al. 2009) and Medicare pays $500 per day, a 14 percentage point increase in
SNF discharge implies an extra Medicare payment of $223.2 million in our sample.
Projecting it to the whole Medicare population, it implies unnecessary Medicare payment
to SNFs by $112.5 million per year. To calculate Medicare payment for the extra
readmission after the SNF discharge, we assume each readmission entails $10,000 per
visit. 18 That implies $6 million in Medicare spending for our analysis sample, or $4.24
million per year for the whole Medicare population. In combination, the two sources of
unnecessary spending add up to $83.73 million per year for Medicare, which accounts for
1.2% of the total Medicare expenditure on knee and hip replacement. 19
        These back-of-the-envelope calculations may be conservative, because we do not
include the potential longer stay in hospital in order to qualify for the SNF discharge



16
   According to CMS (2017b) Table III.6, total Medicare payment to SNFs was $31.332 billion in fiscal
year 2016.
17
   We use procedure codes in the inpatient record to determine whether a KHR patient receives the joint
replacement procedure with or without complications. Literature has shown that institutionalized post-acute
care can be helpful for KHR patients with complications (McLawhorn and Buller 2017). Because KHR
patients with complications often stay in the hospital longer than three days, our analysis sample has very
few of them.
18
   Based on CMS data (https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-
Reports/Medicare-Provider-Charge-Data/Inpatient2015.html), the least expensive DRG at readmission for
KHR is DRG 946 (Rehabilitation without CC/MCC) with an average payment of $10,951 in 2014. We
assume $10,000 per readmission to be conservative.
19
   According to CMS (https://innovation.cms.gov/initiatives/cjr, accessed May 16, 2018), there were more
than 400,000 knee and hip replacement procedures in 2014, costing more than $7 billion for the
hospitalizations alone. We use $7 billion to proxy for the total Medicare expenditure on knee and hip
replacement.



                                                    25
under the three-day rule. It is difficult to quantify this element, as we do not find strong
evidence supporting hospital manipulation in length of stay (Appendix Table B.34).
       Our findings are consistent with the perceived inefficiency in the Medicare
system, which has motivated a number of alternative payment methods. In 2012, CMS
experimented with the Bundled Payments for Care Improvement (BPCI) on a voluntary
basis. Subsequently in 2016, CMS mandated the Comprehensive Care for Joint
Replacement (CJR) reimbursement model in 67 MSAs. In both programs, Medicare
commits to a bundled payment to a participating hospital, where the bundle covers
inpatient, outpatient and post-acute care related to a particular procedure. In its extreme
form, the participating hospital may receive a fixed amount for the whole knee and hip
replacement episode, regardless how much care the patient actually receives from
inpatient stay, SNF usage, rehabilitation center, or home care up to 90 days since the
beginning of the procedure.
       As summarized by McLawhorn and Buller (2017), early evidence suggests that
bundled payments are able to reduce Medicare cost for the whole KHR episode, without
reducing quality of care for most KHR patients. For example, Navathe et al. (2017) study
3,942 KHR patients in the Baptist Health System (BHS), a network of 5 hospitals in San
Antonio, Texas. BHS adopted BPCI in October 2013, where the bundled payment covers
acute hospitalization and 30 days of post-acute care. Between July 2008 and June 2015,
average Medicare expenditure per KHR episode declined 20.8%. In the meantime,
readmissions, emergency department visits, and length of inpatient stay all declined.
While some of the overall hospital savings came from internal cost reduction, average
post-acute care spending declined 27% per case. Most of the post-acute savings were
driven by reductions in inpatient rehabilitation and SNF spending, and these savings only
occurred when the bundle payment included financial responsibility for post-acute care.
       While these results may be specific to BHS, they confirm the conclusion that
traditional fee-for-service payment includes unnecessary waste. As shown in our study,
the three-day payment rule has encouraged relatively healthy patients to overuse SNFs
but stay in SNF does not improve hospital readmission rates. In some cases – such as
knee and hip replacement – the overuse of SNFs is also related to higher readmission,
leading to even more Medicare spending. Our findings suggest that discharge to SNFs



                                             26
should be based on a more complete assessment of patient conditions including the
existence and severity of comorbidities rather than a single measure of length of stay in
hospitals.
        Finally, we caution readers that our back-of-the-envelope calculations focus on
Medicare spending, not the total welfare. We lack individual records and cost data from
SNFs, and do not consider the possibility that admission of Medicare patients may crowd
out Medicaid and private-insured patients from capacity-constrained SNFs. Nor do we
observe the cost of care provided by family members when a patient is discharged home
instead of to SNFs. These costs could be substantial, but they are not included in
Medicare spending.


7. References

Arling, G., V. Cooke, T. Lewis, A. Perkins, D. C. Grabowski and K. Abrahamson. 2013. "Minnesota's
Provider-Initiated Approach Yields Care Quality Gains at Participating Nursing Homes." Health Affairs,
32(9), 1631-38.

Bowblis, J. R. and C. S. Brunt. 2014. "Medicare Skilled Nursing Facility Reimbursement and Upcoding."
Health Economics, 23(7), 821-40.

Brickley, J, S.F. Lu and G. Wedig. 2018. "Quality Ratings and Corporate Governance: Evidence from the
Nursing Home Industry," University of Rochester Working Paper.

Brown, J., M. Duggan, I. Kuziemko and W. Woolston. 2014. "How Does Risk Selection Respond to Risk
Adjustment? New Evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program." American Economic Review,
104(10), 3335-64.

Castle, N. G. and Ferguson, J. C. (2010). "What Is Nursing Home Quality and How Is It Measured?" The
Gerontologist, 50(4): 426–442. http://doi.org/10.1093/geront/gnq052

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (CMS 2017a). “Medicare Program; Prospective Payment
System and Consolidated Billing for Skilled Nursing Facilities for FY 2018, SNF Value-Based Purchasing
Program, SNF Quality Reporting Program, Survey Team Composition, and Correction of the Performance
Period for the NHSN HCP Influenza Vaccination Immunization Reporting Measure in the ESRD QIP for
PY 2020.” Federal Register, 82(149), Friday, August 4, 2017.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (CMS 2017b). “2016 CMS Statistics,” accessed at
https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/CMS-Statistics-
Reference-Booklet/index.html, on May 16, 2018.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (CMS 2017c). “Design for Nursing Home Compare Five-Star
Quality Rating: Technical Users Guide,” 2017.
https://www.medicare.gov/nursinghomecompare/data/about.html.

Ching, A., Hayashi F. and H. Wang. (2015). “Quantifying the Impacts of Limited Supply: The Case of
Nursing Homes.” International Economic Review, 56(4): 1291-1322.




                                                   27
Curto V., Finkelstein A., Levin J. and Bhattacharya, J. (2017). “Healthcare Spending and Utilization in
Public and Private Medicare,” NBER Working Paper #23090.

DeJong, G., Hsieh, C.H., Gassaway, J., Horn, S.D., Smout, R.J., Putman, K., James, R., Brown, M.,
Newman, E.M. and Foley, M.P. (2009). "Characterizing Rehabilitation Services for Patients with Knee and
Hip Replacement in Skilled Nursing Facilities and Inpatient Rehabilitation Facilities." Archives of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation, 90(8): 1269-1283.

Doyle J. and Graves, J.. (2017). “Uncovering Waste in U.S. Healthcare.” Journal of Health Economics.

Duggan M. and F. Morton. (2010). "The Effect of Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical Prices and
Utilization." American Economic Review, 100(1): 590-607

Duggan M., Starc A., and Vabson, B. "Who Benefits When the Government Pays More? Evidence from the
Medicare Advantage Program." Forthcoming in Journal of Public Economics.

Duggan M., Gruber, J. and Vabson, B. "The Consequences of Health Care Privatization: Evidence from
Medicare Advantage Exits." Forthcoming in AEJ: Economic Policy.

Einav L., Finkelstein A. and Mahoney, N. (2017). “Provider Incentives and Healthcare Costs: Evidence
from Long-Term Care Hospitals.” NBER Working Paper #23100.

Eliason P., Grieco P., McDevitte R., and Roberts, J. (2017). “Strategic Patient Discharge: Evidence from
Long-term Care Hospitals.” working paper.

Elixhauser A., Steiner C., Harris D.R., Coffey R.M. (1998). “Comorbidity Measures for Use with
Administrative Data.” Medical Care, 36:8-27.

Finkelstein A. (2007). “The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the Introduction of
Medicare.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 1-37.

Finkelstein A. and McKnight, R.. (2008). “What Did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact of Medicare on
Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending.” Journal of Public Economics 92: 1644-1669.

Grebla, Regina C., Laura Keohane, Yoojin Lee, Lewis A. Lipsitz, Momotazur Rahman, and Amal N.
Trivedi. (2015). “Waiving The Three-Day Rule: Admissions And Length-Of-Stay At Hospitals And
Skilled Nursing Facilities Did not Increase.” Health Affairs, 34(8), August 2015.

Gornick, M. and M.J. Hall. (1988). “Trends in Medicare Use of Post-hospital Care.” Health Care
Financing Review, Suppl: 27–38.

Grabowski, D.C. (2007). “Medicare and Medicaid: Conflicting Incentives for Long‐ Term Care.” The
Milbank Quarterly, 2007 Dec, 85(4): 579–610.

Grabowski, D.C., Stevenson, D.G., Caudry, D.J., O'Malley, A.J., Green, L.H., Doherty, J.A.. and Frank,
R.G. (2017). “The Impact of Nursing Home Pay-for-Performance on Quality and Medicare Spending:
Results from the Nursing Home Value-Based Purchasing Demonstration.” Health Services Research, 2017
Aug, 52(4): 1387-1408.

Hackman, M. and V. Pohl. 2018. "Patient vs. Provider Incentives in Long Term Care," UCLA Working
Paper.

Harrington, C., Woolhandler, S., Mullan, J., Carrillo, H., and Himmelstein, D. (2001). “Does Investor
Ownership of Nursing Homes Compromise the Quality of Care?” American Journal of Public Health, 91:
1452–1455.



                                                    28
Huang, S. S. and R. A. Hirth. 2016. "Quality Rating and Private-Prices: Evidence from the Nursing Home
Industry." Journal of Health Economics, 50, 59-70.

Lu, S.F. (2012). “Multitasking, Information Disclosure and Product Quality: Evidence from Nursing
Homes.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 21(3): 673–705.

Lu, S.F. (2016), “The Role of Donations in Quality Disclosure Evidence from Nonprofit Nursing Homes.”
American Journal of Health Economics, 2(4): 431–462.

Lu, S.F. and G. Wedig. (2013). “Clustering, Agency Costs and Operating Efficiency: Evidence from
Nursing Home Chains.” Management Science, 59(3): 677–694.

Lu, S.F., H. Rui and A. Seidmann. (2018). “Does Technology Substitute for Nurses? Staffing Decisions in
Nursing Homes.” Management Science, 64(4), 1842-59.

Meyers, D. J., V. Mor and M. Rahman. 2018. "Medicare Advantage Enrollees More Likely to Enter Lower-
Quality Nursing Homes Compared to Fee-for-Service Enrollees." Health Affairs, 37(1), 78-85.

McLawhorn, A.S. and L.T. Buller. (2017). “Bundled Payments in Total Joint Replacement: Keeping Our
Care Affordable and High in Quality.” Current Reviews in Musculoskeletal Medicine, 10: 370–377.

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MEDPAC 2010). “Most Common Diagnoses in Skilled Nursing
Facilities.” available at http://67.59.137.244/chapters/Mar10_Ch03A_APPENDIX.pdf, accessed on May
18, 2018.

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MEDPAC 2015). “Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment
Policy.” Washington, DC.

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MEDPAC 2017). “A DATA BOOK Health Care Spending and
the Medicare Program.” available at http://www.medpac.gov/docs/default-source/data-
book/jun17_databookentirereport_sec.pdf?sfvrsn=0, accessed on May 16, 2018.

Navathe, A.S., Troxel, A.B., Liao, J.M., Nan, N., Zhu, J., Zhong, W. and Emanuel, E.J. (2017). “Cost of
Joint Replacement Using Bundled Payment Models.” JAMA Internal Medicine, 177(2): 214–22.

Nyman, J.A. (1993). “Testing for Excess Demand in Nursing Home Care Markets.” Medical Care, 31(8):
680–693.

Werner, R., Kolstad, J., Stuart, E. and Polsky, D. (2011). “The Effect of Pay-for-Performance in Hospitals:
Lessons for Quality Improvement.” Health Affairs, 30(4), 690-98.

Zhao, X. (2016). “Competition, Information, and Quality: Evidence from Nursing Homes.” Journal of
Health Economics, 49: 136–152.




                                                    29
             Figure 1: Sorting of destination with homogenous SNFs

             Assume all SNFs are high-quality
             Net value of staying at home is normalized to zero conditional on sickness s
             s 1 = social optimal threshold to discharge to SNF
             s 2 = social optimal threshold to discharge home




                                                                                            V(inpatient)
            Net Value (patient
            utility of receiving
                                                                                                           V(SNF)
            care – cost of care
            provision)




0=V(home)
                               s2                                     s1

                                                                                                   Patient
                                                                                                   sickness




            Go home                       Go to SNF                        Stay inpatient




                                                        30
            Figure 2: Sorting of destination with SNF high and SNF low



                                                                                               V(inpatient)
            Net Value (patient
            utility of receiving                                                                          V(SNFhigh)
            care – cost of care
            provision)

                                                                                                         V(SNFlow)




                                                                sc
0=V(home)                     s2       s’2                                    s1

                                                                                                      Patient
                                                                                                      sickness




                                                 SNFhigh, if    SNFhigh, if
              Go home              SNFhigh, if   crowded,       crowded,           Stay inpatient
                                   crowded,      SNFlow         stay
                                   go home                      inpatient




                                                           31
Table 1: Potential distortion from Medicare reimbursement rules for SNFs

            Description                    Potential distortion in    Extra cost for CMS (as Any adverse effect on     Graphic
                                           hospital’s discharge       a social planner)      patient readmission       illustration
                                           decision
 Error 1    s’ 2 <s<s1 (so the patient     Hospital keeps the         Medicare pays for        No                      Red triangle
            should go to SNF high , or     patient beyond the         extra inpatient stay                             in Figure 1
            SNF low if SNF high is full)   cutoff and then            while patient receives                           and Figure 2
            but the patient is ready for   discharges her to SNF      better but unnecessary
            discharge before reaching                                 care in hospital
            the three-day cutoff           Hospital discharges        Patient suffers from     Yes                     Green
                                           the patient home           inadequate care after                            diamond in
                                           before the cutoff          discharge, Medicare                              Figure 1 and
                                                                      saves SNF cost                                   Figure 2
 Error 2    s<s 2 (so the patient should   Hospital discharges        Medicare pays for        Potentially yes if      Blue circle in
            go home regardless of SNF      the patient to SNF high    unnecessary SNF care     SNF low has a risk of   Figure 1 and
            quality) but the patient is    or SNF low                                          providing worse care    Figure 2
            ready for discharge after                                                          than home
            three-night inpatient stay     Hospital discharges        Same as efficient        No
                                           the patient home           outcome
 Error 3    s 2 <s<s’ 2 (so the patient    Hospital discharges        Medicare pays for        Potentially yes if      Yellow
            should go home when            the patient to SNF low     unnecessary SNF care     SNF low has a risk of   pentagon in
            SNF high is full) but the                                                          providing worst care    Figure 2
            patient is ready for                                                               than home
            discharge after three-night    Hospital discharges        Same as efficient        No
            inpatient stay                 the patient home           outcome




                                                                     32
      Table 2: Discharge destination by above/below threshold and Medicare/non-Medicare

                          Day 2 & Medicare   Day 2 & Non-Medicare   Day 3 & Medicare   Day 3 & Non-Medicare
       Home                    0.801                0.859                0.582                0.702
       SNF                     0.022                0.013                0.163                0.077
       Short-term              0.022                0.023                0.018                0.018
       Other facilities        0.022                0.014                0.050                0.032
       HHC                     0.123                0.080                0.182                0.163
       AMA                     0.010                0.011                0.005                0.007
       Observations           964,887              488,518             1,012,604             449,129

Notes: SNF denotes skilled nursing facilities; HHC home health care; AMA against medical advice.




                                                         33
Table 3: Summary statistics by discharge destination, above/below threshold, and Medicare/non-
Medicare

                                                           Panel A. Discharged home or HHC
                                   Day 2 & Medicare   Day 2 & Non-Medicare    Day 3 & Medicare   Day3 & Non-Medicare
 Age                                    72.017                64.599               72.019              64.623
 Female                                  0.525                 0.493                0.539               0.507
 Main diagnosis
 Heart attack or heart failure          0.056                  0.055                0.063               0.058
 Stroke                                 0.059                  0.048                0.040               0.034
 Knee or hip replacement                0.042                  0.056                0.137               0.170
 Other                                  0.843                  0.842                0.759               0.738
 Comorbidity
 Deficiency anemia                      0.090                  0.067                0.121               0.094
 Chronic pulmonary disease              0.170                  0.136                0.187               0.150
 Diabetes, uncomplicated                0.246                  0.222                0.248               0.223
 Hypertension                           0.674                  0.601                0.677               0.607
 Hypothyroidism                         0.131                  0.098                0.138               0.104
 Fluid and electrolyte disorders        0.140                  0.120                0.171               0.145
 Renal failure                          0.076                  0.044                0.084               0.048
 Readmission rates
 30-day readmission rates               0.089                  0.072                0.096               0.079
 60-day readmission rates               0.132                  0.105                0.142               0.116
 Observations                          891,955                458,452              773,478             388,576

                                                               Panel B. Transferred to SNF
                                   Day 2 & Medicare   Day 2 & Non-Medicare    Day 3 & Medicare   Day3 & Non-Medicare
 Age                                    73.416                67.050               73.004              66.380
 Female                                  0.611                 0.585                0.686               0.657
 Main diagnosis
 Heart attack or heart failure          0.029                  0.020                0.012               0.006
 Stroke                                 0.063                  0.051                0.034               0.020
 Knee or hip replacement                0.115                  0.256                0.545               0.719
 Other                                  0.793                  0.674                0.409               0.255
 Comorbidity
 Deficiency anemia                      0.156                  0.133                0.153               0.136
 Chronic pulmonary disease              0.208                  0.179                0.177               0.159
 Diabetes, uncomplicated                0.304                  0.265                0.240               0.227
 Hypertension                           0.673                  0.624                0.700               0.667
 Hypothyroidism                         0.150                  0.125                0.176               0.152
 Fluid and electrolyte disorders        0.191                  0.150                0.150               0.112
 Renal failure                          0.112                  0.082                0.063               0.041
 Readmission rates
 30-day readmission rates               0.126                  0.097                0.085               0.063
 60-day readmission rates               0.189                  0.147                0.126               0.093
 SNF characteristics
 Deficiency citations, HSA level         0.574                 0.580                0.585               0.580
 SNF occupancy, HSA level               88.470                88.601               88.638              89.492
 Observations                           21,141                 6,431               165,103             34,696

Notes: HSA denotes health service area.




                                                         34
Table 4: SNF discharge rate and readmission rates by health condition, above/below threshold,
and Medicare/non-Medicare

                                                        Panel A. Knee or hip replacement
                                Day 2 & Medicare   Day 2 & Non-Medicare       Day 3 & Medicare   Day3 & Non-Medicare
 SNF                                 0.052                  0.056                      0.400            0.251
 30-day readmission rates            0.029                  0.024                      0.040            0.031
 60-day readmission rates            0.045                  0.039                      0.058            0.047
 Elixhauser Comorbidity Index
 Readmission score                   3.633                 2.925                        5.044          4.002
 Mortality score                     -0.272                -0.835                      -0.099          -0.742
 Observations                        46,285                29,311                  225,132             99,329

                                                               Panel B. Heart disease
                                Day 2 & Medicare   Day 2 & Non-Medicare       Day 3 & Medicare   Day3 & Non-Medicare
 SNF                                 0.011                  0.004                      0.035            0.008
 30-day readmission rates            0.119                  0.091                      0.137            0.113
 60-day readmission rates            0.175                  0.135                      0.204            0.164
 Elixhauser Comorbidity Index
 Readmission score                   9.751                  7.021                     11.613            8.239
 Mortality score                     1.929                  0.768                      2.596            1.242
 Observations                        57,182                28,639                     56,095           24,866

                                                                     Panel C. Stroke
                                Day 2 & Medicare   Day 2 & Non-Medicare       Day 3 & Medicare   Day3 & Non-Medicare
 SNF                                 0.023                  0.014                      0.130            0.044
 30-day readmission rates            0.076                  0.065                      0.090            0.077
 60-day readmission rates            0.115                  0.098                      0.134            0.111
 Elixhauser Comorbidity Index
 Readmission score                   6.575                  5.554                      8.030            6.518
 Mortality score                     1.041                  0.456                      1.596            0.866
 Observations                        58,029                23,528                     42,904           15,779

                                                                     Panel D. Other
                                Day 2 & Medicare   Day 2 & Non-Medicare       Day 3 & Medicare   Day3 & Non-Medicare
 SNF                                 0.021                  0.011                      0.098            0.029
 30-day readmission rates            0.090                  0.074                      0.103            0.088
 60-day readmission rates            0.134                  0.108                      0.152            0.128
 Elixhauser Comorbidity Index
 Readmission score                   8.888                  7.183                     10.878            8.790
 Mortality score                     2.578                  1.652                      3.506            2.389
 Observations                       803,391                407,040                 688,473             309,155

Notes: We compute Elixhauser Comorbidity Index according to Elixhauser et al. (1998) and the corresponding
software developed by AHRQ (https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/comorbidity/comorbidity.jsp).




                                                      35
                                      Table 5: First stage: discharge outcomes

                                             Home/HHC             SNF       Other facilities       AMA
                        Panel A. Full sample
                        Day 3*Medicare         -0.076∗∗∗        0.068∗∗∗          0.008∗∗∗         -0.000
                                                (0.003)         (0.004)           (0.003)         (0.000)
                        Observations           2,915,127        2,915,127     2,915,127          2,915,127
                        Adjusted R2              0.237            0.215         0.124              0.053
                        Mean Y                   0.862            0.078         0.052              0.008

                        Panel B. No comorbidity
                        Day 3*Medicare         -0.079∗∗∗        0.066∗∗∗          0.013∗∗∗         -0.000
                                                (0.004)         (0.005)           (0.004)         (0.001)
                        Observations            352,749          352,749          352,749         352,749
                        Adjusted R2              0.215            0.184            0.128           0.101
                        Mean Y                   0.904            0.052            0.038           0.006

                        Panel C. Any comorbidity
                        Day 3*Medicare         -0.075∗∗∗        0.068∗∗∗          0.008∗∗∗         -0.000
                                                (0.003)         (0.004)           (0.003)         (0.000)
                        Observations           2,562,350        2,562,350     2,562,350          2,562,350
                        Adjusted R2              0.241            0.219         0.124              0.049
                        Mean Y                   0.856            0.082         0.054              0.008

                        Panel D. Below-median Elixhauser Comorbidity Index readmission score
                        Day 3*Medicare         -0.080∗∗∗        0.069∗∗∗          0.012∗∗∗         -0.000
                                                (0.004)         (0.005)           (0.004)         (0.000)
                        Observations           1,437,652        1,437,652     1,437,652          1,437,652
                        Adjusted R2              0.255            0.229         0.139              0.060
                        Mean Y                   0.877            0.070         0.048              0.006

                        Panel E. Above-median Elixhauser Comorbidity Index readmission score
                        Day 3*Medicare         -0.073∗∗∗        0.067∗∗∗          0.006∗∗∗         0.000
                                                (0.003)         (0.004)           (0.002)         (0.000)
                        Observations           1,477,450        1,477,450     1,477,450          1,477,450
                        Adjusted R2              0.228            0.209         0.116              0.050
                        Mean Y                   0.848            0.086         0.057              0.010

Notes: Each cell shows an estimate from a different regression. In addition to Day 3*Medicare, each regression
includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as
patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related
Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge
month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are
                              ∗                         ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
clustered at the HSA level.       Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                                 36
                                                      Table 6: Readmission rates

                              (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)            (8)         (9)           (10)
                               Full sample        No comorbidity         Any comorbidity           Below-median               Above-median
                                                                                                 readmission score          readmission score
                          30-day      60-day     30-day     60-day      30-day      60-day      30-day         60-day       30-day        60-day
     Panel A. OLS
     Discharge to SNF    0.021∗∗∗     0.031∗∗∗   0.013∗∗∗   0.018∗∗∗   0.022∗∗∗    0.032∗∗∗     0.017∗∗∗   0.024∗∗∗        0.025∗∗∗      0.037∗∗∗
                         (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.002)
     Observations       2,915,127    2,915,127   352,749    352,749    2,562,350   2,562,350   1,437,652   1,437,652      1,477,450      1,477,450
     Adjusted R2          0.031        0.045      0.044      0.053       0.030       0.043       0.028       0.036          0.027          0.039
     Mean Y               0.084        0.124      0.061      0.088       0.088       0.129       0.065       0.094          0.104          0.154

     Panel B. 2SLS
37




     Discharge to SNF      -0.011    -0.030∗∗∗    0.005      0.011       -0.016    -0.037∗∗∗     -0.004         -0.009      -0.023       -0.056∗∗∗
                          (0.010)     (0.011)    (0.023)    (0.024)     (0.011)     (0.012)     (0.015)        (0.017)     (0.015)        (0.019)
     Observations       2,915,127    2,915,127   352,749    352,749    2,562,350   2,562,350   1,437,652   1,437,652      1,477,450      1,477,450
     Adjusted R2          0.031        0.043      0.044      0.053       0.029       0.040       0.028       0.036          0.025          0.035
     Mean Y               0.084        0.124      0.061      0.088       0.088       0.129       0.065       0.094          0.104          0.154
     F statistic         277.995      277.995    166.737    166.737     273.041     273.041     192.903     192.903        337.427        337.427

         Notes: Each cell shows an estimate from a different regression. Panel A shows the OLS estimates from a regression of
         30- or 60-day readmission rate on SNF discharges, controlling for an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as
         well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators
         for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital
         fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing
         discharge hour. Panel B shows the 2SLS estimates where we instrument SNF discharges with an interaction between
                                                                                     ∗                         ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
         Day 3 and Medicare. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.             Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,
         significant at 1%.
                          Table 7: First stage by condition: discharge outcomes

                                                        Home/HHC          SNF           Other facilities      AMA
                 Panel A. Knee/hip replacement
                 Day 3*Medicare                          -0.132∗∗∗       0.139∗∗∗            -0.007           -0.000
                                                          (0.012)        (0.014)            (0.011)          (0.000)
                 Observations                                400,046     400,046            400,046          400,046
                 Adjusted R2                                  0.342       0.279              0.277            0.003
                 Mean Y                                       0.587       0.297              0.116            0.000

                 Panel B. Heart disease
                 Day 3*Medicare                          -0.019∗∗∗       0.018∗∗∗            0.001            0.000
                                                          (0.003)        (0.001)            (0.003)          (0.001)
                 Observations                                166,758     166,758            166,758          166,758
                 Adjusted R2                                  0.301       0.054              0.346            0.017
                 Mean Y                                       0.880       0.017              0.092            0.011

                 Panel C. Stroke
                 Day 3*Medicare                          -0.078∗∗∗       0.071∗∗∗           0.007∗            -0.001
                                                          (0.005)        (0.005)            (0.004)          (0.001)
                 Observations                                140,224     140,224            140,224          140,224
                 Adjusted R2                                  0.179       0.100              0.131            0.015
                 Mean Y                                       0.848       0.057              0.087            0.008

                 Panel D. Other conditions
                 Day 3*Medicare                          -0.053∗∗∗       0.051∗∗∗          0.002∗∗∗          -0.001∗∗
                                                          (0.002)        (0.002)           (0.001)            (0.000)
                 Observations                            2,208,047      2,208,047          2,208,047       2,208,047
                 Adjusted R2                               0.160          0.146              0.090           0.058
                 Mean Y                                    0.911          0.044              0.036           0.009

Notes: Each cell shows an estimate from a different regression. In addition to Day 3*Medicare, each regression
includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as
patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related
Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge
month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are
                              ∗                         ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
clustered at the HSA level.       Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                                 38
                                  Table 8: OLS by condition: readmission rates

                                         Full sample                  No comorbidity                Any comorbidity
                                Knee/hip          Other           Knee/hip       Other           Knee/hip          Other
                               replacement      conditions       replacement   conditions       replacement      conditions
           Panel A. 30-day readmission rates
           Discharge to SNF        0.018∗∗∗      0.026∗∗∗          0.013∗∗∗     0.017∗∗∗          0.018∗∗∗        0.027∗∗∗
                                   (0.001)       (0.002)           (0.002)      (0.004)           (0.001)         (0.002)
           Observations            400,046       2,515,070          62,191      290,531           337,825        2,224,509
           Adjusted R2              0.015          0.028            0.015        0.043             0.015           0.026
           Mean Y                   0.036          0.092            0.026        0.069             0.037           0.095

           Panel B. 60-day readmission rates
           Discharge to SNF        0.024∗∗∗      0.042∗∗∗          0.016∗∗∗     0.032∗∗∗          0.025∗∗∗        0.042∗∗∗
                                   (0.001)       (0.002)           (0.003)      (0.004)           (0.001)         (0.002)
           Observations            400,046       2,515,070          62,191      290,531           337,825        2,224,509
           Adjusted R2              0.017          0.040            0.015        0.051             0.017           0.038
           Mean Y                   0.053          0.136            0.041        0.098             0.055           0.141

Notes: Each cell shows an estimate from a different regression. In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF, each
regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics
such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis
Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and
discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors
                                  ∗                         ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
are clustered at the HSA level.       Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                                 39
                                Table 9: 2SLS by condition: readmission rates

                                       Full sample                No comorbidity               Any comorbidity
                                 Knee/hip         Other       Knee/hip           Other       Knee/hip        Other
                                replacement     conditions   replacement       conditions   replacement    conditions
            Panel A. 30-day readmission rates
            Discharge to SNF       0.026∗∗        -0.010       0.043∗∗           0.014         0.020          -0.014
                                   (0.010)       (0.015)       (0.020)          (0.048)       (0.013)        (0.015)
            Observations           400,046      2,515,070      62,191           290,531       337,825       2,224,509
            Adjusted R2             0.015         0.028         0.010            0.043         0.015          0.025
            Mean Y                  0.036         0.092         0.026            0.069         0.037          0.095
            F statistic            94.942        520.255       85.830           308.921       84.136         519.957

            Panel B. 60-day readmission rates
            Discharge to SNF      0.039∗∗∗        -0.020        0.044            0.049        0.036∗∗        -0.029∗
                                  (0.013)        (0.016)       (0.028)          (0.052)       (0.016)        (0.017)
            Observations           400,046      2,515,070      62,191           290,531       337,825       2,224,509
            Adjusted R2             0.016         0.039         0.012            0.051         0.016          0.036
            Mean Y                  0.053         0.136         0.041            0.098         0.055          0.141
            F statistic            94.942        520.255       85.830           308.921       84.136         519.957

Notes: Each cell shows an estimate from a different regression. In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF
instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well
as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for
race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital
fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing
                                                                           ∗                         ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,
significant at 1%.




                                                             40
        Table 10: 2SLS by condition & local SNF characteristics, knee and hip replacement

                                                           Low occupancy            High occupancy
                                                          30-day         60-day    30-day     60-day
                                 Panel A. By occupancy
                                 Discharge to SNF         0.031∗∗∗      0.052∗∗∗    0.008      -0.001
                                                          (0.012)       (0.015)    (0.018)    (0.021)
                                 Observations             309,140        309,140    90,892     90,892
                                 Adjusted R2               0.016          0.016     0.011      0.012
                                 Mean Y                    0.035          0.052     0.036      0.054
                                 F statistic              68.795         68.795    135.507    135.507

                                                           Low deficiency           High deficiency
                                                          30-day         60-day    30-day     60-day
                                 Panel B. By deficiency
                                 Discharge to SNF          0.012          0.021    0.033∗∗∗   0.048∗∗∗
                                                          (0.019)        (0.025)   (0.012)    (0.013)
                                 Observations             163,734        163,734   236,295    236,295
                                 Adjusted R2               0.017          0.019     0.013      0.014
                                 Mean Y                    0.035          0.052     0.036      0.053
                                 F statistic              35.374         35.374    139.184    139.184

Notes: Each cell shows an estimate from a different regression. We define low vs high deficiency areas based on the
average number of deficiency citations across SNFs in a given HSA relative to the median of the corresponding state
in the preceding year. Similarly, we define low vs high occupancy areas based on the average occupancy rate across
SNFs in a given HSA relative to the median of the corresponding state in the year preceding the admission year.
In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an
indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age,
age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG)
fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed
effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the
             ∗                         ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
HSA level.       Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                                    41
                                                          Table 11: Back of the envelope calculation (in million)

                                                                                                                         (1)                                                          (2)
     Panel A. Full sample
     Total Medicare population in 2015                                                                                 55.51
     Total Medicare population in our sample states and years                                                          77.91
     Total Medicare population in our data                                                                 .96 + 1.01 = 1.97
     Share of Medicare population showing up in our sample                                                1.97/77.91 = 2.5%
     Share of Medicare population showing up in our day-3 sample                                          1.01/77.91 = 1.3%
     Average SNF care for Medicare                                                                              $500 per day
     Average SNF stay for Medicare                                                                                   37 days
                                                                                                             No comorbidity                              Below-median comorbidity index
     Average increase in SNF admission due to the three-day rule                                                       6.6%                                                         6.9%
     Share of patients in each category                                                                              11.32%                                                       48.51%
     Potential savings of discharges home rather than to SNF
     For our day-3 Medicare sample                                            1.01 × 6.6% × 11.32% × $500 × 37 days = 139.60             1.01 × 6.9% × 48.51% × $500 × 37 days = 625.42
     Annual savings for the whole Medicare population                  55.51 × 1.3% × 6.6% × 11.32% × $500 × 37 days = 99.74    55.51 × 1.3% × 6.9% × 48.51% × $500 × 37 days = 446.86
     Annual savings as a share of total Medicare payment to SNF                                        115.09/31332 = 0.32%                                       515.60/31332 = 1.43%

     Panel B. Knee and hip replacement only
42




     Total joint replacement patients with Medicare in our data                                           0.04 + 0.11 = 0.15
     Share of Medicare population showing up in the subsample                                            0.15/77.91 = 0.19%
     Share of Medicare population showing up in the day-3 subsample                                      0.11/77.91 = 0.14%
     Average increase in SNF admission due to the three-day rule                                                        14%
     Share of total joint replacement patients without complications                                                  97.4%
     60-day readmission effect of SNF discharge                                                                        4.0%
     Sources of wastes
     (1) Discharge to SNF rather than home                                                          $500 per day for 15 days
     (2) Readmission to hospital                                                                     $10,000 per readmission
     (3) Longer initial hospital stays to qualify for SNF coverage
     Estimation of wastes                                               For our day-3 Medicare sample with joint replacement   Potential annual savings for the whole Medicare population
     (1) Discharge to SNF rather than home                                     0.11 × 97.4% × 14% × $500 × 15 days = 112.50       55.51 × 0.14% × 97.4% × 14% × $500 × 15 days = 79.48
     (2) Readmission to hospital                                                  0.11 × 97.4% × 14% × 4.0% × $10000 = 6.00        55.51 × 0.14% × 97.4% × 14% × 4.0% × $10000 = 4.24
     Total wastes
                                                                                                       112.50+6.00 = 118.50                                           79.48+4.24 = 83.73
     Total Medicare expenditure on total joint replacement                                                                                                                          7000
     Total waste as a share of total Medicare expenditure                                                                                                            83.73/7000 = 1.20%
Appendix A. Appendix Figures




                         .1
                         .05
                         0
                         −.05




                                −24       −12                  0                  12    24
                                                Hours from the three−day cutoff


                                                   (a) Full sample
                         .6
                         .4
                         .2
                         0
                         −.2
                         −.4




                                −24       −12                  0                  12    24
                                                Hours from the three−day cutoff


                                      (b) Knee and hip replacement only

                      Figure A.1: Event study graph, outcome: discharge to SNF

Notes: The corresponding regression is analogous to equation (1), replacing Day3*Medicare with a series of interac-
tions between Medicare and each discharge hour within the 24 hour window before and after the three-day cutoff.




                                                           43
       .1




                                                                               .1
                                                                               .05
       .05




                                                                               0
       0




                                                                               −.05
       −.05




                                                                               −.1
       −.1




                                                                               −.15


              −24        −12                 0                  12   24               −24   −12                  0                  12   24
                               Hours from the four−day cutoff                                      Hours from the five−day cutoff



                               (a) Day 4 cutoff                                                   (b) Day 5 cutoff
                                                                               .2
       .2




                                                                               .1
       .1




                                                                               0
       0




                                                                               −.1
       −.1




                                                                               −.2
       −.2




              −24        −12                 0                  12   24               −24   −12                  0                12     24
                                Hours from the six−day cutoff                                     Hours from the seven−day cutoff



                               (c) Day 6 cutoff                                                   (d) Day 7 cutoff

                    Figure A.2: Event study graph, outcome: discharge to SNF, placebo cutoffs

Notes: Instead of hours from the three-day cutoff, panels (a), (b), (c), and (d) examine the effects of discharges at
hours from the four, five, six, and seven-day cutoffs, respectively.




                                                                          44
Appendix B. Appendix Tables

       Table B.1: First stage discharge outcomes & 2SLS readmission rates: placebo cutoffs

                                                            First stage                                      2SLS
                                    Home/HHC            SNF        Other facilities     AMA         30-day          60-day
                 Panel A. Day 3 vs 4
                 Day 4*Medicare        0.007∗∗∗       -0.007∗∗∗           -0.000         -0.000
                                       (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.001)        (0.000)
                 Discharge to SNF                                                                    -0.020      -0.174
                                                                                                    (0.121)     (0.149)
                 Observations          2,423,929      2,423,929         2,423,929      2,423,929   2,423,929   2,423,929
                 Adjusted R2             0.261          0.224             0.126          0.045       0.032       0.016
                 Mean Y                  0.795          0.133             0.066          0.005       0.093       0.136
                 F statistic                                                                        11.466      11.466

                 Panel B. Day 4 vs 5
                 Day 5*Medicare          0.002        0.004∗∗∗           -0.006∗∗∗       0.000
                                        (0.002)       (0.001)             (0.002)       (0.000)
                 Discharge to SNF                                                                    0.413       0.728
                                                                                                    (0.400)     (0.462)
                 Observations          1,596,859      1,596,859         1,596,859      1,596,859   1,596,859   1,596,859
                 Adjusted R2             0.261          0.207             0.125          0.041       -0.103      -0.268
                 Mean Y                  0.791          0.132             0.073          0.005        0.110      0.160
                 F statistic                                                                        10.028      10.028

                 Panel C. Day 5 vs 6
                 Day 6*Medicare        -0.008∗∗∗      0.010∗∗∗           -0.002∗         -0.000
                                        (0.002)       (0.001)            (0.001)        (0.000)
                 Discharge to SNF                                                                    0.169       0.071
                                                                                                    (0.128)     (0.138)
                 Observations          1,088,767      1,088,767         1,088,767      1,088,767   1,088,767   1,088,767
                 Adjusted R2             0.261          0.200             0.118          0.034       0.015       0.043
                 Mean Y                  0.775          0.143             0.077          0.004       0.125       0.179
                 F statistic                                                                        85.073      85.073

                 Panel D. Day 6 vs 7
                 Day 7*Medicare        -0.011∗∗∗      0.011∗∗∗            -0.000         0.000
                                        (0.002)       (0.002)            (0.001)        (0.000)
                 Discharge to SNF                                                                    -0.122      -0.054
                                                                                                    (0.151)     (0.170)
                 Observations          797,400        797,400            797,400       797,400     797,400      797,400
                 Adjusted R2            0.246          0.184              0.115         0.029       0.003         0.031
                 Mean Y                 0.753          0.160              0.082         0.004       0.138        0.196
                 F statistic                                                                       43.070        43.070

Notes: Each regression includes an indicator for Day 4, 5, 6, or 7, an indicator for Medicare as well as patients’ age,
age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG)
fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed
effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. For 2SLS regressions, we instrument
SNF discharges with the interaction between Day 4, 5, 6, or 7 and Medicare. Standard errors are clustered at the
             ∗                         ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
HSA level.       Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.



                                                                   45
                                 Table B.2: First stage: discharge outcomes, age 60-69

                                                   Home/HHC             SNF           Other facilities        AMA

                            Day 3*Medicare           -0.057∗∗∗         0.050∗∗∗          0.007∗∗∗             -0.000
                                                      (0.003)          (0.004)           (0.003)             (0.000)
                            Observations            1,414,079      1,414,079            1,414,079           1,414,079
                            Adjusted R2               0.207          0.186                0.128               0.075
                            Mean Y                    0.892          0.053                0.046               0.009

Notes: We focus on patients with age between 60 and 69 and repeat the first stage estimations. In addition to
Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of
discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health
conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects,
discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge
                                                                   ∗                                ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                   Significant at 10%,              significant at 5%,         significant at
1%.


                                       Table B.3: 2SLS: Readmission rates, age 60-69

                                                   Full sample              No comorbidity               Any comorbidity
                                               30-day        60-day         30-day      60-day           30-day     60-day
                      Discharge to SNF          -0.012       -0.040∗         0.067       0.051        -0.027       -0.056∗∗
                                               (0.019)       (0.021)        (0.046)     (0.053)      (0.020)        (0.023)
                      Observations            1,414,079     1,414,079       208,702     208,702     1,205,345     1,205,345
                      Adjusted R2               0.037         0.049          0.054       0.063        0.033         0.045
                      Mean Y                    0.077         0.113          0.056       0.080        0.080         0.118
                      F statistic              193.982       193.982        110.744     110.744      186.943       186.943

Notes: We focus on patients with age between 60 and 69 and repeat the 2SLS estimations. Each regression includes
an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’
age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group
(DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month
fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. We instrument SNF discharges
                                                                                                                               ∗
with an interaction between Day 3 and Medicare. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                                     Significant at
       ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                                       46
                          Table B.4: 2SLS by condition: readmission rates, age 60-69

                                             Full sample                  No comorbidity           Any comorbidity
                                   Knee/hip           Other         Knee/hip         Other       Knee/hip       Other
                                  replacement       conditions     replacement     conditions   replacement   conditions
             Panel A. 30-day readmission rates
             Discharge to SNF          0.030∗          -0.012           0.084∗∗       0.134        0.018        -0.030
                                       (0.016)        (0.032)           (0.036)      (0.126)      (0.019)      (0.033)
             Observations              206,208       1,207,859          36,254       172,414      169,911     1,035,414
             Adjusted R2                0.013          0.034            -0.010        0.053        0.014        0.030
             Mean Y                     0.031          0.085             0.023        0.063        0.032        0.088
             F statistic               87.000         423.672           69.057       196.600      77.840       405.464

             Panel B. 60-day readmission rates
             Discharge to SNF          0.046∗∗         -0.045            0.066        0.133       0.040∗       -0.066∗
                                       (0.020)        (0.036)           (0.047)      (0.144)      (0.023)      (0.037)
             Observations              206,208       1,207,859          36,254       172,414      169,911     1,035,414
             Adjusted R2                0.014          0.046             0.005        0.062        0.015        0.042
             Mean Y                     0.047          0.124             0.037        0.089        0.050        0.129
             F statistic               87.000         423.672           69.057       196.600      77.840       405.464

Notes: We focus on patients with age between 60 and 69 and repeat the 2SLS estimations by health conditions.
In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an
indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age,
age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG)
fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed
effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the
             ∗                         ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
HSA level.       Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                                   47
 Table B.5: 2SLS by condition & local SNF characteristics, knee and hip replacement, age 60-69

                                                         Low occupancy              High occupancy
                                                        30-day        60-day       30-day       60-day
                                Panel A. By occupancy
                                Discharge to SNF        0.043∗∗       0.071∗∗∗      -0.010       -0.035
                                                        (0.017)       (0.022)      (0.036)      (0.045)
                                Observations            158,831       158,831      47,368       47,368
                                Adjusted R2              0.013         0.010       0.008        0.005
                                Mean Y                   0.031         0.047       0.031        0.048
                                F statistic             65.106        65.106       92.826       92.826

                                                          Low deficiency            High deficiency
                                                        30-day        60-day       30-day       60-day
                                Panel B. By deficiency
                                Discharge to SNF         0.021         0.017       0.034∗       0.059∗∗
                                                        (0.029)       (0.040)      (0.018)      (0.023)
                                Observations            83,565        83,565       122,618      122,618
                                Adjusted R2             0.016         0.017         0.013        0.011
                                Mean Y                   0.030        0.046         0.031        0.048
                                F statistic             34.430        34.430       116.989      116.989

Notes: We focus on patients with age between 60 and 69 and repeat the 2SLS estimations by local SNF characteristics
for knee and hip replacement patients. In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day
3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge
characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions
(Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge
year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard
                                          ∗                           ∗∗                            ∗∗∗
errors are clustered at the HSA level.        Significant at 10%,          significant at 5%,             significant at 1%.




                            Table B.6: First stage: discharge outcomes, age 62-67

                                                 Home/HHC           SNF          Other facilities         AMA

                           Day 3*Medicare          -0.049∗∗∗       0.044∗∗∗          0.006∗∗               -0.001
                                                    (0.003)        (0.004)           (0.003)              (0.000)
                           Observations            845,080         845,080          845,080               845,080
                           Adjusted R2              0.207           0.184            0.130                 0.071
                           Mean Y                   0.893           0.052            0.046                 0.009

Notes: We focus on patients with age between 62 and 67 and repeat the first stage estimations. In addition to
Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of
discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health
conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects,
discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge
                                                               ∗                               ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.              Significant at 10%,              significant at 5%,         significant at
1%.




                                                                 48
                                   Table B.7: 2SLS: Readmission rates, age 62-67

                                                    Full sample           No comorbidity       Any comorbidity
                                                  30-day    60-day       30-day    60-day      30-day      60-day
                           Discharge to SNF        0.032     -0.013      0.141∗∗    0.113       0.009       -0.039
                                                  (0.029)   (0.031)      (0.071)   (0.082)     (0.031)     (0.034)
                           Observations           845,080   845,080      124,813   124,813     720,230     720,230
                           Adjusted R2             0.037     0.050        0.044     0.058       0.034       0.047
                           Mean Y                  0.076     0.111        0.055     0.079       0.079       0.117
                           F statistic            145.295   145.295      78.258     78.258     140.556     140.556

Notes: We focus on patients with age between 62 and 67 and repeat the 2SLS estimations. In addition to the indicator
for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator
for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex,
a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all
comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects,
                                                                                                               ∗                         ∗∗
and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                            Significant at 10%,
                     ∗∗∗
significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                            Table B.8: 2SLS by condition: readmission rates, age 62-67

                                             Full sample                  No comorbidity                 Any comorbidity
                                     Knee/hip          Other        Knee/hip         Other         Knee/hip            Other
                                    replacement      conditions    replacement     conditions     replacement        conditions
             Panel A. 30-day readmission rates
             Discharge to SNF          0.067∗∗∗         0.054           0.103∗        0.288         0.058∗∗            0.022
                                       (0.023)         (0.051)          (0.054)      (0.188)        (0.027)           (0.052)
             Observations              125,320        719,738           22,010       102,754        103,259           616,947
             Adjusted R2                0.003          0.034            -0.028        0.042          0.007             0.031
             Mean Y                     0.030          0.084             0.022        0.062          0.032             0.087
             F statistic               63.885         395.781           46.854       112.375        57.546            371.542

             Panel B. 60-day readmission rates
             Discharge to SNF          0.071∗∗          -0.006           0.056        0.257         0.068∗∗            -0.040
                                       (0.029)         (0.054)          (0.066)      (0.213)        (0.033)           (0.057)
             Observations              125,320        719,738           22,010       102,754        103,259           616,947
             Adjusted R2                0.009          0.047             0.007        0.056          0.010             0.043
             Mean Y                     0.047          0.122             0.035        0.088          0.050             0.128
             F statistic               63.885         395.781           46.854       112.375        57.546            371.542

Notes: We focus on patients with age between 62 and 67 and repeat the 2SLS estimations by health conditions.
In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an
indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age,
age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG)
fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed
effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the
             ∗                         ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
HSA level.       Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                                   49
 Table B.9: 2SLS by condition & local SNF characteristics, knee and hip replacement, age 62-67

                                                        Low occupancy             High occupancy
                                                       30-day        60-day       30-day    60-day
                                Panel A. By occupancy
                                Discharge to SNF      0.092∗∗∗       0.114∗∗∗     0.000      -0.046
                                                      (0.029)        (0.037)     (0.044)    (0.053)
                                Observations           96,482        96,482       28,826       28,826
                                Adjusted R2            -0.009        -0.007       0.012        0.001
                                Mean Y                  0.031        0.048        0.029        0.046
                                F statistic            45.157        45.157       88.075       88.075

                                                        Low deficiency            High deficiency
                                                       30-day        60-day       30-day    60-day
                                Panel B. By deficiency
                                Discharge to SNF        0.053         0.050      0.073∗∗∗   0.078∗∗
                                                       (0.042)       (0.054)     (0.027)    (0.035)
                                Observations           50,948        50,948       74,351       74,351
                                Adjusted R2             0.010         0.016        0.000        0.006
                                Mean Y                  0.030        0.047        0.030        0.048
                                F statistic            25.492        25.492       83.967       83.967

Notes: We focus on patients with age between 62 and 67 and repeat the 2SLS estimations by local SNF characteristics
for knee and hip replacement patients. In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day
3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge
characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions
(Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge
year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard
                                         ∗                           ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
errors are clustered at the HSA level.       Significant at 10%,          significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                                50
                     Table B.10: First stage: discharge outcomes, all inpatient episodes

                                                Home/HHC             SNF          Other facilities        AMA

                           Day 3*Medicare         -0.068∗∗∗        0.062∗∗∗            0.007∗∗∗           -0.000
                                                   (0.003)         (0.004)             (0.002)           (0.000)
                           Observations          4,256,972         4,256,972           4,256,972        4,256,972
                           Adjusted R2             0.206             0.179               0.115            0.068
                           Mean Y                  0.846             0.087               0.057            0.009

Notes: We include all inpatient episodes and repeat the first stage estimations. In addition to Day 3*Medicare, each
regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics
such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis
Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and
discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors
                                    ∗                         ∗∗                           ∗∗∗
are clustered at the HSA level.         Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,             significant at 1%.


                         Table B.11: 2SLS: Readmission rates, all inpatient episodes

                                                Full sample             No comorbidity               Any comorbidity
                                             30-day     60-day          30-day         60-day       30-day      60-day

                     Discharge to SNF       -0.028∗∗   -0.040∗∗∗         0.015          0.019      -0.034∗∗∗   -0.048∗∗∗
                                             (0.012)    (0.011)         (0.026)        (0.025)      (0.012)     (0.012)
                     Observations          4,256,972   4,256,972        444,768     444,768        3,812,181   3,812,181
                     Adjusted R2             0.058       0.078           0.103       0.112           0.053       0.072
                     Mean Y                  0.126       0.182           0.086       0.121           0.130       0.189
                     F statistic            307.899     307.899         152.494     152.494         309.103     309.103

Notes: We include all inpatient episodes and repeat the 2SLS estimations. In addition to the indicator for discharge to
SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as
well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators
for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital
fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing
                                                                                   ∗                            ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                         Significant at 10%,          significant at 5%,
significant at 1%.




                                                                   51
                   Table B.12: 2SLS by condition: readmission rates, all inpatient episodes

                                             Full sample               No comorbidity           Any comorbidity
                                        Knee/hip       Other       Knee/hip       Other       Knee/hip       Other
                                       replacement   conditions   replacement   conditions   replacement   conditions
               Panel A. 30-day readmission rates
               Discharge to SNF          0.024∗∗       -0.029∗      0.044∗∗       0.046         0.017       -0.037∗∗
                                         (0.010)       (0.017)      (0.020)      (0.053)       (0.012)       (0.016)
               Observations              450,738      3,806,223     68,378       376,369       382,336     3,429,830
               Adjusted R2                0.016         0.052        0.009        0.101         0.016        0.047
               Mean Y                     0.037         0.136        0.027        0.097         0.039        0.140
               F statistic               97.255        532.289      88.590       230.071       85.622       543.258

               Panel B. 60-day readmission rates
               Discharge to SNF          0.043∗∗∗     -0.031∗∗      0.049∗∗       0.082       0.038∗∗∗      -0.041∗∗
                                         (0.012)       (0.015)      (0.024)      (0.052)      (0.015)        (0.016)
               Observations              450,738      3,806,223     68,378       376,369       382,336     3,429,830
               Adjusted R2                0.018         0.070        0.011        0.109         0.018        0.064
               Mean Y                     0.055         0.197        0.042        0.135         0.058        0.204
               F statistic               97.255        532.289      88.590       230.071       85.622       543.258

Notes: We include all inpatient episodes and repeat the 2SLS estimations by health conditions. In addition to the
indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an
indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator
for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators
for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed
                                                                                                                ∗
effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                    Significant at
       ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                                  52
 Table B.13: 2SLS by local SNF characteristics, knee and hip replacement, all inpatient episodes

                                                              Low occupancy              High occupancy
                                                             30-day         60-day      30-day       60-day
                                       Panel A. By occupancy
                                       Discharge to SNF     0.028∗∗       0.049∗∗∗       0.010        0.023
                                                            (0.012)       (0.015)       (0.016)      (0.019)
                                       Observations         348,211         348,211     102,510      102,510
                                       Adjusted R2           0.016           0.018       0.013        0.016
                                       Mean Y                0.037           0.055       0.038        0.057
                                       F statistic          70.602          70.602      135.605      135.605

                                                              Low deficiency             High deficiency
                                                             30-day         60-day      30-day       60-day
                                       Panel B. By deficiency
                                       Discharge to SNF      0.018           0.037      0.026∗∗     0.044∗∗∗
                                                            (0.018)         (0.025)     (0.011)     (0.013)
                                       Observations         185,616         185,616     265,108      265,108
                                       Adjusted R2           0.017           0.020       0.015        0.017
                                       Mean Y                0.036           0.054       0.038        0.056
                                       F statistic          36.587          36.587      140.875      140.875

Notes: We include all inpatient episodes and repeat the 2SLS estimations by local SNF characteristics for knee and
hip replacement patients. In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each
regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics
such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis
Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and
discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors
                                        ∗                         ∗∗                          ∗∗∗
are clustered at the HSA level.             Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,           significant at 1%.




                           Table B.14: First stage: discharge outcomes, dropping MA

                                                    Home/HHC             SNF          Other facilities     AMA

                            Day 3*Medicare            -0.083∗∗∗        0.073∗∗∗          0.011∗∗∗          -0.000
                                                       (0.004)         (0.005)           (0.004)          (0.000)
                            Observations              2,447,892        2,447,892        2,447,892        2,447,892
                            Adjusted R2                 0.228            0.198            0.126            0.058
                            Mean Y                      0.862            0.075            0.055            0.008

Notes: We drop patients from NY and FL whom we could identify as enrolled in Medicare Advantage (MA) and
repeat the first stage estimations. In addition to Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an
indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator
for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators
for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed
                                                                                                                         ∗
effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                             Significant at
       ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                                       53
                            Table B.15: 2SLS: Readmission rates, dropping MA

                                                Full sample               No comorbidity            Any comorbidity
                                            30-day       60-day           30-day    60-day          30-day        60-day
                   Discharge to SNF         -0.008      -0.024∗∗           0.022     0.021        -0.013      -0.032∗∗
                                           (0.010)       (0.011)          (0.024)   (0.026)      (0.011)       (0.012)
                   Observations           2,447,892     2,447,892        309,438    309,438     2,138,427    2,138,427
                   Adjusted R2              0.032         0.045           0.046      0.054        0.030        0.042
                   Mean Y                   0.084         0.123           0.061      0.086        0.087        0.128
                   F statistic             204.637       204.637         115.857    115.857      202.329      202.329

Notes: We drop patients from NY and FL whom we could identify as enrolled in Medicare Advantage (MA) and repeat
the 2SLS estimations. In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each
regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics
such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis
Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and
discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors
                                   ∗                           ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
are clustered at the HSA level.        Significant at 10%,          significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.



                    Table B.16: 2SLS by condition: readmission rates, dropping MA

                                          Full sample                     No comorbidity                 Any comorbidity
                                   Knee/hip         Other            Knee/hip         Other            Knee/hip         Other
                                  replacement     conditions        replacement     conditions        replacement     conditions
            Panel A. 30-day readmission rates
            Discharge to SNF       0.028∗∗∗           -0.001            0.048∗∗        0.043            0.023∗          -0.007
                                   (0.010)           (0.013)            (0.021)       (0.042)           (0.012)        (0.014)
            Observations            344,350       2,103,530              55,750       253,655           288,563       1,849,846
            Adjusted R2              0.014          0.029                 0.007        0.044             0.014          0.026
            Mean Y                   0.034          0.092                 0.026        0.068             0.036          0.095
            F statistic             74.181         688.815               62.593       325.946           68.491         709.509

            Panel B. 60-day readmission rates
            Discharge to SNF       0.039∗∗∗           -0.008            0.053∗         0.058            0.036∗∗         -0.016
                                   (0.013)           (0.014)            (0.029)       (0.047)           (0.015)        (0.015)
            Observations            344,350       2,103,530              55,750       253,655           288,563       1,849,846
            Adjusted R2              0.016          0.040                 0.010        0.052             0.016          0.038
            Mean Y                   0.051          0.135                 0.040        0.097             0.053          0.140
            F statistic             74.181         688.815               62.593       325.946           68.491         709.509

Notes: We drop patients from NY and FL whom we could identify as enrolled in Medicare Advantage (MA) and
repeat the 2SLS estimations by health conditions. In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented
with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of
discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health
conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects,
discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge
                                                                    ∗                          ∗∗                          ∗∗∗
hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                   Significant at 10%,         significant at 5%,           significant at
1%.



                                                                    54
Table B.17: 2SLS by condition & local SNF characteristics, knee and hip replacement, dropping
MA

                                                             Low occupancy              High occupancy
                                                            30-day         60-day       30-day      60-day
                                       Panel A. By occupancy
                                       Discharge to SNF     0.035∗∗∗    0.055∗∗∗        0.006        -0.008
                                                            (0.011)     (0.015)        (0.018)      (0.022)
                                       Observations         265,032        265,032      79,305       79,305
                                       Adjusted R2           0.014          0.015       0.011        0.011
                                       Mean Y                0.034          0.051       0.035        0.052
                                       F statistic          54.488         54.488      108.253      108.253

                                                              Low deficiency             High deficiency
                                                            30-day         60-day       30-day      60-day
                                       Panel B. By deficiency
                                       Discharge to SNF      0.018          0.025      0.033∗∗∗     0.047∗∗∗
                                                            (0.017)        (0.023)     (0.012)      (0.014)
                                       Observations         140,156        140,156     204,175      204,175
                                       Adjusted R2           0.016          0.018       0.013        0.014
                                       Mean Y                0.033          0.050       0.035        0.052
                                       F statistic          28.371         28.371      104.874      104.874

Notes: We drop patients from NY and FL whom we could identify as enrolled in Medicare Advantage (MA) and
repeat the 2SLS estimations by local SNF characteristics for knee and hip replacement patients. In addition to the
indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an
indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator
for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators
for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed
                                                                                                                              ∗
effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                                   Significant at
       ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.



                         Table B.18: First stage: discharge outcomes, 12-hour window

                                                   Home/HHC            SNF           Other facilities       AMA

                            Day 3*Medicare            -0.070∗∗∗       0.054∗∗∗           0.017∗∗            -0.000
                                                       (0.007)        (0.006)            (0.008)           (0.000)
                            Observations              1,111,287    1,111,287           1,111,287          1,111,287
                            Adjusted R2                 0.213        0.183               0.140              0.062
                            Mean Y                      0.893        0.050               0.048              0.008

Notes: We focus on 12 hours before and after the three-day cutoff and repeat the first stage estimations. In addition
to Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of
discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health
conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects,
discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge
                                                                   ∗                               ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                  Significant at 10%,              significant at 5%,         significant at
1%.



                                                                      55
                                 Table B.19: 2SLS: Readmission rates, 12-hour window

                                                     Full sample            No comorbidity          Any comorbidity
                                                30-day        60-day        30-day     60-day       30-day     60-day
                      Discharge to SNF         -0.090∗∗∗     -0.121∗∗∗       -0.064    -0.092∗    -0.092∗∗∗   -0.123∗∗∗
                                                (0.031)       (0.035)       (0.046)    (0.053)     (0.034)     (0.038)
                      Observations             1,111,287     1,111,287      134,973    134,973      976,271   976,271
                      Adjusted R2                0.026         0.038         0.046      0.052        0.024     0.035
                      Mean Y                     0.080         0.118         0.058      0.083        0.083     0.123
                      F statistic               79.766        79.766        56.096     56.096       80.340    80.340

Notes: We focus on 12 hours before and after the three-day cutoff and repeat the 2SLS estimations. In addition to the
indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an
indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator
for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators
for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed
                                                                                                                           ∗
effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                               Significant at
       ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                      Table B.20: 2SLS by condition: readmission rates, 12-hour window

                                              Full sample                   No comorbidity               Any comorbidity
                                        Knee/hip        Other          Knee/hip          Other         Knee/hip       Other
                                       replacement    conditions      replacement      conditions     replacement   conditions
               Panel A. 30-day readmission rates
               Discharge to SNF            0.022       -0.168∗∗∗          0.028          -0.176          0.019       -0.160∗∗∗
                                          (0.013)       (0.054)          (0.036)        (0.136)         (0.017)       (0.059)
               Observations              141,812         969,449         23,918         111,006         117,845         858,400
               Adjusted R2                0.015           0.018           0.017          0.039           0.015           0.017
               Mean Y                     0.029           0.088           0.022          0.066           0.030           0.090
               F statistic               56.955          218.277         38.311         76.606          55.013          219.843

               Panel B. 60-day readmission rates
               Discharge to SNF           0.042∗∗      -0.174∗∗∗          0.052          -0.213         0.039∗        -0.160∗∗
                                          (0.017)       (0.058)          (0.044)        (0.146)         (0.020)        (0.062)
               Observations              141,812         969,449         23,918         111,006         117,845         858,400
               Adjusted R2                0.014           0.031           0.012          0.046           0.014           0.030
               Mean Y                     0.043           0.129           0.034          0.093           0.045           0.134
               F statistic               56.955          218.277         38.311         76.606          55.013          219.843

Notes: We focus on 12 hours before and after the three-day cutoff and repeat the 2SLS estimations by health
conditions. In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression
includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as
patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related
Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge
month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are
                                  ∗                          ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
clustered at the HSA level.            Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                                       56
Table B.21: 2SLS by condition & local SNF characteristics, knee and hip replacement, 12-hour
window

                                                      Low occupancy           High occupancy
                                                     30-day        60-day     30-day     60-day
                                Panel A. By occupancy
                                Discharge to SNF     0.027∗        0.056∗∗∗    0.003      -0.003
                                                     (0.014)       (0.020)    (0.028)    (0.033)
                                Observations        106,029        106,029    35,771     35,771
                                Adjusted R2          0.017          0.014      0.008      0.008
                                Mean Y               0.028          0.043     0.030       0.044
                                F statistic         44.526         44.526     41.137     41.137

                                                      Low deficiency           High deficiency
                                                     30-day        60-day     30-day     60-day
                                Panel B. By deficiency
                                Discharge to SNF      -0.008        0.015     0.037∗∗   0.054∗∗∗
                                                     (0.025)       (0.030)    (0.015)   (0.018)
                                Observations         53,674        53,674     88,119     88,119
                                Adjusted R2          0.014         0.016       0.014      0.013
                                Mean Y                0.027        0.040      0.030       0.045
                                F statistic          27.875        27.875     69.240     69.240

Notes: We focus on 12 hours before and after the three-day cutoff and repeat the 2SLS estimations by local SNF
characteristics for knee and hip replacement patients. In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented
with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of
discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health
conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects,
discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge
                                                           ∗                            ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.          Significant at 10%,           significant at 5%,         significant at
1%.




                                                              57
      Table B.22: First stage: discharge outcomes, 5-hour window, regression discontinuity (RD)

                                                 Home/HHC           SNF       Other facilities    AMA

                                Above                 -0.044∗∗    0.041∗∗∗         -0.002          0.004
                                                       (0.020)    (0.010)         (0.019)         (0.007)
                                Observations           60,854      60,854         60,854          60,854
                                Adjusted R2            0.216       0.117          0.198           0.039
                                Mean Y                 0.868       0.039          0.078           0.016

Notes: We restrict the sample to Medicare patients discharged between 5 hours before and after the three-day cutoff
and run a standard RD model, controlling for a linear spline of the running variable, which is the hours from the
three-day cutoff. We also control for age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health
conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects,
                                                                                                                                     ∗
discharge year fixed effects, and discharge month fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.
                      ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.


Table B.23: First stage: discharge outcomes, dropping a subsample with significant comorbidity
difference

                                                 Home/HHC           SNF        Other facilities      AMA

                             Day 3*Medicare           -0.073∗∗∗   0.063∗∗∗        0.010∗∗∗           -0.000
                                                       (0.004)    (0.004)         (0.003)           (0.000)
                             Observations             1,286,994   1,286,994       1,286,994        1,286,994
                             Adjusted R2                0.227       0.207           0.132            0.061
                             Mean Y                     0.888       0.060           0.045            0.007

Notes: We drop patients with comorbidities that have a significant difference between Medicare patients who are
discharged after versus before the three-day cutoff relative to non-Medicare patients and repeat the first stage esti-
mations. In addition to Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare
as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indi-
cators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities),
hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for
                                                                                      ∗                         ∗∗
missing discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                   Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,
∗∗∗
      significant at 1%.




                                                                  58
Table B.24: 2SLS: Readmission rates, dropping a subsample with significant comorbidity difference

                                                    Full sample             No comorbidity         Any comorbidity
                                                 30-day     60-day         30-day     60-day       30-day    60-day
                       Discharge to SNF           -0.012    -0.029∗         0.005     0.011         -0.022   -0.048∗∗
                                                 (0.016)    (0.017)        (0.023)   (0.024)       (0.019)    (0.021)
                       Observations            1,286,994   1,286,994       352,749   352,749       934,214   934,214
                       Adjusted R2               0.031       0.041          0.044     0.053         0.026     0.036
                       Mean Y                    0.071       0.104          0.061     0.088         0.075     0.110
                       F statistic              202.614     202.614        166.737   166.737       200.242   200.242

Notes: We drop patients with comorbidities that have a significant difference between Medicare patients who are
discharged after versus before the three-day cutoff relative to non-Medicare patients and repeat the 2SLS estimations.
In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an
indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age,
age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG)
fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed
effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the
             ∗                         ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
HSA level.       Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.


Table B.25: 2SLS by condition: readmission rates, dropping a subsample with significant comor-
bidity difference

                                             Full sample                   No comorbidity                Any comorbidity
                                   Knee/hip            Other           Knee/hip        Other          Knee/hip          Other
                                  replacement        conditions       replacement    conditions      replacement      conditions
             Panel A. 30-day readmission rates
             Discharge to SNF          0.025∗           -0.012          0.043∗∗        0.014            0.012            -0.025
                                       (0.014)         (0.029)          (0.020)       (0.048)          (0.021)          (0.032)
             Observations              195,314       1,091,664           62,191       290,531          133,095          801,100
             Adjusted R2                0.013          0.029              0.010        0.043            0.013            0.024
             Mean Y                     0.032          0.078              0.026        0.069            0.034            0.081
             F statistic               98.388         329.527            85.830       308.921          86.025           307.054

             Panel B. 60-day readmission rates
             Discharge to SNF          0.027∗           -0.017           0.044         0.049            0.013            -0.043
                                       (0.017)         (0.032)          (0.028)       (0.052)          (0.023)          (0.037)
             Observations              195,314       1,091,664           62,191       290,531          133,095          801,100
             Adjusted R2                0.014          0.039              0.012        0.051            0.014            0.034
             Mean Y                     0.047          0.114              0.041        0.098            0.050            0.119
             F statistic               98.388         329.527            85.830       308.921          86.025           307.054

Notes: We drop patients with comorbidities that have a significant difference between Medicare patients who are
discharged after versus before the three-day cutoff relative to non-Medicare patients and repeat the 2SLS estimations
by health conditions. In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each
regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics
such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis
Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and
discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors
                                   ∗                             ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
are clustered at the HSA level.        Significant at 10%,            significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.



                                                                      59
Table B.26: 2SLS by local SNF characteristics, knee and hip replacement, dropping a subsample
with significant comorbidity difference

                                                       Low occupancy            High occupancy
                                                      30-day      60-day        30-day    60-day
                                 Panel A. By occupancy
                                 Discharge to SNF    0.041∗∗∗     0.051∗∗        -0.028    -0.046
                                                     (0.015)      (0.020)       (0.027)   (0.031)
                                 Observations         150,353     150,353       44,951    44,951
                                 Adjusted R2           0.013       0.013         0.002     0.000
                                 Mean Y                0.032       0.047        0.031     0.047
                                 F statistic          73.379      73.379        89.493    89.493

                                                       Low deficiency            High deficiency
                                                      30-day      60-day        30-day    60-day
                                 Panel B. By deficiency
                                 Discharge to SNF      0.027       0.038         0.025     0.022
                                                      (0.028)     (0.034)       (0.016)   (0.021)
                                 Observations         79,074      79,074        116,223   116,223
                                 Adjusted R2           0.015       0.015         0.013     0.014
                                 Mean Y                0.031      0.047          0.032     0.048
                                 F statistic          37.180      37.180        138.196   138.196

Notes: We drop patients with comorbidities that have a significant difference between Medicare patients who are
discharged after versus before the three-day cutoff relative to non-Medicare patients and repeat the 2SLS estimations
by local SNF characteristics for knee and hip replacement patients. In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF
instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well
as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for
race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital
fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing
                                                                            ∗                          ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                  Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,
significant at 1%.




                                                             60
Table B.27: First stage: discharge outcomes, additional controls of admission hour, total hours in
the hospital, and ER admission

                                                 Home/HHC             SNF          Other facilities     AMA

                             Day 3*Medicare        -0.077∗∗∗        0.069∗∗∗          0.009∗∗∗          -0.000
                                                    (0.003)         (0.004)           (0.003)          (0.000)
                             Observations         2,915,127         2,915,127        2,915,127        2,915,127
                             Adjusted R2            0.238             0.215            0.124            0.053
                             Mean Y                 0.862             0.078            0.052            0.008

Notes: In addition to Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as
well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators
for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital
fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, admission hour, total
hours in the hospital, an indicator for ER admission, and a series of indicators for missing values. Standard errors
                                     ∗                         ∗∗                          ∗∗∗
are clustered at the HSA level.          Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,           significant at 1%.


Table B.28: 2SLS: Readmission rates, additional controls of admission hour, total hours in the
hospital, and ER admission

                                                 Full sample             No comorbidity            Any comorbidity
                                              30-day     60-day          30-day      60-day        30-day     60-day
                     Discharge to SNF         -0.012    -0.030∗∗∗         0.005       0.010        -0.016    -0.038∗∗∗
                                             (0.010)     (0.011)         (0.023)     (0.024)      (0.011)     (0.012)
                     Observations           2,914,288   2,914,288        352,608     352,608     2,561,652   2,561,652
                     Adjusted R2              0.031       0.043           0.044       0.053        0.029       0.040
                     Mean Y                   0.084       0.124           0.061       0.088        0.088       0.129
                     F statistic             270.348     270.348         158.923     158.923      266.238     266.238

Notes: In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes
an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’
age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group
(DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month
fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, admission hour, total hours in the hospital, an indicator for ER admission,
                                                                                                                  ∗                         ∗∗
and a series of indicators for missing values. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                        Significant at 10%,
                     ∗∗∗
significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                                    61
Table B.29: 2SLS by condition: readmission rates, additional controls of admission hour, total
hours in the hospital, and ER admission

                                          Full sample               No comorbidity           Any comorbidity
                                     Knee/hip       Other       Knee/hip       Other       Knee/hip          Other
                                    replacement   conditions   replacement   conditions   replacement      conditions
           Panel A. 30-day readmission rates
           Discharge to SNF           0.026∗∗∗      -0.010       0.041∗∗       0.015         0.021           -0.015
                                      (0.010)      (0.015)       (0.020)      (0.049)       (0.013)         (0.015)
           Observations               400,000     2,514,277      62,185       290,396       337,785        2,223,851
           Adjusted R2                 0.015        0.028         0.011        0.043         0.015           0.025
           Mean Y                      0.036        0.092         0.026        0.069         0.037           0.095
           F statistic                94.978       495.974       84.261       293.335       84.566          495.546

           Panel B. 60-day readmission rates
           Discharge to SNF           0.039∗∗∗      -0.021        0.044        0.049        0.036∗∗         -0.030∗
                                      (0.012)      (0.016)       (0.028)      (0.052)       (0.015)         (0.017)
           Observations               400,000     2,514,277      62,185       290,396       337,785        2,223,851
           Adjusted R2                 0.016        0.039         0.012        0.051         0.016           0.036
           Mean Y                      0.053        0.136         0.041        0.098         0.055           0.141
           F statistic                94.978       495.974       84.261       293.335       84.566          495.546

Notes: In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes
an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’
age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group
(DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month
fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, admission hour, total hours in the hospital, an indicator for ER admission,
                                                                                                      ∗                         ∗∗
and a series of indicators for missing values. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.            Significant at 10%,
                     ∗∗∗
significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                               62
Table B.30: 2SLS by condition & local SNF characteristics, knee and hip replacement, additional
controls of admission hour, total hours in the hospital, and ER admission

                                                          Low occupancy               High occupancy
                                                         30-day          60-day       30-day      60-day
                                   Panel A. By occupancy
                                   Discharge to SNF      0.031∗∗∗      0.052∗∗∗       0.010        0.001
                                                         (0.011)       (0.015)       (0.018)      (0.021)
                                   Observations          309,105         309,105      90,881       90,881
                                   Adjusted R2            0.016           0.016       0.012        0.013
                                   Mean Y                 0.035           0.052       0.036        0.054
                                   F statistic           69.028          69.028      128.890      128.890

                                                           Low deficiency              High deficiency
                                                         30-day          60-day       30-day      60-day
                                   Panel B. By deficiency
                                   Discharge to SNF       0.013           0.022      0.033∗∗∗     0.048∗∗∗
                                                         (0.019)         (0.024)     (0.011)      (0.013)
                                   Observations          163,722         163,722     236,261      236,261
                                   Adjusted R2            0.017           0.019       0.013        0.014
                                   Mean Y                 0.035           0.052       0.036        0.053
                                   F statistic           36.018          36.018      137.429      137.429

Notes: In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF instrumented with Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes
an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’
age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group
(DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month
fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, admission hour, total hours in the hospital, an indicator for ER admission,
                                                                                                                  ∗                         ∗∗
and a series of indicators for missing values. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                        Significant at 10%,
                     ∗∗∗
significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                      Table B.31: First stage: discharge outcomes, ER admission only

                                                 Home/HHC             SNF          Other facilities      AMA

                             Day 3*Medicare        -0.049∗∗∗        0.048∗∗∗            0.001           -0.001
                                                    (0.002)         (0.002)            (0.001)         (0.000)
                             Observations         1,708,710         1,708,710        1,708,710        1,708,710
                             Adjusted R2            0.181             0.159            0.129            0.047
                             Mean Y                 0.890             0.048            0.050            0.012

Notes: We restrict the sample to those admitted through emergency room only. In addition to Day 3*Medicare, each
regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics
such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis
Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and
discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors
                                     ∗                         ∗∗                          ∗∗∗
are clustered at the HSA level.          Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,           significant at 1%.




                                                                    63
                            Table B.32: 2SLS: Readmission rates, ER admission only

                                                 Full sample              No comorbidity          Any comorbidity
                                             30-day        60-day         30-day     60-day       30-day     60-day
                   Discharge to SNF          -0.015         -0.028         0.018      0.116       -0.021     -0.041∗
                                            (0.020)        (0.021)        (0.076)    (0.077)     (0.020)     (0.022)
                   Observations            1,708,710      1,708,710       158,620   158,620     1,550,031   1,550,031
                   Adjusted R2               0.022          0.032          0.028     0.036        0.021       0.031
                   Mean Y                    0.096          0.141          0.073     0.105        0.098       0.145
                   F statistic              421.586        421.586        284.574   284.574      418.607     418.607

Notes: We restrict the sample to those admitted through emergency room only. In addition to the indicator for
discharge to SNF and Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as
well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a series of indicators
for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all comorbidities), hospital
fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing
discharge hour. We instrument SNF discharges with an interaction between Day 3 and Medicare. Standard errors
                                    ∗                          ∗∗                         ∗∗∗
are clustered at the HSA level.         Significant at 10%,          significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                   Table B.33: OLS: Readmission rates controlling for Day 3*Medicare

                                                Full sample               No comorbidity          Any comorbidity
                                           30-day         60-day        30-day      60-day       30-day      60-day
                    SNF                    0.021∗∗∗      0.031∗∗∗      0.013∗∗∗     0.018∗∗∗     0.022∗∗∗   0.033∗∗∗
                                           (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.002)    (0.002)
                    Day 3*Medicare        -0.002∗∗∗      -0.004∗∗∗       -0.000      -0.000     -0.003∗∗∗   -0.005∗∗∗
                                           (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.001)
                    Observations          2,915,127      2,915,127     352,749      352,749     2,562,350   2,562,350
                    Adjusted R2             0.031          0.045        0.044        0.053        0.030       0.043
                    Mean Y                  0.084          0.124        0.061        0.088        0.088       0.129

Notes: In addition to the indicator for discharge to SNF and Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for
Day 3, an indicator for Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an
indicator for sex, a series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and
indicators for all comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge
                                                                                                                            ∗
hour fixed effects, and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.
                      ∗∗                        ∗∗∗
Significant at 10%,        significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                                     64
                Table B.34: First stage by hospital bed availability: discharge outcomes

                                                       Home/HHC        SNF      Other facilities        AMA
                Panel. Above-median inpatient days
                Day 3*Medicare                           -0.068∗∗∗   0.052∗∗∗      0.017∗∗∗             -0.000
                                                          (0.004)    (0.006)       (0.005)             (0.000)
                Observations                             806,372     806,372       806,372             806,372
                Adjusted R2                               0.247       0.209         0.143               0.076
                Mean Y                                    0.857       0.077         0.059               0.007

                Panel B. Below-median inpatient days
                Day 3*Medicare                           -0.067∗∗∗   0.052∗∗∗      0.016∗∗∗             -0.000
                                                          (0.004)    (0.005)       (0.006)             (0.000)
                Observations                             750,707     750,707       750,707             750,707
                Adjusted R2                               0.249       0.214         0.138               0.081
                Mean Y                                    0.857       0.077         0.058               0.007

Notes: We define hospital bed availability as months in which total inpatient days are below the median in a given
hospital-year. In addition to Day 3*Medicare, each regression includes an indicator for Day 3, an indicator for
Medicare as well as a vector of discharge characteristics such as patients’ age, age squared, an indicator for sex, a
series of indicators for race, health conditions (Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) fixed effects and indicators for all
comorbidities), hospital fixed effects, discharge year and discharge month fixed effects, discharge hour fixed effects,
                                                                                                   ∗                         ∗∗
and a dummy for missing discharge hour. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.                Significant at 10%,
                     ∗∗∗
significant at 5%,         significant at 1%.




                                                          65
