                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MISSING EVENTS IN EVENT STUDIES:
     IDENTIFYING THE EFFECTS OF PARTIALLY-MEASURED NEWS SURPRISES

                                      Refet S. Gürkaynak
                                      Burçin Kısacıkoğlu
                                      Jonathan H. Wright

                                      Working Paper 25016
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25016


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




We are grateful to Eric Swanson and many seminar and conference participants for helpful
comments on an earlier draft. We thank Yunus Can Aybaş and Cem Tütüncü for outstanding
research assistance. The code that implements the econometric procedures described in this paper
is available in a user-friendly form on the authors’ web pages. Gürkaynak’s research was
supported by funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement No 726400). All errors are our
sole responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Refet S. Gürkaynak, Burçin Kısacıkoğlu, and Jonathan H. Wright. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Missing Events in Event Studies: Identifying the Effects of Partially-Measured News Surprises
Refet S. Gürkaynak, Burçin Kısacıkoğlu, and Jonathan H. Wright
NBER Working Paper No. 25016
September 2018
JEL No. E43,E52,E58,G12,G14

                                          ABSTRACT

Macroeconomic news announcements are elaborate and multi-dimensional. We consider a
framework in which jumps in asset prices around macroeconomic news and monetary policy
announcements reflect both the response to observed surprises in headline numbers and latent
factors, reflecting other details of the release. The details of the non headline news, for which
there are no expectations surveys, are unobservable to the econometrician, but nonetheless elicit a
market response. We estimate the model by the Kalman filter, which essentially combines OLS-
and heteroskedasticity-based event study estimators in one step, showing that those methods are
better thought of as complements rather than substitutes. The inclusion of a single latent factor
greatly improves our ability to explain asset price movements around announcements.


Refet S. Gürkaynak                              Jonathan H. Wright
Bilkent University                              Department of Economics
Department of Economics                         Johns Hopkins University
06800 Ankara, Turkey                            3400 N. Charles Street
refet@bilkent.edu.tr                            Baltimore, MD 21218
                                                and NBER
Burçin Kısacıkoğlu                              wrightj@jhu.edu
Bilkent University
Department of Economics
06800 Ankara, Turkey
bkisacikoglu@bilkent.edu.tr




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25016
1     Introduction

It is notoriously difficult to establish causality among movements in macroeconomic vari-
ables and asset prices due to simultaneity and endogeneity. High frequency macroeconomic
event studies have proved to be a fruitful strategy to address the issue. The event study
literature studies the reaction of asset prices to news releases, such as the employment re-
port, GDP, or FOMC policy announcements. It exploits the lumpy manner in which news
are released to the public as a powerful source of identification since within short windows
(daily or higher frequency) around news releases, it is clear that asset price changes do
not cause news (Faust et al., 2007; Gürkaynak and Wright, 2013; Kuttner, 2001). One can
then interpret the results to make inference on macroeconomic fundamentals and beliefs of
market participants about the structure of the economy. Still, it is troubling that even in
tight intraday windows of 20 minutes around news announcements, event study regressions
explain only a small to moderate fraction of asset price changes. Looking at the glass as
half full, it is helpful to be able to link asset prices to news about macroeconomic fun-
damentals. Looking at the glass as half empty, it is a puzzle that we cannot explain the
majority of asset price changes even around news announcements. A further puzzle is that
the two ways of carrying out event studies, OLS regressions and heteroskedasticity-based
identification, produce strikingly different results.
    This paper contributes to the theory and implementation of event studies. Our per-
spective is that macroeconomic news announcements are complex and multi-dimensional.
The event study literature focuses on headline numbers and survey expectations for these
numbers. We argue that these are only a part of news releases, and so the surprise is only
partially measured. For example, the US employment report that is generally released on
the first Friday of each month includes aggregate employment in nonfarm payrolls, the
civilian unemployment rate, and average hourly earnings. The event-study literature fo-
cuses on the effects of surprises in these numbers. But the employment report also includes
around 40 pages of other data. Alas, there are no survey expectations for these other ele-
ments, which also elicit a market response to the extent that some of those numbers contain
updates to market participants’ information sets. In this paper, we nonetheless offer a way
of capturing the non-headline surprises in data releases, in addition to the headline sur-
prises for which we have survey expectations. Our approach, described in detail later, can
be thought of as combining OLS estimation of the event-study regression with identifica-
tion through heteroskedasticity. Our method can explain the puzzle of why event study
regressions explain a limited share of asset price changes.
   The basic idea of the method we develop comes from the heteroskedasticity-based iden-
tification literature that was proposed by Rigobon (2003) and applied very elegantly by
Rigobon and Sack (2004, 2005, 2006). This approach measures the effect of an unobserv-
able surprise simply by knowing that there are certain days on which the variance of that
surprise is unusually large. However, in considering the effects of news announcements,
we also have survey expectations of headline numbers that have desirable properties as
expectations proxies. They pass standard rationality tests and outperform simple bench-
marks (Balduzzi et al., 2001; McQueen and Roley, 1993; Pearce and Roley, 1985) . We
provide further evidence on this, showing that survey-based expectations fare similarly to
market-based expectations. Thus we argue that it is appropriate to treat the headline sur-
prise as observed. But announcements contain information beyond the headline number.
We measure the effects of other dimensions of news announcements on asset prices using
identification through heteroskedasticity. The identifying assumption is simple: there is
more macroeconomic news around the times of announcements than at other times.
   Our approach treats OLS and heteroskedasticity-based identification as complements
that capture different aspects of the market reaction to news, rather than as substitutes.
We propose a way of setting up the model that gives us explicit estimates of the non-
headline components of macroeconomic news surprises and estimate the model, that now
includes an unobservable component, via the Kalman filter. The results show that the
headline surprise combined with a single latent news factor that captures macroeconomic
and monetary policy news, can explain a great majority of the yield curve movements
around news announcements.




                                             2
    We relate the latent news factor to FOMC statements around monetary policy releases
and to non-surveyed parts of news around other macroeconomic data releases. The signifi-
cant increase in explanatory power remains when we allow for release-specific latent factors
rather than a common one and when we allow for an ever-present background noise factor.
The factor that we identify is indeed related to news and is not picking up a level factor
that is always in the data.
    Our contribution is therefore in two dimensions. The methodological contribution is
showing that OLS and heteroskedasticity-based identification are complements rather than
substitutes and developing an efficient method to combine these to measure the yield curve
reaction to both observed and unobserved surprises in macroeconomic data releases. The
second contribution is to show that, using this method, we understand almost all of the
yield curve movements in event windows and are able to get a handle on what moves yields,
at least at times of macroeconomic releases.
    The plan for the remainder of this paper is as follows. In section 2, we discuss the event
study methodology, showing how it can be implemented via OLS or via heteroskedasticity-
based identification, and reporting results using both methods. In section 3 we discuss
why these methods are complements rather than substitutes and show how they can be
simultaneously employed. Section 4 presents a discussion of the interpretation of the
heteroskedasticity-identified latent release factors and goes back to the properties of the
survey expectations, showing that the standard reasons to doubt survey-based expectations
are very unlikely to be problems in the data used in macroeconomic event studies. This
section also provides a demonstration of why it is correct to interpret the heteroskedasticity-
based estimator as measuring something conceptually different from the OLS-based event
study. Section 5 presents robustness checks and extensions. Section 6 concludes.



2     Event-Study Methodology

Macro-finance event studies relate releases of macroeconomic data and changes in asset
prices to each other. For example, we may be interested in learning how, say, the five-year


                                               3
yield reacts to the non-farm payrolls release. We will denote the news, or unexpected,
component of the macro series or monetary policy decisions being released as st . With
forward-looking investors the log return of the asset or change in yield, yt , depends on
the change in the information set, and hence on st . This is why expectations surveys are
important for macroeconomic news releases—they allow us to construct the unexpected
component of the data release, which should drive changes in asset prices.
       The general modeling setup is a system of an asset price return in a window around
an event being related to a surprise that may be measured with error (Rigobon and Sack,
2006):1


                                           yt = αs∗t + εt                                         (2.1)

                                           st = s∗t + ηt                                          (2.2)


where s∗t is the true surprise (unobservable to the econometrician), st is the observed
surprise, and εt and ηt are uncorrelated error terms. The parameter of interest is α, but
it is not identified due to s∗t being unobservable. There are two ways of identifying α, via
OLS and via heteroskedasticity-based identification.


2.1       OLS Identification in Event Studies

If we think that measurement error is negligible, st = s∗t , then the surprise is observable and
equation (2.1) can simply be estimated by an OLS regression of yt on st over announcement
windows:
                                            yt = αst + εt                                         (2.3)

Equation (2.3) is the standard simple implementation of the event-study methodology
that only requires basic OLS and the interpretation of the result is straightforward. The
equation fit should be perfect if st is the only source of variation in this window. This
   1
    Including simultaneity and endogeneity into this system is easy and does not change our results. We
do not do so both because it leads to cluttered notation and more importantly because it is very hard to
envision how these may be issues in high-frequency event studies of the type that we are looking at.




                                                   4
method requires data on expectations of upcoming announcements, but these are available
from surveys, notably the long-running survey by Action Economics, which is the successor
to Money Market Services (MMS), or alternatively from the Bloomberg Survey.
   Table 1 shows the results of such OLS-based event studies for non-farm payrolls, GDP,
unemployment, durable goods orders, CPI, core CPI, PPI, core PPI, retail sales, retail
sales excluding autos, average hourly earnings, the employment cost index, initial claims
and FOMC policy announcements concerning the target funds rate. The asset returns are
changes in yields on the first and fourth Eurodollar futures contracts, and on two-, five-,
ten- and thirty-year Treasury futures. The windows that we are using are from 5 minutes
before the data release and FOMC policy announcement times, to 15 minutes afterwards.
Expectations are measured using MMS/Action Economics survey results, except that the
FOMC policy surprise is calculated using price changes in short-dated federal funds futures
contracts, as proposed by Kuttner (2001). A detailed explanation of the data sources and
construction is provided in Appendix A.
   Our sample period is from January 1992 to December 2017 (except for FOMC surprises,
which end in 2007). This includes the period from December 2008 to December 2015 when
the U.S. was stuck at the zero lower bound (ZLB) for short-term nominal interest rates.
We could drop this period, but that would greatly reduce the sample size. Swanson and
Williams (2014), in their careful study of the effects of ZLB on the sensitivity of asset
prices to news, show that while very short-term interest rates were clearly constrained by
the ZLB, one- and two-year interest rates were affected for only part of the period, and the
sensitivity of longer-term interest rates was essentially unchanged throughout the sample.
Hence we use the full sample but in section 5 we show results from a sample ending in 2007
as a robustness check.
   The results shown in Table 1 are in line with the literature (Andersen et al., 2003). In
terms of asset price responses, non-farm payrolls is by far the most important macroeco-
nomic release. A one standard deviation non-farm payrolls surprise increases bond yields
by 2 to 6 basis points. However, asset price responses to other macroeconomic announce-




                                             5
ments are also both economically and statistically significant. We see that yields at all
maturities move in the same direction, but we also see a hump-shaped response of yields
to macroeconomic announcements, meaning that the medium term maturities are affected
by the macro releases the most. The fact that while magnitudes are different, the shape
of the yield curve response is common to all data surprises will be important when jointly
analyzing observed and unobserved surprises below.
   For monetary policy surprises, the first Eurodollar futures (ED1) response is larger
than for other maturities. This is intuitive because monetary policy decisions affect shorter
term maturities the most. The findings reported in this table are also consistent with the
literature going back to Kuttner (2001).
   Nonetheless, even with the very high frequency data that we have, the headline sur-
prises explain less than 40% of the variance of yields around news announcements. This
means that there are other factors that affect yields in this window and/or that there is
measurement error in the surprises. These are often thought of as the main limitations
of the OLS method. Heteroskedasticity-based identification takes these concerns seriously
and suggests an alternative way of identifying α that allows for classical measurement error
in the surprise.


2.2    Heteroskedasticity-Based Identification in Event Studies

The system of equations (2.1)-(2.2) contains four parameters, α, ση2 , σε2 and σ∗2 , where ση2 ,
σε2 and σ∗2 are the variances of ηt , εt and s∗t . The variance-covariance matrix of (yt , st )0 in
the event window we are looking at is:
                                                               
                                        2 2    2
                                      α σ∗ + σε    ασ∗2 
                                ΩE =                                                       (2.4)
                                           ·     σ∗2 + ση2


which only has three entries, less than the number of parameters. This confirms that α is
not identified without further assumptions, which we made in the OLS case by asserting
that the only relevant source of variation in the event window for the measured surprise



                                                6
is the true surprise (ση2 = 0). Heteroskedasticity-based identification offers another way of
measuring α without making those assumptions.
   The key insight here, going back to Rigobon (2003) and Rigobon and Sack (2004), is that
one can also look at windows where there is no event but that are otherwise comparable.
Think of these windows as a period covering the same length of time, but on a day with no
news announcement. In these windows the structure of (2.1)-(2.2) is the same, but there
is no surprise. The variance-covariance matrix of (yt , st )0 for the non-event window is:

                                                                   
                                                          2
                                                        σε 0 
                                                ΩN E =                                   (2.5)
                                                         0 0


In the event window, we observe yt and st , and so can estimate ΩE . Call this Ω̂E . In the
non-event window, st is zero by assumption, and we observe yt . We can estimate ΩN E , all
elements of which are 0, except for the 1,1 element, which is informative about the variance
of noise. Subtracting (2.4) from (2.5) gives

                                                                              
                                                          α2 σ∗2     ασ∗2
                                       ΩE − ΩN E =                                        (2.6)
                                                                              
                                                                               
                                                              ·    σ∗2 + ση2


from which one can identify the parameter of interest, α. Concretely, one can simply
                [Ω̂E ]1,1 −[Ω̂N E ]1,1
estimate α as          [Ω̂E ]1,2
                                       ,   as proposed by Rigobon and Sack (2004, 2006).
   Table 2 shows the same exercise that was carried out in Table 1, this time using
heteroskedasticity-based identification. It is striking that all coefficients are much larger
when identification via heteroskedasticity is employed, compared to OLS, which would be
the natural effect of correcting for attenuation bias in the measurement error model. There-
fore, a possible interpretation of this finding is that headline news is indeed measured with
substantial error, leading to attenuation bias, and that heteroskedasticity-based identifica-
tion is robust to these problems. This is the interpretation offered by Rigobon and Sack
(2006). But ση2 would have to be large for this to be true.
   In this paper, we offer a different interpretation, more in line with the evidence showing


                                                          7
the broad efficiency of survey expectations of data releases. We argue that survey expecta-
tions are measuring headline surprises correctly but instead there are surprise components
in news announcements that are not directly observed by the econometrician, which have
important effects on asset prices. Our reasons for thinking along these lines, and the pro-
posed methodology to accommodate this feature of the data are presented in the next
section.



3     Partially-Measured News and Heteroskedasticity-

      Based Identification

We recognize that data releases are elaborate and multi-dimensional. The “news” that is
captured in OLS-based event studies is only headline news—the deviation of the headline
number from its survey expectation. The survey expectations are well measured and usually
pass standard forecast rationality tests. Gürkaynak and Wolfers (2006) find that survey-
based forecasts are roughly comparable in efficiency to market-based ones, and we expand
on this argument in Section 4 below.
    However, it remains the case that the headline news are only part of news releases.
Releases also contain other information such as revisions to past data and information on
sub-components. For example, the GDP release reports the contributions of different ex-
penditure items, and markets may react differently to increases in GDP driven by gross
capital formation versus inventory increases. Some releases contain a discussion of current
conditions and even forecasts. The FOMC release is the obvious example, where the state-
ment has for some time garnered more attention than the immediate policy setting. Yet
in terms of “news”, only the headline is observable as there are surveys for these numbers
alone. The balance of the news in the release is unobservable to the econometrician, but
elicits a market response as well. We argue that this is why the R2 s of OLS-based event
studies are not very high. The regression only captures the contribution of the headline
news to the variance of asset prices and effects of all other news in the same release show



                                            8
up in the residual.
      Notice that under this interpretation, the OLS-based event study answers a narrowly
defined question correctly: it determines the relationship between the headline news (but
not the whole news release) and the asset price in question. The heteroskedasticity-based
estimator instead allows the news to be unobservable and conditions only on the time of the
data release. To the extent that news are multidimensional, the increase in variance at the
time of the release is due to more than the headline surprise. The heteroskedasticity-based
estimator captures the asset price response to the news release as a whole, not only to the
headline number. This, rather than sizable measurement error in survey expectations, is
why the heteroskedasticity-based estimator always finds larger asset price response coeffi-
cients. In the next section, we show this analytically, and bring direct evidence to verify
that heteroskedasticity-based estimator, along with the headline surprise effects, captures
the effects of non-headline component of the release.
      We therefore posit that a complete understanding of yield changes in news release event
windows is possible, using OLS to partial out the effects of the observable news on the
asset prices, and then using heteroskedasticity-based identification to find out the effect of
non-headline, unobservable news in the data release. This could be done in two steps, with
heteroskedasticity-based identification applied to residuals from the OLS regression2 but
we instead introduce an efficient, one-step estimator via the Kalman filter. This has the
useful by-product of giving an estimate of the unobserved news component in any given
data release, which is not directly available from identification through heteroskedasticity.
      We let yt denote the 6x1 vector of yield changes (of maturities studied in Tables 1 and
2) from 8:25am to 8:45am. Some days have macroeconomic announcements at 8:30am,
while others do not, but all the macroeconomic announcements that we consider come out
at 8:30am. In the implementation for FOMC policy surprises, we let yt denote the 6x1
vector of yield changes from 2:10pm to 2:30pm (incorporating some minor deviations of
timing to accommodate FOMC announcements times early in the sample). Data from
  2
      We report the results from doing this in Appendix B.




                                                    9
these intradaily windows are included regardless of whether they contain an announcement
or not.
      The model that we specify is then:


                                     y t = β 0 s t + γ 0 d t f t + εt                        (3.1)


where st is the vector of surprises in macroeconomic or monetary policy announcements,3
dt is a dummy that is 1 if there is an announcement in that window and 0 otherwise, ft is
an iid N (0, 1) latent variable and εt is iid normal with mean zero and diagonal variance-
covariance matrix. The sample period and the data used to measure surprises remain the
same. Note that in this implementation ft is a latent factor common to all data releases.
      Equation (3.1) would essentially collapse to the standard OLS event study regression
if the ft term were dropped, and to a heteroskedasticity-based estimator if the st term
were dropped. As it stands, this equation can be estimated by maximum likelihood via the
Kalman filter.4
      Table 3 reports the results, along with R2 values from the regressions of yt on st alone,
and from regressions augmented with the Kalman-smoothed estimate of ft in equation
(3.1), around announcement times. The headline surprise alone explains less than 40%
of announcement-window variation in each of the yields considered here, as in Table 1.
Augmenting the regression with one latent factor brings the explained share up to over
90%. We can explain about all of the movements in the term structure of interest rates
around news announcements with the headline surprise and one latent factor. Inclusion
of the latent factor makes little difference to the estimated coefficients on the headline
surprises, although it does reduce the error variance and hence the standard errors.
      The specification in equation (3.1) implies that the latent factor has the same loadings
for all announcement types and it is worth noting that the R2 s are so high despite this
constraint. The releases are clearly heteroskedastic, with the employment report creating
  3
     st is set to 0 for any announcement that does not take place in that window.
  4
     Maximum likelihood estimates are obtained via the EM algorithm. Our code can handle any number
of releases, asset price changes and latent factors and is made available for others to use.



                                                   10
the largest variance, and so the model is literally misspecified: the draws of ft on employ-
ment report days have sample variance greater than 1. That does not prevent the model
from fitting well, which means that different announcements have similar relative effects at
different points on the yield curve. Nonetheless, we can extend the model to incorporate
release-specific factors, specifying instead that:


                                      yt = β 0 st + ΣIi=1 dit γi fit + εt                              (3.2)


where dit is a dummy that is 1 if an announcement of the ith type comes out in window
t and zero otherwise and I is the number of latent factors. Because they always come out
concurrently, non-farm payroll/unemployment/average hourly earnings, retail sales/retail
sales ex autos, core PPI/PPI and core CPI/CPI surprises each share a single latent factor,
and so there are I = 8 latent macroeconomic announcement factors, even though there are
13 8:30am macroeconomic announcements. Including the monetary policy factor, in total
we have I = 9 release related factors to be estimated. The factors {fit }Ii=1 are all standard
normal and are independent over time and independent of each other. This extended
model can also be estimated by maximum likelihood via the Kalman filter. The results are
reported in Table 4. The coefficient estimates on the headline surprises are similar to those
in Tables 1 and 3.5
    Table 4 also includes the R2 values from regressions of elements of yt on st alone, and
from regressions augmented with the Kalman smoothed estimates of the latent factors
associated with macro announcements. Incorporating the macro factors again increases
the R2 values from below 40% to above 90% for most maturities. The R2 s are similar to
the single factor case, even though the single factor model is nested in equation (3.2).
   5
     We constructed counterparts of Tables 3 and 4 using daily data, with changes in Treasury yields as
independent variables rather than Treasury futures rates. The results, not reported, show that for all
surprises, the estimated coefficients are similar to their intraday counterparts. However, these coefficients
have higher standard errors and the regressions have smaller R2 s. This result is intuitive: There are other
financial market developments happening on a given day along with macroeconomic announcements. This
introduces additional noise to the event study regression. Nonetheless, when the latent factor is introduced,
the fraction of yield changes explained once again dramatically increase.




                                                      11
4     Discussion: Understanding the latent factor

In this section we study the relationship between measurement error, latent factors, OLS,
and heteroskedasticity-based estimators. To do so, we analytically explore the implica-
tions of different modeling assumptions about the data generating process on OLS and
heteroskedasticity-based estimates and turn to empirical evidence to see which of these are
consistent with the data. We then study the properties of the latent factor and show that
it is indeed related to non-headline news and discuss how these results help improve our
understanding of yield curve movements.


4.1    A General Model

The heteroskedasticity-based parameter estimates are larger in absolute value than their
OLS counterparts but this is consistent with either attenuation bias from measurement
error in the headline surprises or the presence of an unobservable latent factor. To show
this formally, we consider a general model which incorporates both measurement error and
an unobservable latent factor, nesting both cases. The model is:


                                   yt = β 0 s∗t + γ 0 dt ft + εt

                                   st = s∗t + ηt


where yt is a log return or yield change (a scalar, without loss of generality), st is the
observed surprise, s∗t is the true headline surprise, dt is a dummy that is 1 on an announce-
ment day and 0 otherwise, ft is an iid N (0, 1) latent variable, and εt and ηt are processes
measuring noise in yields and measurement error of the headline surprise. We assume
that s∗t , εt and ηt are iid, mutually uncorrelated, have mean zero, and variances σ∗2 , σε2
and ση2 , respectively. To estimate β, the parameter of interest in event studies, using OLS
and identification through heteroskedasticity, we need the variance-covariance matrices for
event (ΩE ) and non-event (ΩN E ) windows:




                                                12
                                                                                             
                                     2 2         2
                           β σ ∗ + γ +                    σε2          2
                                                                    βσ∗  N E              2
                                                                                        σ ε   0
                      ΩE =                                                , Ω =              
                                   .                             σ∗2 + ση2         0           0

       In this general model, the OLS estimate for β is:


                                                           OLS       [Ω̂E ]1,2
                                                      β̂         =
                                                                     [Ω̂E ]2,2

and the identification through heteroskedasticity estimate of β is:

                                                             [Ω̂E ]1,1 − [Ω̂N E ]1,1
                                           β̂ HET =
                                                                     [Ω̂E ]1,2

This general model collapses to a model with no latent factor if γ = 0 and it collapses to
the no measurement error case (the case presented in this paper) when ση2 = 0. In the
general model, as shown in Appendix C, the probability limits of the two estimators are:

                                                                            ση2
                                                                                   
                                                OLS
                                           β̂         →β 1−
                                                                        σ∗2 + ση2

and
                                                                 γ2
                                                                    
                                                 HET
                                            β̂             →β 1+ 2 2
                                                                β σ∗

If there is neither a latent factor (γ = 0) nor measurement error in the surprise (ση2 = 0), the
OLS and heteroskedasticity based estimators both uncover the true β and should coincide.
However, as Tables 1 and 2 show, these are significantly different from each other, implying
that this is not the relevant case.
       With a latent factor, the heteroskedasticity-based estimator is biased away from zero.
                        γ2
Note that the term     β 2 σ∗2
                                 is proportional to the variance share of the latent factor in the event
window changes of yields. As the relative variance share of the latent factor increases (non-
headline news carry more information affecting yields), the bias of the heteroskedasticity-
based estimator for the headline effect increases.6
   6
    As the variance of the latent factor σf2 is normalized to unity, γ 2 itself is the measure of variance due
to the latent factor.




                                                                 13
   With measurement error, the OLS estimate will be biased towards zero because of
classical attenuation bias. This bias is proportional to the share of measurement error in
                                              ση2
total variance of the observed surprise,   σ∗2 +ση2
                                                    .
   Except for the case where the is no latent factor and no measurement error in the
surprise, the probability limit of the heteroskedasticity-based estimator will always be larger
than the OLS estimate in absolute value, as we find in the data. However, this could be
because of a latent factor (γ 6= 0), or measurement error (ση2 6= 0), or both. It is this
observational equivalence that makes it impossible to judge whether OLS is consistent or not
by only looking at the difference between the OLS and heteroskedasticity-based estimates.
One has to take a stance on the extent of measurement error. Given the observed difference
between the two estimators, that stance is consequently also on the presence of unobserved
surprises and the consistency of the heteroskedasticity-based estimator.
   We argue that measurement error in survey-based surprises is negligible, and so ση2 ≈ 0,
and therefore β̂ OLS is consistent, whereas β̂ HET is not. We shall do this in subsection
4.2, by bringing in data from economic derivatives to show that measurement error in the
survey-based surprises is likely to be negligible for event studies. As further corroborating
evidence, the bias term for heteroskedasticity-based identification when there is a latent
factor, discussed above, shows that the difference between β̂ HET and β̂ OLS should be larger
when |γ| is bigger, that is when events have larger non-headline components. To examine
this, in subsection 4.3, we shall compare monetary policy announcements with and without
accompanying statements. We will show that heteroskedasticity-based estimates are closer
to the OLS counterparts on days without monetary policy statements compared to the
days with statements.


4.2    Quality of survey expectations

The surveys used in event studies are those of news releases that are to take place very
soon, no longer than a week after the time of the survey. And the “event” is the release of
information on something that has already taken place. Hence, these expectations are not



                                                  14
necessarily subject to the anomalies often reported in analysis of long-term expectations
(Fuhrer, 2017).7
       Nonetheless, three areas of concern remain: (i) the survey expectation may be stale, i.e.
there may be incoming news between a respondent’s reporting of her expectation and the
releases which change her expectations, (ii) respondents may not have sufficient skin in the
game, and (iii) respondents may have an incentive to be right in the extreme case, not on
average, therefore reporting numbers closer to the tails rather than their true expectations,
especially if their predictions are not anonymous. We argue that while these concerns sound
relevant, in practice survey expectations work remarkably well and are not subject to large
measurement errors.
       To do so, we compare the survey-based expectations to timely market-based expecta-
tions. The latter data come from Gürkaynak and Wolfers (2006) who analyze the market
for Economic Derivatives. This was a market, now defunct, where Deutsche Bank and
Goldman Sachs allowed trades of binary options on news releases about half an hour before
the release itself.8 Market-based expectations of data releases are not subject to any of
the potential measurement error problems that survey-based ones might be. The market
operates minutes before the data release, hence there is no scope for staleness; the traders
do have skin in the game as they bet on their expectations; and since the market returns
are anonymous they have no special incentive to get low probability events right.
       We construct market- and survey-based expectations and news surprises based on these
and directly test whether there is measurement error in survey-based expectations by com-
paring the market responses to the two surprise measures. If there is sizable measurement
error in survey-based surprises, event study coefficients based on these should be signifi-
cantly smaller than coefficients based on Economic Derivatives-based surprises, which are
not subject to measurement error.
   7
      Notwithstanding these anomalies, Ang et al. (2007) show that survey expectations remain the best
forecasts among many alternatives, even at longer horizons.
    8
      These call options paid off if the release came in at or above the buyer’s strike price. Gürkaynak and
Wolfers (2006) describe the market and these options, as well as the methodology to use them to construct
risk neutral probability density functions of market perceived data release outcomes.




                                                     15
       We run SUR regressions for the four releases covered by Economic Derivatives (Nonfarm
payrolls, NAPM, Retail Sales ex-Autos, and Initial Claims) of the form:

                                           4
                                           X
                                  yt =           θis SitSURVEY + εt                                 (4.1)
                                           i=1
                                           X4
                                  yt =           θim SitECON-DERIV + εt                             (4.2)
                                           i=1


where SitSURVEY and SitECON-DERIV are surprises where expectations are measured using sur-
veys and Economic Derivatives, respectively. Measurement error in survey expectations
will lead to smaller θs compared to θm . Table 5 reports the results as well as the joint test
of the hypothesis that θis = θim for all i. It is striking that while all estimated θis s are some-
what smaller than corresponding θim s (consistent with minor classical measurement error)
the differences in point estimates are small and in no cases individually or jointly statisti-
cally significant.9 Thus we conclude that survey expectations capture market expectations
extremely well. Even if one attributes all of the difference between point estimates to mea-
surement error, the differences are on the order of 5 to 15 percent, an order of magnitude
smaller than the gap between OLS and heteroskedasticity-based estimates shown in Tables
1 and 2. These substantial differences cannot be predominantly due to measurement error
in surveys and resulting attenuation bias in the coefficients.


4.3       Comparison of OLS and Heteroskedasticity-Based Estimates

A well-studied and well-understood case of multi-dimensional data release is that of FOMC
announcements, which contain both the interest rate decision and an accompanying state-
ment providing information on the future course of interest rates. This is a case we will
return to in more detail but here we will exploit the fact that FOMC releases did not
always contain statements. Until 1994, the FOMC did not issue statements and until 1999
statements were only issued when the policy rate was changed.
   9
    In his discussion of Gürkaynak and Wolfers (2006), Carroll (2006) notes how the survey- and market-
based expectations are remarkably similar to each other in terms of first moments. This is consistent with
what we find here.



                                                    16
   Under the measurement error model, the difference between OLS and heteroskedasticity-
based estimators should not depend on the presence of an accompanying statement. If on
the other hand, as we suggest, heteroskedasticity-based identification provides the asset
price response to the whole “event” rather than just the headline, the difference between the
two measures should be larger when the non-headline component is more important, i.e. γ is
larger. Increasing the importance of non-headline news is exactly what the FOMC did when
it began to issue statements. So, if our conjecture is correct, the coefficient estimates of the
impact of FOMC announcements on yields measured by OLS- and heteroskedasticity-based
estimators should be closer for a sample of events consisting of policy actions only, than
for a sample consisting of announcements that also have statements providing information
on the policy path.
   For monetary policy surprises, as before, we follow the standard procedure and use fed-
eral funds futures-based surprises as suggested by Kuttner (2001). Table 6 shows that when
statements do not accompany the policy rate decision, the OLS- and heteroskedasticity-
based estimates of the asset price reactions are quite similar—though the OLS estimates
are smaller due to market participants’ inference of information even in the absence of
formal statements. But for the sample that includes statements the heteroskedasticity-
based estimator yields a reaction coefficient that is two to 400 times larger than the OLS
estimator.
   What is striking here is not that OLS coefficients are a little smaller and statistically less
significant in the latter sample. This is due to the dearth of policy action surprises in the
21st century, when policy actions were usually signaled ahead of the FOMC meeting date.
What is noteworthy is the increase in the spread between OLS- and heteroskedasticity-
based estimators, and the fact that the spread becomes significantly more pronounced as
maturity increases. This is exactly what one would expect to find based on our conjecture:
the presence of a statement will increase the distance between OLS- and heteroskedasticity-
based estimates for all maturities but as the statement is more informative for longer




                                              17
maturities10 the heteroskedasticity-based estimator will find even larger coefficients for
those maturities.
       Thus, by studying the FOMC announcement dates, we conclude that the heteroskedasticity-
based estimator provides a convolution of the asset price responses to the headline and
non-headline components of news, whereas our partial observability-based Kalman filter-
ing methodology provides asset price responses to headline news and the latent non-headline
news component separately. An additional benefit is that this method estimates the latent
component directly, and allows it to be given an economic interpretation.
       It can be shown, as we do in Appendix C, that the heteroskedasticity-based estimator
is essentially the sum of the OLS response to the observables and the response to the latent
variable that can be extracted from the residuals. The method we developed does this
efficiently, in one step.


4.4       Interpreting the Latent Factor

So far we have focused on the relationship between the heteroskedasticity-based, OLS- and
Kalman filter-based estimators and showed that the discrepancy between the two is better
understood as arising from the presence of unobserved surprises in releases rather than
measurement error in observed surprises. We also showed that a single factor estimated
using the Kalman filter along with observable headline surprises is sufficient to explain the
variation in asset prices around macroeconomic news events. In this subsection, we closely
examine the economic interpretation of that latent factor.
       To begin with, Table 7 lists the five largest readings of the latent factor on FOMC
announcement windows and shows that based on the comments in the financial press,
these are indeed days of well-known “statement surprises.” Monetary policy statement
surprises are well understood and it is reassuring that the latent factor we extract behaves
as expected. Non-headline surprises in other macroeconomic data releases are much less
  10
    The literature, described in the next section, finds that quantifying the statement can explain the
movement in longer maturities, whereas short maturities are more responsive to the immediate policy
action.




                                                  18
well understood, not only in the academic literature but also in the financial press. Thus,
the financial press reports of non-headline items are always boilerplate, listing the numbers
without much commentary, so doing the same exercise for macroeconomic data releases is
not possible. We therefore do the next best thing and create psuedo-unobservable surprises.
       To verify that our method indeed picks up un-surveyed news in data releases we take
the observable surprises in the employment report–nonfarm payrolls, unemployment rate,
and hourly earnings–and drop the nonfarm payrolls surprise from the data, treating it
as if this component of the employment report is not surveyed and hence its surprise is
unobservable to the econometrician.11 We then look at the correlation between the latent
factor we extract on employment report release days and the surprise we have excluded
from the data. Figure 1 shows the results of the exercise. The correlation between the
nonfarm payrolls surprise and the latent factor extracted from the factor model is striking.
The estimated latent factor indeed tracks the surprise–as measured by the survey–market
participants have perceived. The correlation is not perfect because the true unobserved
surprises are also being picked up by the factor but as the nonfarm payrolls surprise has a
large variance share, this is closely tracked by the estimated latent factor.


4.4.1      Why is a Single Factor Sufficient?

One of the most interesting findings of this paper is that a single latent factor is suffi-
cient to capture almost all of the non-headline variation in yields around news releases.
This would have been surprising if a single factor per release were sufficient—all the non-
surveyed/unobservable information in the employment report being captured by a single
latent factor—but it is very surprising that a single factor across releases is sufficient. The
model with a single latent factor is literally misspecified in that it ignores differences in
variance across releases, as evidenced by the fact that the latent variable spikes most often
on employment report days (not shown for brevity). However this does not prevent the
single factor from capturing almost all non-headline variation in yields around announce-
  11
    Doing this for the other two observed surprises produces similar results but since nonfarm payrolls
surprises elicit the largest yield curve responses, visually this case is easier to present.




                                                  19
ments. This is because individual latent factors are simply different scalings of the common
factor. In Figure 2 we show the correlation of the common factor with the individual latent
factors and show that there is almost perfect correlation in most cases.
       Not only is it the case that all individual latent factors elicit the same response from
the yield curve, observable surprises also elicit this response. The latent factor has a hump
shaped effect on the yield curve, which is very similar to the hump-shaped effect of observed
macroeconomic news surprises on the yield curve documented in Table 1.12 Both latent
and observed news surprises have peak effects at a maturity around one to two years. They
also both have a sizeable effect on long-term yields. In this paper we remain silent on why
long-term yields are sensitive to incoming macroeconomic news,13 . We do not get into that
question in this paper. but it is important to have shown that this reaction can be tied
almost fully to macroeconomic news releases.
       Given that all news, observed or unobserved, have the same hump-shaped effect on the
yield curve, one might suppose that we could have treated the headline news as unobserv-
able as well and only extracted a single latent factor, without compromising the fit. Table
8 shows the result of this exercise, and the fit is indeed about the same. Note that mechan-
ically these are the heteroskedasticity-based estimator effects but our methodology allows
measuring R2 , and shows that the fit remains about the same when all news are treated as
unobservable. This is closely related to another approach considered by Rigobon and Sack
(2006), which is simply to measure the news surprise by the first principal component of
yt in announcement windows alone.
       This finding reinforces our argument that news releases are multidimensional and unob-
served/unsurveyed surprises also elicit asset price responses. In all likelihood, every release
has many unobserved surprises but since all of them elicit the same response in terms of
  12
     The “hump-shape” language is well known in the macro VAR literature. That is a hump over time,
whereas here we find a hump over maturities. The two are related but working out the exact nature of
that relationship is a separate study.
  13
     One author of this paper has work arguing that the sensitivity of long rates is due to updating of
steady state inflation beliefs (Gürkaynak et al., 2005b), another has argued that it is due to changes in
expected real rates (Beechey and Wright, 2009) and the third has argued that neither explains the yield
curve behavior in a model consistent way (Kısacıkoğlu, 2016).




                                                   20
the shape of the yield curve reaction, one latent factor per release is sufficient, as is one
latent factor across releases. The hump shaped factor that we find is closely related to the
level and slope components of the yield curve, with the bulk of it being level.14 Thus, our
procedure, as a by product of this application, finally lets us have a handle on what moves
the yield curve, as captured predominantly by level, in event windows. It is driven by news,
but we do not how much of the effect represents expectations of future short rates versus
term premia.
       It is important to emphasize the two separate findings here. The first is that observed
and latent news both elicit hump-shaped responses from the yield curve, as shown by the
regression coefficients. The second is that yield curve movements in the event window are
almost completely explained by those observed and latent factors, as shown by the R2 s.



5        Extensions and robustness

There are several extensions and robustness checks that are in order. These are (i) limiting
the sample to the period before the financial crisis, so that estimates will not be affected
by the short end being stuck at the ZLB, (ii) verifying that the latent factor is not just
capturing a factor that is always driving yield curve movements and is unrelated to eco-
nomic news, (iii) verifying that the Kalman filter, which uses all yields in extracting the
latent factor, is not mechanically explaining long yields with themselves, (iv) comparing
the FOMC release factor to a well-studied statement factor derived using a different, two
step procedure, and (v) allowing for an unrestricted variance-covariance matrix for εt in
equation (3.1). In this section we tackle these issues.
  14
    In unreported results, we extracted a level factor from yields in event windows and showed that we are
able to explain about all of the variation in level in these windows with our method. The hump-shaped
factor itself is close to level but the hump is critically important as this is what turns out to differentiate
the latent factor we extract, from ever-present background noise.




                                                      21
5.1       Pre-crisis sample and ever-present level factor

We take on the first two issues simultaneously. We limit the sample to the pre-crisis period
and introduce a new latent factor that is ever-present. The ever-present factor is identified
using the yield change covariances in non-announcement days. The extended model that
we estimate is:
                                yt = β 0 st + ΣIi=1 dit γi fit + γ0 f0t + εt                       (5.1)

and applies on all days, as before. The new factor f0t affects yields on all days, whether
they have announcements or not and captures the “background” common movement in
asset prices that would be present even without any announcement. This latent factor
turns out to be a level factor and we refer to it as the “ever-present” level factor. It does
not have the hump shape that we saw for the effects of news announcements on yields and
indeed this is how the unobserved event and ever-present factors are separately identified.
       Maximum-likelihood estimates are reported in Table 9. This shows that our results hold
even more strongly in the pre-crisis period. Thus our results are not driven by the somewhat
unusual behavior of the yield curve in the zero lower bound period. More importantly,
the results also show that introducing an ever-present level factor does not detract from
the importance of non-headline statement factors. That is, the effect introduced by the
non-headline news factor is distinct from the background factor that is always present.
This exercise also reports marginal R2 measures for headline surprises, non-headline latent
factors, and the ever-present level factor.15 We observe that R2 s are below 40% when only
the headline surprises are included, increase substantially to about 90% when the latent
non-announcement factors are included, and increase further when the common background
factor is also included. When the ever-present level factor is not separately included in the
analysis, latent factors proxy for this as well, which inflates their R2 contributions, as in
section 2, but this effect turns out to be minor.
  15
    These regressors have negligible covariance with each other, so that changes in R2 can be interpreted
as marginal R2 measures.




                                                    22
5.2     Short-end factor

The methodology that we propose efficiently extracts the latent factor and the coefficients
relating the headline surprises and the latent factor to yields at various maturities in one
step. While the efficiency is desirable, information from long-term yields is used to estimate
the factor, which in turn helps fit the changes in these yields. One worry therefore is whether
we are mechanically explaining long-term yields with themselves.
   To be sure that we are not, we sacrifice efficiency for a moment and use only information
from the short-end of the yield curve, covering maturities up to one year. We then use this
latent factor to help explain the changes in longer term yields in the event window. This
exercise can only be done with the pre-crisis sample as during the ZLB episode yields up
to one year were stuck at their lower bounds and were not responsive to incoming data, as
was persuasively shown by Swanson and Williams (2014).
   Coefficient estimates and R2 s from the two-step procedure are shown in Table 10. It is
clear that the results are about the same, showing that the latent factor we extract from
the short-end of the yield curve in the first step can explain the changes in the long-end as
well.


5.3     The monetary policy path surprise

This exercise segues nicely into our last robustness check. Extracting latent factors from
the short-end of the yield curve and rotating these to admit policy action and policy
path surprise definitions was done by Gürkaynak et al. (2005a) for FOMC announcement
windows. Their policy action surprise mechanically coincides with our observed headline
news. We now check whether their principal components and factor rotation-based two
step procedure and our Kalman filtering-based method produce similar path (latent non-
headline) factors. The Gürkaynak et al. (2005a) path factor has been extensively used in
academic and policy work during the past decade to study the effects of forward guidance.
Verifying that the series we produce for FOMC non-headline news is close to that series
would instill confidence that our macroeconomic data release latent factors, for which there



                                              23
is no comparison series, is also capturing non-headline news that are in the release.
    Figure 3 shows the paths of the Gürkaynak et al. (2005a) path factor and our latent
FOMC factor based on the pre-crisis sample. The close correspondence between the two
series is impressive—the two series have a correlation of more than 90%. Hence, the method-
ology we propose in this paper does in one step what was done in two steps by Gürkaynak
et al. (2005a), but finds the same latent path factor. This makes it easier to be assured
that the latent factors extracted for other macroeconomic data releases are also measures
of non-headline news as perceived by market participants.


5.4     Generalized Variance-Covariance Matrix

As a final robustness check, instead of having a diagonal variance-covariance matrix for εt
in equations (3.1) and (3.2), we allow for an unrestricted variance-covariance matrix for the
background noise. Thus the variance-covariance matrix now incorporates any ever-present
factor (like the one considered in equation (5.1)), which is not separately identified any
more.
    This model can also be estimated by maximum likelihood, and the results are reported in
Table 11, for the case with a single factor and Table 12, with release-specific factors. Having
unrestricted noise makes no difference for our results. As in the case in the benchmark model
where εt has a diagonal variance-covariance matrix, the OLS coefficients are essentially
unchanged from those reported in Table 1. And it remains the case that the measured
surprise plus one latent factor are sufficient to explain the vast majority of yield curve
movements around announcements.



6       Conclusions

In this paper we have proposed a new way of thinking about the impacts of macroeconomic
news announcements on asset prices. The effects are assumed to come both from a mea-
sured surprise component of the announcement and from latent factors that we think of




                                              24
as representing details of the news announcement. The inclusion of a single latent factor
greatly increases the fraction of asset price movements bracketing news announcements
that we can explain.
   A narrow reading of this paper is that this is a contribution to econometrics of event
studies. We showed that OLS- and heteroskedasticity-based event studies are complements
rather than substitutes. We also showed how to implement these two methods simultane-
ously, in a one-step procedure. We expect this to be a standard procedure when the aim is to
explain as much of the asset price response as possible, without sacrificing interpretability.
   A broader reading would also focus on the applications we presented. It appears that a
single latent factor drives the non-headline component of the news releases in every case.
This latent factor has a “hump-shaped” effect on the yield curve. Importantly, we show
that when studied using our method, news can explain the vast majority of yield curve
movements in the event window. Thus, we understand more–in fact most–of yield curve
movements in windows involving macroeconomic data and policy releases, a goal that had
hitherto been elusive.
   Although we show that news, which may not be observable to the econometrician,
explain the yield curve movements in the event window, more work is needed to understand
why the response has the hump shape and how exactly that shape relates to the usual level,
slope, and curvature decomposition of the yield curve. We leave these interesting questions
to future research, in the hope that it will benefit from the methodology that we have
developed and insights that it has provided.




                                             25
References

Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Clara Vega, “Mi-
  cro Effects of Macro Announcements: Real-time Price Discovery in Foreign Exchange,”
  American Economic Review, 2003, 93, 38–62.

Ang, Andrew, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei, “Do Macro Variables, Asset Markets
  or Surveys Forecast Inflation Better?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2007, 54, 1163–
  1212.

Beechey, Meredith J. and Jonathan H. Wright, “The High-Frequency Impact of
  News on Long-Term Yields and Forward Rates: Is It Real?,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 2009, 56, 535–544.

Faust, Jon, John H. Rogers, Shing-Yi Wang, and Jonathan H. Wright, “The
  High Frequency Response of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic An-
  nouncements,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2007, 54, 1051–1068.

Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., “Expectations as a Source of Macroeconomic Persistence: Evidence
  from Survey Expectations in a Dynamic Macro Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  2017, 86, 22–35.

Gürkaynak, Refet S. and Jonathan H. Wright, “Identification and Inference Using
  Event Studies,” The Manchester School, 2013, 83, 48–65.

   and Justin Wolfers, “Macroeconomic Derivatives: An Initial Analysis of Market-
  Based Macro Forecasts, Uncertainty and Risk,” 2006. NBER International Seminar on
  Macroeconomics.

  , Brian Sack, and Eric T. Swanson, “Do Actions Speak Louder than Words? The
  Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements,” International
  Journal of Central Banking, 2005, 1, 55–93.




                                          26
  ,     , and    , “The Sensitivity of Long-Term Interest Rates to Economic News: Evidence
  and Implications for Macroeconomic Models,” The American Economic Review, 2005,
  95, 425–436.

Kuttner, Kenneth, “Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from the
  Fed Funds Futures Market,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2001, 47, 523–544.

Rigobon, Roberto, “Identification through Heteroskedasticity,” Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 2003, 85, 777–792.

      and Brian Sack, “The Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices,” Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics, 2004, 51, 1553–1575.

      and   , “The Effects of War Risk on US Financial Markets,” Journal of Banking and
  Finance, 2005, 29, 1769–1789.

      and   , “Noisy Macroeconomic Announcements Monetary Policy and Asset Prices,” in
  “Asset Prices and Monetary Policy” University of Chicago Press 2006.

Swanson, Eric T. and John C. Williams, “Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower
  Bound on Medium- and Longer-term Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, 2014,
  104, 3154–3185.




                                             27
Tables and Figures
                           ED1         ED4         2-Year      5-Year      10-Year     30-Year
       Non-Farm            2.89∗∗∗     5.69∗∗∗     4.55∗∗∗     5.31∗∗∗     3.99∗∗∗     2.42∗∗∗
                           (0.32)      (0.51)      (0.42)      (0.45)      (0.34)      (0.22)
       Initial Claims      −0.33∗∗∗    −0.73∗∗∗    −0.61∗∗∗    −0.69∗∗∗    −0.55∗∗∗    −0.33∗∗∗
                           (0.05)      (0.08)      (0.06)      (0.07)      (0.06)      (0.04)
       Durable             0.40∗∗∗     0.75∗∗∗     0.74∗∗∗     0.86∗∗∗     0.61∗∗∗     0.39∗∗∗
                           (0.12)      (0.22)      (0.18)      (0.20)      (0.16)      (0.10)
       Emp Cost            0.70∗∗∗     1.59∗∗∗     1.05∗∗∗     1.51∗∗∗     1.17∗∗∗     0.77∗∗∗
                           (0.21)      (0.46)      (0.36)      (0.44)      (0.34)      (0.23)
       Retail              0.32∗       0.68∗∗∗     0.46∗∗      0.55∗∗      0.39∗       0.15
                           (0.18)      (0.22)      (0.19)      (0.23)      (0.20)      (0.15)
       Retail Ex. Auto     0.41∗∗∗     0.87∗∗∗     0.97∗∗∗     1.22∗∗∗     0.97∗∗∗     0.74∗∗∗
                           (0.15)      (0.23)      (0.21)      (0.23)      (0.19)      (0.13)
       GDP                 0.68∗∗∗     1.65∗∗∗     1.25∗∗∗     1.62∗∗∗     1.23∗∗∗     0.72∗∗∗
                           (0.14)      (0.34)      (0.24)      (0.31)      (0.25)      (0.17)
       CPI                 0.00        −0.10       −0.08       0.07        0.12        0.17
                           (0.10)      (0.23)      (0.15)      (0.20)      (0.16)      (0.12)
       Core CPI            0.74∗∗∗     1.48∗∗∗     1.16∗∗∗     1.55∗∗∗     1.27∗∗∗     0.80∗∗∗
                           (0.12)      (0.22)      (0.17)      (0.21)      (0.17)      (0.12)
       PPI                 0.11        0.21        0.16        0.18        0.23∗       0.16∗
                           (0.10)      (0.17)      (0.15)      (0.16)      (0.13)      (0.09)
       Core PPI            0.62∗∗∗     0.98∗∗∗     0.83∗∗∗     1.05∗∗∗     0.91∗∗∗     0.69∗∗∗
                           (0.13)      (0.21)      (0.16)      (0.17)      (0.14)      (0.10)
       Hourly Earnings     0.88∗∗∗     1.81∗∗∗     1.48∗∗∗     2.02∗∗∗     1.61∗∗∗     0.97∗∗∗
                           (0.25)      (0.35)      (0.28)      (0.34)      (0.27)      (0.18)
       Unemp               −1.21∗∗∗    −2.00∗∗∗    −1.61∗∗∗    −1.65∗∗∗    -1.14∗∗∗    −0.65∗∗∗
                           (0.22)      (0.37)      (0.28)      (0.31)      (0.24)      (0.16)
       FOMC                0.64∗∗∗     0.55∗∗∗     0.23∗∗      0.15        0.05        −0.01
                           (0.09)      (0.12)      (0.11)      (0.09)      (0.06)      (0.03)
       R2                  0.41        0.36        0.35        0.35        0.34        0.29

Table 1: OLS estimates of equation (2.3). White standard errors in parentheses (∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p <
0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01). Macroeconomic surprises are normalized by their respective standard deviations. Mon-
etary policy surprises are in basis points. Responses of ED1, ED4, two-year, five-year, ten-year, and
thirty-year yields are in basis points. Regressions are only run on announcement days. The sample is
1992-2017 for macroeconomic announcements, 1992-2007 for monetary policy surprises.




                                                  28
                            ED1         ED4          2-year      5-year       10-year     30-year
       Non-Farm             7.98∗∗∗     13.23∗∗∗     10.25∗∗∗    12.23∗∗∗     9.45∗∗∗     6.32∗∗∗
                            (0.70)      (1.00)       (0.70)      (0.86)       (0.69)      (0.49)
       Initial Claims       −1.69∗∗∗    −2.66∗∗∗     −1.81∗∗∗    −2.36∗∗∗     −1.99∗∗∗    −1.47∗∗∗
                            (0.48)      (0.62)       (0.28)      (0.29)       (0.25)      (0.21)
       Durable              1.02        3.43∗∗       3.32∗∗∗     3.46∗∗∗      2.86∗∗∗     1.80∗∗∗
                            (1.51)      (1.39)       (0.76)      (0.75)       (0.66)      (0.49)
       Emp Cost             2.74∗∗      3.39∗∗       2.40        3.14∗∗       2.38∗∗      1.55∗
                            (1.17)      (1.69)       (1.56)      (1.25)       (1.03)      (0.84)
       Retail Ex. Auto      5.19∗       7.33∗∗       3.96∗∗∗     3.96∗∗∗      3.00∗∗∗     1.81∗∗∗
                            2.99        2.98         1.25        1.12         0.88        0.55
       GDP (advance)        7.59        8.08∗∗       5.76∗       6.77∗∗       5.46∗       2.91∗
                            (5.91)      (3.82)       (2.95)      (3.37)       (2.94)      (1.75)
       Core CPI             2.79∗∗∗     5.75∗∗∗      4.02∗∗∗     5.22∗∗∗      4.12∗∗∗     2.90∗∗∗
                            (1.02)      (1.12)       (1.16)      (0.8)        (0.60)      (0.44)
       Core PPI             4.22∗∗∗     5.33∗∗∗      4.41∗∗∗     5.59∗∗∗      4.70∗∗∗     3.20∗∗∗
                            (1.30)      (1.36)       (1.16)      (1.40)       (1.15)      (0.70)
       FOMC                 0.94∗∗∗     2.70∗∗∗      2.57∗∗      3.95∗        6.25        −7.46
                            (0.12)      (1.01)       (1.05)      (2.17)       (7.43)      (17.79)

Table 2: Heteroskedasticity-based estimates following Rigobon (2003) and Rigobon and Sack (2004, 2005,
2006). Asymptotic standard errrors are in parentheses (∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01). Macroeconomic
surprises are normalized by their respective standard deviations. Monetary policy surprises are in basis
points. esponses of ED1, ED4, two-year, five-year, ten-year, and thirty-year yields are in basis points. Re-
gressions are only run on announcement days. The sample is 1992-2017 for macroeconomic announcements,
1992-2007 for monetary policy surprises.




                                                    29
                            ED1         ED4         2-Year      5-Year      10-Year      30-year
       Non-Farm             2.89∗∗∗     5.71∗∗∗     4.55∗∗∗     5.31∗∗∗     3.99∗∗∗      2.42∗∗∗
                            (0.16)      (0.25)      (0.21)      (0.22)      (0.17)       (0.11)
       Initial Claims       −0.32∗∗∗    −0.74∗∗∗    −0.58∗∗∗    −0.68∗∗∗    −0.55∗∗∗     −0.33∗∗∗
                            (0.02)      (0.04)      (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.02)
       Durable              0.39∗∗∗     0.88∗∗∗     0.71∗∗∗     0.86∗∗∗     0.60∗∗∗      0.39∗∗∗
                            (0.06)      (0.11)      (0.09)      (0.10)      (0.08)       (0.05)
       Emp Cost             0.69∗∗∗     1.51∗∗∗     1.17∗∗∗     1.51∗∗∗     1.17∗∗∗      0.77∗∗∗
                            (0.10)      (0.23)      (0.18)      (0.22)      (0.17)       (0.12)
       Retail               0.32∗∗∗     0.76∗∗∗     0.53∗∗∗     0.56∗∗∗     0.39∗∗∗      0.15∗∗∗
                            (0.09)      (0.12)      (0.10)      (0.12)      (0.10)       (0.07)
       Retail Ex. Auto      0.41∗∗∗     0.95∗∗∗     0.94∗∗∗     1.21∗∗∗     0.97∗∗∗      0.74∗∗∗
                            (0.07)      (0.12)      (0.10)      (0.12)      (0.10)       (0.07)
       GDP                  0.67∗∗∗     1.64∗∗∗     1.24∗∗∗     1.62∗∗∗     1.23∗∗∗      0.72∗∗∗
                            (0.07)      (0.17)      (0.12)      (0.15)      (0.13)       (0.09)
       CPI                  0.01        -0.09       0.00        0.07        0.12         0.17∗∗∗
                            (0.05)      (0.11)      (0.08)      (0.10)      (0.08)       (0.06)
       Core CPI             0.72∗∗∗     1.66∗∗∗     1.21∗∗∗     1.55∗∗∗     1.27∗∗∗      0.80∗∗∗
                            (0.06)      (0.11)      (0.09)      (0.11)      (0.08)       (0.06)
       PPI                  0.10∗∗      0.25∗∗∗     0.20∗∗∗     0.18∗∗      0.23∗∗∗      0.16∗∗∗
                            (0.05)      (0.09)      (0.07)      (0.08)      (0.06)       (0.05)
       Core PPI             0.63∗∗∗     1.08∗∗∗     0.78∗∗∗     1.05∗∗∗     0.91∗∗∗      0.69∗∗∗
                            (0.07)      (0.10)      (0.08)      (0.09)      (0.07)       (0.05)
       Hourly Earnings      0.88∗∗∗     1.83∗∗∗     1.45∗∗∗     2.02∗∗∗     1.61∗∗∗      0.97∗∗∗
                            (0.12)      (0.17)      (0.14)      (0.17)      (0.14)       (0.09)
       Unemp                −1.21∗∗∗    −2.01∗∗∗    −1.64∗∗∗    −1.65∗∗∗    −1.14∗∗∗     −0.65∗∗∗
                            (0.11)      (0.18)      (0.14)      (0.15)      (0.12)       (0.08)
       FOMC                 0.64∗∗∗     0.53∗∗∗     0.32∗∗∗     0.25∗∗∗     0.12∗∗∗      0.04∗
                            (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.03)       (0.02)
       Factor               1.46∗∗∗     3.25∗∗∗     2.52∗∗∗     3.04∗∗∗     2.35∗∗∗      1.50∗∗∗
                            (0.04)      (0.06)      (0.04)      (0.05)      (0.03)       (0.02)
       R2 no factor         0.41        0.36        0.35        0.35        0.34         0.29
       R2 with factor       0.74        0.92        0.94        0.98        0.96         0.88

Table 3: Estimates of equation (3.1). Standard errors in parentheses (∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01).
Macroeconomic surprises are normalized by their respective standard deviations. Monetary policy surprises
are in basis points. Responses of ED1, ED4, two-year, five-year, ten-year, and thirty-year yields are in
basis points. The sample is 1992-2017 for macroeconomic announcements, 1992-2007 for monetary policy
surprises. Factor is estimated via Kalman Filter using changes in asset prices around macroeconomic and
FOMC releases. The R2 values are those of announcement day yields using (i) just headline surprises, (ii)
headline surprises and the latent factor.




                                                   30
                                        ED1             ED4              2-Year          5-Year           10-Year         30-Year
        Non-Farm                        2.89∗∗∗         5.71∗∗∗          4.55∗∗∗         5.31∗∗∗          3.99∗∗∗         2.42∗∗∗
                                        (0.16)          (0.25)           (0.21)          (0.22)           (0.17)          (0.11)
        Initial Claims                  −0.33∗∗∗        −0.75∗∗∗         −0.60∗∗∗        −0.70∗∗∗         −0.56∗∗∗        −0.34∗∗∗
                                        (0.02)          (0.04)           (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.02)          (0.02)
        Durable                         0.42∗∗∗         0.92∗∗∗          0.74∗∗∗         0.89∗∗∗          0.63∗∗∗         0.40∗∗∗
                                        (0.06)          (0.11)           (0.09)          (0.10)           (0.08)          (0.05)
        Emp Cost                        0.70∗∗∗         1.51∗∗∗          1.17∗∗∗         1.51∗∗∗          1.17∗∗∗         0.77∗∗∗
                                        (0.11)          (0.23)           (0.18)          (0.22)           (0.16)          (0.11)
        Retail                          0.26∗∗∗         0.63∗∗∗          0.42∗∗∗         0.42∗∗∗          0.28∗∗∗         0.07
                                        (0.08)          (0.10)           (0.09)          (0.10)           (0.08)          (0.06)
        Retail Ex. Auto                 0.45∗∗∗         1.03∗∗∗          1.00∗∗∗         1.29∗∗∗          1.03            0.78∗∗∗
                                        (0.07)          (0.12)           (0.10)          (0.11)           (0.09)          (0.06)
        GDP                             0.67∗∗∗         1.65∗∗∗          1.25∗∗∗         1.63∗∗∗          1.24∗∗∗         0.72∗∗∗
                                        (0.07)          (0.16)           (0.11)          (0.14)           (0.12)          (0.08)
        CPI                             0.01            −0.08            0.00            0.08             0.13            0.18∗∗∗
                                        (0.05)          (0.11)           (0.08)          (0.10)           (0.08)          (0.06)
        Core CPI                        0.69∗∗∗         1.59∗∗∗          1.15∗∗∗         1.49∗∗∗          1.22∗∗∗         0.77∗∗∗
                                        (0.06)          (0.11)           (0.08)          (0.10)           (0.08)          (0.06)
        PPI                             0.11∗∗          0.27∗∗∗          0.22∗∗∗         0.21∗∗           0.25∗∗∗         0.17∗∗∗
                                        (0.05)          (0.09)           (0.07)          (0.08)           (0.06)          (0.05)
        Core PPI                        0.65∗∗∗         1.10∗∗∗          0.81∗∗∗         1.08∗∗∗          0.93∗∗∗         0.71∗∗∗
                                        (0.07)          (0.10)           (0.08)          (0.09)           (0.07)          (0.05)
        Hourly Earnings                 0.88∗∗∗         1.83∗∗∗          1.45∗∗∗         2.02∗∗∗          1.61∗∗∗         0.98∗∗∗
                                        (0.12)          (0.17)           (0.14)          (0.17)           (0.14)          (0.09)
        Unemp                           −1.21∗∗∗        −2.01∗∗∗         −1.64∗∗∗        −1.66∗∗∗         −1.14∗∗∗        −0.65∗∗∗
                                        (0.11)          (0.18)           (0.14)          (0.15)           (0.12)          (0.08)
        FOMC                            0.64∗∗∗         0.53∗∗∗          0.34∗∗∗         0.25∗∗∗          0.12∗∗∗         0.03
                                        0.05            0.05             0.05            0.05             0.03            0.02
        fCP I,t                         1.13∗∗∗         2.64∗∗∗          2.08∗∗∗         2.63∗∗∗          2.10∗∗∗         1.47∗∗∗
                                        (0.06)          (0.09)           (0.07)          (0.08)           (0.06)          (0.05)
        fDurable,t                      0.77∗∗∗         1.97∗∗∗          1.50∗∗∗         1.86∗∗∗          1.50∗∗∗         1.00∗∗∗
                                        (0.06)          (0.10)           (0.06)          (0.06)           (0.05)          (0.03)
        fEmpCost,t                      0.84∗∗∗         2.54∗∗∗          2.10∗∗∗         2.68∗∗∗          2.07∗∗∗         1.42∗∗∗
                                        (0.14)          (0.25)           (0.20)          (0.30)           (0.26)          (0.19)
        fGDP,t                          1.45∗∗∗         3.16∗∗∗          2.30∗∗∗         2.87∗∗∗          2.31∗∗∗         1.45∗∗∗
                                        (0.32)          (0.24)           (0.19)          (0.18)           (0.14)          (0.10)
        fClaims,t                       0.87∗∗∗         1.81∗∗∗          1.30∗∗∗         1.58∗∗∗          1.27∗∗∗         0.82∗∗∗
                                        (0.11)          (0.13)           (0.07)          (0.06)           (0.04)          (0.02)
        fN onF arm,t                    2.63∗∗∗         5.78∗∗∗          4.56∗∗∗         5.64∗∗∗          4.34∗∗∗         2.75∗∗∗
                                        (0.11)          (0.18)           (0.14)          (0.13)           (0.11)          (0.08)
        fP P I,t                        1.30∗∗∗         2.45∗∗∗          1.98∗∗∗         2.40∗∗∗          1.98∗∗∗         1.37∗∗∗
                                        (0.09)          (0.10)           (0.07)          (0.09)           (0.08)          (0.05)
        fRetail,t                       1.45∗∗∗         2.90∗∗∗          2.30∗∗∗         2.54∗∗∗          1.96∗∗∗         1.21∗∗∗
                                        (0.15)          (0.18)           (0.11)          (0.10)           (0.07)          (0.05)
        fF OM C,t                       2.42∗∗∗         6.21∗∗∗          4.91∗∗∗         5.31∗∗∗          3.72∗∗∗         2.10∗∗∗
                                        (0.20)          (0.33)           (0.24)          (0.32)           (0.22)          (0.15)
        R2 No Factor                    0.41            0.36             0.35            0.35             0.34            0.29
        Rs Release Factors              0.74            0.93             0.94            0.98             0.96            0.88

Table 4: Estimates of equation (3.2). Standard errors in parentheses (∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01). Macroeconomic surprises are

normalized by their respective standard deviations.    Monetary policy surprises are in basis points.   The R2 values reported are those for
                                                                      31
announcement day yields using (i) just headline surprises, (ii) headline surprises and latent factors. The sample is 1992-2017 for macroeconomic

announcements, 1992-2007 for monetary policy surprises.
                           Non-Farm      Initial Claims    NAPM       Retail   Obs.    R2      p-value (χ2 )
               Auction       1.4∗∗∗           -0.12         0.05       0.19    152     0.31        0.82
 ED1                        (0.19)           (0.13)        (0.12)     (0.19)
               Survey       1.33∗∗∗           -0.11         0.04       0.17     152    0.28
                            (0.20)           (0.13)        (0.12)     (0.19)
               Auction      6.99∗∗∗           -0.53         0.43       0.40     153    0.48        0.87
 ED4                        (0.63)           (0.44)        (0.43)     (0.65)
               Survey       6.75∗∗∗           -0.51         0.37       0.38     153    0.45
                            (0.66)           (0.46)        (0.45)     (0.68)
               Auction      4.72∗∗∗           -0.38         0.36       0.35     153    0.42        0.87
 Two-Year                   (0.49)           (0.34)        (0.32)     (0.50)
               Survey       4.54∗∗∗           -0.36         0.30       0.33     153    0.38
                            (0.52)           (0.36)        (0.34)     (0.53)
               Auction      5.62∗∗∗           -0.47         0.54       0.49     153    0.45        0.78
 Five-Year                  (0.54)           (0.37)        (0.37)     (0.56)
               Survey       5.39∗∗∗           -0.44         0.45       0.45     153    0.41
                            (0.57)           (0.40)        (0.39)     (0.39)
               Auction      4.37∗∗∗           -0.37         0.42       0.41     153    0.43        0.88
 Ten-Year                   (0.45)           (0.31)        (0.30)     (0.46)
               Survey       4.22∗∗∗           -0.35         0.36       0.38     153     0.4
                            (0.47)           (0.33)        (0.32)     (0.48)

Table 5: Seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) results for ED1, ED4, and on-the-run two-, five-, ten-
, and thirty-year yields. “Auction” are the coefficients for the auction based surprises and “Survey” are
MMS/Action Economics survey based surprise coefficients. Standard errors in parentheses (∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p <
0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01). P-value is the joint test statistic of equality between auction and survey estimates. The
sample is from October 2002 to July 2005.




                                                     32
       No FOMC Statement

                                   ED1        ED4       2-year     5-year    10-year    30-year
       OLS                         0.53∗∗∗    0.65∗∗     0.28∗      0.18∗      0.08       0.02
                                   (0.15)     (0.29)    (0.17)     (0.11)     (0.06)     (0.04)
       ID HET                      0.82∗∗∗    1.22∗∗∗   0.80∗∗∗    0.76∗∗∗     0.66       0.55
                                   (0.13)     (0.24)    (0.16)     (0.27)     (0.43)     (0.63)

       FOMC Statement
                                   ED1        ED4       2-year     5-year    10-year    30-year
       OLS                         0.54∗∗∗    0.39∗∗∗    0.21       0.13       0.03       -0.03
                                   (0.10)     (0.14)    (0.13)     (0.12)     (0.08)     (0.04)
       ID HET                      0.99∗∗∗    3.20∗∗    3.35∗∗      5.76      12.21       -4.38
                                   (0.17)     (1.40)    (1.64)     (4.29)    (27.41)     (6.08)

Table 6: OLS and Heteroskedasticity-based estimates of the effects of target federal funds rate surprises
using FOMC days with and without monetary policy statements. Standard errors in parentheses (∗ p <
0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01).




                                                   33
 Date                              Factor                             Commentary
 January 28, 2004                  4.62                               Statement drops commitment to
                                                                      keep policy unchanged for
                                                                      “considerable period”, bringing
                                                                      forward expectations of future
                                                                      tightenings.
 August 13, 2002                   -2.85                              Statement announces balance of
                                                                      risks has shifted from neutral to
                                                                      economic weakness
 January 3, 2001                   2.77                               Large surprise intermeeting ease
                                                                      reportedly causes financial markets
                                                                      to mark down probability of a
                                                                      recession; Fed is perceived as being
                                                                      “ahead of the curve” and as needing
                                                                      to ease less down the road as a
                                                                      result.
 May 17, 1994                      -2.50                              Fed’s move is perceived as a
                                                                      “combative response to markets
                                                                      that for weeks have been
                                                                      demanding convincing
                                                                      evidence…that it was doing enough
                                                                      to rein in economic growth and
                                                                      dampen inflation expectations.”
                                                                      (The New York Times, May 18,
                                                                      1994).
 October 15, 1998                  -2.48                              First intermeeting move since 1994
                                                                      and statement pointing to “unsettled
                                                                      conditions in financial markets...
                                                                      restraining aggregate demand”
                                                                      increases expectations of further
                                                                      easings.


Table 7: FOMC commentary. Table shows the 5 largest (absolute) values of the latent factor monetary
policy announcements with associated dates and the summary of the statements. January 28, 2004, August
13, 2002, October 15, 1998 and January 3, 2001 commentary are from Gürkaynak et al. (2005).




                                                 34
                         ED1        ED4       2-Year    5-Year    10-Year     30-Year
               Factor    2.08∗∗∗    4.14∗∗∗   3.26∗∗∗   3.88∗∗∗   2.98∗∗∗     1.87∗∗∗
                         (0.08)     (0.09)    (0.07)    (0.07)    (0.06)      (0.04)
               R2        0.65       0.92      0.93      0.98      0.96        0.86

Table 8: Estimates of equation (3.1) when headline and FOMC surprises are unobservable. Standard
errors in parentheses (∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01). Responses of ED1, ED4, two-year, five-year,
ten-year, and thirty-year yields are in basis points.




                                                  35
                                       ED1             ED4        2-Year               5-Year          10-Year         30-Year
       Non-Farm                         3.70∗∗∗         6.84∗∗∗    5.41∗∗∗              5.92∗∗∗         4.35∗∗∗         2.52∗∗∗
                                        (0.22)          (0.37)     (0.29)               (0.32)          (0.24)          (0.16)
       Initial Claims                  −0.48∗∗∗        −0.90∗∗∗ −0.69∗∗∗               −0.74∗∗∗        −0.56∗∗∗        −0.32∗∗∗
                                        (0.03)          (0.05)     (0.04)               (0.04)          (0.03)          (0.02)
       Durable                          0.70∗∗∗         1.36∗∗∗    1.05∗∗∗              1.20∗∗∗         0.81∗∗∗         0.51∗∗∗
                                        (0.08)          (0.15)     (0.12)               (0.12)          (0.10)          (0.06)
       Emp Cost                         0.84∗∗∗         1.83∗∗∗    1.41∗∗∗              1.72∗∗∗         1.35∗∗∗         0.92∗∗∗
                                        (0.16)          (0.33)     (0.26)               (0.30)          (0.23)          (0.17)
       Retail                           0.32∗∗∗         0.83∗∗∗    0.54∗∗∗              0.55∗∗∗         0.36∗∗∗          0.10
                                        (0.12)          (0.17)     (0.13)               (0.13)          (0.11)          (0.08)
       Retail Ex. Auto                  0.81∗∗∗         1.42∗∗∗    1.23∗∗∗              1.26∗∗∗         0.99∗∗∗         0.72∗∗∗
                                        (0.10)          (0.18)     (0.14)               (0.15)          (0.12)          (0.08)
       GDP                              0.93∗∗∗         2.32∗∗∗    1.68∗∗∗              2.05∗∗∗         1.49∗∗∗         0.83∗∗∗
                                        (0.10)          (0.21)     (0.14)               (0.18)          (0.15)          (0.10)
       CPI                               -0.02         −0.37∗∗      -0.11                -0.13           -0.03           0.09
                                        (0.08)          (0.16)     (0.12)               (0.15)          (0.12)          (0.09)
       Core CPI                         1.10∗∗∗         2.42∗∗∗    1.69∗∗∗              2.15∗∗∗         1.72∗∗∗         1.09∗∗∗
                                        (0.08)          (0.16)     (0.13)               (0.15)          (0.12)          (0.09)
       PPI                              0.16∗∗          0.30 ∗∗    0.30∗∗∗              0.34∗∗∗         0.36∗∗∗         0.25∗∗∗
                                        (0.07)          (0.13)     (0.11)               (0.11)          (0.09)          (0.07)
       Core PPI                         0.96∗∗∗         1.67∗∗∗    1.12∗∗∗              1.39∗∗∗         1.19∗∗∗         0.90∗∗∗
                                        (0.10)          (0.15)     (0.12)               (0.12)          (0.10)          (0.07)
       Hourly Earnings                  1.23∗∗∗         2.22∗∗∗    1.76∗∗∗              2.16∗∗∗         1.76∗∗∗         1.15∗∗∗
                                        (0.18)          (0.24)     (0.19)               (0.23)          (0.18)          (0.12)
       Unemp                           −1.75∗∗∗        −2.49  ∗∗∗ −2.02∗∗∗             −1.95∗∗∗        −1.28∗∗∗        −0.68∗∗∗
                                        (0.15)          (0.27)     (0.20)               (0.22)          (0.17)          (0.12)
       FOMC                             0.64∗∗∗         0.52∗∗∗    0.33∗∗∗              0.24∗∗∗         0.10∗∗∗          0.01
                                        (0.05)          (0.05)     (0.05)               (0.05)          (0.03)          (0.02)
       fCP I,t                          1.15∗∗∗         2.65∗∗∗    2.15∗∗∗              2.32∗∗∗         1.64∗∗∗         1.10∗∗∗
                                        (0.09)          (0.15)     (0.13)               (0.17)          (0.15)          (0.12)
       fDurable,t                       0.79∗∗∗         1.78∗∗∗    1.44∗∗∗              1.46∗∗∗         1.08∗∗∗         0.61∗∗∗
                                        (0.08)          (0.17)     (0.11)               (0.13)          (0.11)          (0.08)
       fEmpCost,t                       1.23∗∗∗         3.32∗∗∗    2.66∗∗∗              3.21∗∗∗         2.43∗∗∗         1.80∗∗∗
                                        (0.19)          (0.36)     (0.28)               (0.44)          (0.38)          (0.21)
       fGDP,t                           1.95∗∗∗         3.34∗∗∗    2.36∗∗∗              2.73∗∗∗         2.08∗∗∗         1.10∗∗∗
                                        (0.39)          (0.39)     (0.36)               (0.46)          (0.38)          (0.22)
       fClaims,t                        0.95∗∗∗         1.75∗∗∗    1.12∗∗∗              1.04∗∗∗         0.62∗∗∗         0.30∗∗∗
                                        (0.18)          (0.23)     (0.14)               (0.16)          (0.13)          (0.08)
       fN onF arm,t                     3.45∗∗∗         6.18∗∗∗    4.98∗∗∗              5.35∗∗∗         3.77∗∗∗         2.28∗∗∗
                                        (0.17)          (0.30)     (0.20)               (0.27)          (0.24)          (0.18)
       fP P I,t                         1.54∗∗∗         2.87∗∗∗    2.29∗∗∗              2.53∗∗∗         1.97∗∗∗         1.40∗∗∗
                                        (0.12)          (0.18)     (0.11)               (0.14)          (0.12)          (0.09)
       fRetail,t                        1.83∗∗∗         3.22∗∗∗    2.26∗∗∗              2.21∗∗∗         1.52∗∗∗         0.80∗∗∗
                                        (0.15)          (0.25)     (0.15)               (0.18)          (0.14)          (0.09)
       fF OM C,t                        2.67∗∗∗         5.96∗∗∗    4.50∗∗∗              4.35∗∗∗         2.75∗∗∗         1.28∗∗∗
                                        (0.21)          (0.37)     (0.29)               (0.38)          (0.28)          (0.19)
       f0,t                             0.62∗∗∗         1.60∗∗∗    1.20∗∗∗              1.69∗∗∗         1.47∗∗∗         1.00∗∗∗
                                        (0.06)          (0.08)     (0.06)               (0.06)          (0.04)          (0.03)
       R2 No Factor                       0.48           0.39       0.38                  0.36           0.34            0.30
       R2 Release Factors                 0.85           0.89       0.90                  0.82           0.74            0.65
       R2 All Factors                     0.86           0.96 36 0.97                     0.99           1.00            0.97

Table 9: Estimates of equation (5.1). Standard errors in parentheses (∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01). See Table 3 for data description.

The sample is 1992-2007 for macroeconomic announcements, 1992-2007 for monetary policy surprises.
                           ED1         ED4         2-Year     5-Year      10-Year     30-year
       Non-Farm             3.70∗∗∗     6.85∗∗∗     5.41∗∗∗    5.92∗∗∗     4.35∗∗∗     2.52∗∗∗
                            (0.17)      (0.22)      (0.19)     (0.21)      (0.21)      (0.15)
       Initial Claims      −0.46∗∗∗    −0.86∗∗∗    −0.65∗∗∗   −0.69∗∗∗    −0.53∗∗∗    −0.30∗∗∗
                            (0.02)      (0.03)      (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.04)      (0.03)
       Durable              0.64∗∗∗     1.26∗∗∗     0.98∗∗∗    1.12∗∗∗     0.77∗∗∗     0.48∗∗∗
                            (0.04)      (0.06)      (0.10)     (0.09)      (0.08)      (0.06)
       Emp Cost             0.85∗∗∗     1.92∗∗∗     1.36∗∗∗    1.79∗∗∗     1.40∗∗∗     0.95∗∗∗
                            (0.09)      (0.11)      (0.23)     (0.27)      (0.20)      (0.17)
       Retail               0.36∗∗∗     1.00∗∗∗     0.63∗∗∗    0.66∗∗∗     0.44∗∗∗     0.16∗∗
                            (0.06)      (0.07)      (0.12)     (0.12)      (0.09)      (0.07)
       Retail Ex. Auto      0.82∗∗∗     1.44∗∗∗     1.26∗∗∗    1.27∗∗∗     1.00∗∗∗     0.72∗∗∗
                            (0.06)      (0.09)      (0.15)     (0.16)      (0.12)      (0.10)
       GDP                  0.86∗∗∗     2.22∗∗∗     1.63∗∗∗    2.02∗∗∗     1.48∗∗∗     0.84∗∗∗
                            (0.11)      (0.12)      (0.18)     (0.24)      (0.22)      (0.17)
       CPI                   -0.04     −0.32∗∗∗     −0.18∗      -0.14       -0.03       0.09
                            (0.06)      (0.08)      (0.10)     (0.13)      (0.12)      (0.11)
       Core CPI             1.13∗∗∗     2.57∗∗∗     1.71∗∗∗    2.19∗∗∗     1.75∗∗∗     1.11∗∗∗
                            (0.06)      (0.08)      (0.12)     (0.13)      (0.13)      (0.11)
       PPI                  0.13∗∗∗     0.25∗∗∗     0.24∗∗∗    0.30∗∗∗     0.33∗∗∗     0.23∗∗∗
                            (0.04)      (0.05)      (0.09)     (0.10)      (0.08)      (0.07)
       Core PPI             0.87∗∗∗     1.77∗∗∗     1.03∗∗∗    1.29∗∗∗     1.13∗∗∗     0.87∗∗∗
                            (0.06)      (0.08)      (0.11)     (0.13)      (0.11)      (0.08)
       Hourly Earnings      1.23∗∗∗     2.22∗∗∗     1.78∗∗∗    2.15∗∗∗     1.76∗∗∗     1.15∗∗∗
                            (0.14)      (0.18)      (0.19)     (0.20)      (0.18)      (0.15)
       Unemp               −1.74∗∗∗    −2.50∗∗∗    −2.00∗∗∗   −1.94∗∗∗    −1.27∗∗∗    −0.68∗∗∗
                            (0.10)      (0.13)      (0.17)     (0.20)      (0.17)      (0.12)
       FOMC                 0.64∗∗∗     0.47∗∗∗     0.32∗∗∗    0.26∗∗∗     0.13∗∗∗      0.04
                            (0.03)      (0.04)      (0.03)     (0.05)      (0.04)      (0.03)
       Factor               2.32∗∗∗     4.38∗∗∗     3.01∗∗∗    3.38∗∗∗     2.52∗∗∗     1.56∗∗∗
                            (0.06)      (0.09)      (0.08)     (0.09)      (0.08)      (0.06)
       R2 no factor          0.48        0.39        0.38       0.36         0.34       0.30
       R2 with factor        0.93        0.96        0.86       0.86         0.82       0.74

Table 10: As for Table 3, except that in estimating the latent factor, only ED1 and ED4 are used. Other
yield changes are regressed on the estimated latent factor. The sample is 1992-2007.




                                                  37
                         ED1         ED4         2-Year      5-Year     10-Year     30-year
    Non-Farm              2.89∗∗∗     5.72∗∗∗     4.54∗∗∗     5.31∗∗∗    3.99∗∗∗     2.42∗∗∗
                          (0.16)      (0.25)      (0.21)      (0.22)     (0.17)      (0.11)
    Initial Claims       −0.32∗∗∗    −0.76∗∗∗    −0.58∗∗∗    −0.69∗∗∗   −0.55∗∗∗    −0.33∗∗∗
                          (0.02)      (0.04)      (0.03)      (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.02)
    Durable               0.39∗∗∗     0.90∗∗∗     0.70∗∗∗     0.86∗∗∗    0.60∗∗∗     0.39∗∗∗
                          (0.06)      (0.11)      (0.09)      (0.10)     (0.08)      (0.05)
    Emp Cost              0.69∗∗∗     1.50∗∗∗     1.17∗∗∗     1.51∗∗∗    1.17∗∗∗     0.77∗∗∗
                          (0.10)      (0.23)      (0.18)      (0.22)     (0.17)      (0.12)
    Retail                0.32∗∗∗     0.79∗∗∗     0.52∗∗∗     0.56∗∗∗    0.39∗∗∗     0.15∗∗
                          (0.09)      (0.13)      (0.10)      (0.12)     (0.10)      (0.07)
    Retail Ex. Auto       0.41∗∗∗     0.99∗∗∗     0.94∗∗∗     1.21∗∗∗    0.97∗∗∗     0.74∗∗∗
                          (0.07)      (0.13)      (0.10)      (0.12)     (0.10)      (0.07)
    GDP                    0.67       1.64∗∗∗     1.23∗∗∗     1.62∗∗∗    1.23∗∗∗     0.72∗∗∗
                          (0.07)      (0.17)      (0.12)      (0.15)     (0.13)      (0.09)
    CPI                    0.01        -0.07       0.00        0.07       0.12       0.17∗∗∗
                          (0.05)      (0.11)      (0.08)      (0.10)     (0.08)      (0.06)
    Core CPI              0.73∗∗∗     1.69∗∗∗     1.22∗∗∗     1.55∗∗∗    1.27∗∗∗     0.80∗∗∗
                          (0.06)      (0.11)      (0.09)      (0.11)     (0.08)      (0.06)
    PPI                   0.11∗∗      0.25∗∗∗     0.20∗∗∗     0.18∗∗     0.23∗∗∗     0.16∗∗∗
                          (0.05)      (0.09)      (0.07)      (0.08)     (0.06)      (0.05)
    Core PPI              0.61∗∗∗     1.12∗∗∗     0.77∗∗∗     1.05∗∗∗    0.91∗∗∗     0.69∗∗∗
                          (0.07)      (0.10)      (0.08)      (0.09)     (0.07)      (0.05)
    Hourly Earnings       0.88∗∗∗     1.84∗∗∗     1.45∗∗∗     2.02∗∗∗    1.61∗∗∗     0.97∗∗∗
                          (0.12)      (0.17)      (0.14)      (0.17)     (0.14)      (0.09)
    Unemp                −1.21∗∗∗    −2.02∗∗∗    −1.63∗∗∗    −1.65∗∗∗   −1.14∗∗∗    −0.65∗∗∗
                          (0.11)      (0.18)      (0.14)      (0.15)     (0.12)      (0.08)
    FOMC                  0.64∗∗∗     0.52∗∗∗     0.31∗∗∗     0.23∗∗∗    0.10∗∗∗      0.02
                          (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)     (0.03)      (0.02)
    Factor                1.26∗∗∗     3.11∗∗∗     2.40∗∗∗     2.77∗∗∗    2.07∗∗∗     1.26∗∗∗
                          (0.11)      (0.08)      (0.05)      (0.06)     (0.05)      (0.04)
    R2 no Factor           0.41        0.36        0.35        0.35       0.34        0.29
    R2 with Factor         0.69        0.94        0.96        0.96       0.90        0.77

Table 11: As for Table 3, except with an unrestricted variance-covariance matrix for the background
noise.




                                                38
                     ED1              ED4        2-Year       5-Year      10-Year     30-Year
   Non-Farm           2.89∗∗∗          5.71∗∗∗    4.54∗∗∗      5.30∗∗∗     3.99∗∗∗     2.42∗∗∗
                      (0.16)           (0.25)     (0.21)       (0.22)      (0.17)      (0.11)
   Initial Claims    −0.33∗∗∗         −0.77  ∗∗∗
                                                 −0.59∗∗∗     −0.69∗∗∗    −0.56∗∗∗    −0.34∗∗∗
                      (0.02)           (0.04)     (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.02)      (0.02)
   Durable            0.41∗∗∗          0.93 ∗∗∗
                                                  0.72∗∗∗      0.88∗∗∗     0.62∗∗∗     0.40∗∗∗
                      (0.06)           (0.11)     (0.09)       (0.10)      (0.08)      (0.05)
   Emp Cost           0.74∗∗∗          1.60∗∗∗    1.24∗∗∗      1.60∗∗∗     1.25∗∗∗     0.81∗∗∗
                      (0.11)           (0.23)     (0.18)       (0.22)      (0.17)      (0.11)
   Retail             0.27∗∗∗          0.68 ∗∗∗
                                                  0.42∗∗∗      0.44∗∗∗     0.30∗∗∗      0.08
                      (0.08)           (0.12)     (0.09)       (0.10)      (0.09)      (0.06)
   Retail Ex. Auto    0.43∗∗∗          1.05 ∗∗∗
                                                  0.99∗∗∗      1.26∗∗∗     1.00∗∗∗     0.76∗∗∗
                      (0.07)           (0.13)     (0.10)       (0.11)      (0.09)      (0.06)
   GDP                0.70∗∗∗          1.73∗∗∗    1.31∗∗∗      1.71∗∗∗     1.30∗∗∗     0.76∗∗∗
                      (0.07)           (0.15)     (0.10)       (0.14)      (0.11)      (0.08)
   CPI                 0.01             -0.05      0.01         0.08        0.13       0.18∗∗∗
                      (0.05)           (0.11)     (0.08)       (0.10)      (0.08)      (0.06)
   Core CPI           0.70∗∗∗          1.62∗∗∗    1.17∗∗∗      1.50∗∗∗     1.23∗∗∗     0.78∗∗∗
                      (0.06)           (0.11)     (0.08)       (0.10)      (0.08)      (0.06)
   PPI                0.11∗∗           0.25∗∗∗    0.20∗∗∗      0.18∗∗      0.23∗∗∗     0.16∗∗∗
                      (0.05)           (0.09)     (0.07)       (0.08)      (0.07)      (0.05)
   Core PPI           0.64∗∗∗          1.17 ∗∗∗
                                                  0.81∗∗∗      1.09∗∗∗     0.94∗∗∗     0.71∗∗∗
                      (0.07)           (0.10)     (0.08)       (0.09)      (0.07)      (0.05)
   Hourly Earnings    0.88∗∗∗          1.84 ∗∗∗
                                                  1.45∗∗∗      2.02∗∗∗     1.61∗∗∗     0.97∗∗∗
                      (0.12)           (0.17)     (0.14)       (0.17)      (0.14)      (0.09)
   Unemp             −1.21∗∗∗         −2.02∗∗∗ −1.63∗∗∗       −1.65∗∗∗    −1.14∗∗∗    −0.65∗∗∗
                      (0.11)           (0.18)     (0.14)       (0.15)      (0.12)      (0.08)
   FOMC               0.64∗∗∗          0.52 ∗∗∗
                                                  0.31∗∗∗      0.22∗∗∗     0.09∗∗∗     0.01∗∗∗
                      (0.05)           (0.05)     (0.05)       (0.05)      (0.03)      (0.02)
   fCP I,t            0.97∗∗∗          2.47 ∗∗∗
                                                  1.99∗∗∗      2.39∗∗∗     1.84∗∗∗     1.29∗∗∗
                      (0.08)           (0.11)     (0.08)       (0.09)      (0.07)      (0.06)
   fDurable,t         0.40∗∗           1.69∗∗∗    1.30∗∗∗      1.45∗∗∗     1.14∗∗∗     0.72∗∗∗
                      (0.19)           (0.12)     (0.07)       (0.11)      (0.10)      (0.07)
   fEmpCost,t         0.66∗∗∗          2.21 ∗∗∗
                                                  1.95∗∗∗      2.37∗∗∗     1.75∗∗∗     1.21∗∗∗
                      (0.18)           (0.31)     (0.19)       (0.25)      (0.21)      (0.16)
   fGDP,t             1.21∗∗∗          2.99 ∗∗∗
                                                  2.15∗∗∗      2.72∗∗∗     2.22∗∗∗     1.34∗∗∗
                      (0.35)           (0.23)     (0.19)       (0.22)      (0.18)      (0.12)
   fClaims,t          0.57∗∗∗          1.34∗∗∗    0.93∗∗∗      1.10∗∗∗     0.82∗∗∗     0.48∗∗∗
                      (0.15)           (0.17)     (0.10)       (0.10)      (0.07)      (0.04)
   fN onF arm,t       2.42∗∗∗          5.68 ∗∗∗
                                                  4.53∗∗∗      5.49∗∗∗     4.08∗∗∗     2.45∗∗∗
                      (0.25)           (0.22)     (0.19)       (0.15)      (0.17)      (0.15)
   fP P I,t           1.22∗∗∗          2.26 ∗∗∗
                                                  1.83∗∗∗      2.13∗∗∗     1.76∗∗∗     1.23∗∗∗
                      (0.14)           (0.13)     (0.08)       (0.11)      (0.09)      (0.06)
   fRetail,t          1.20∗∗∗          2.91 ∗∗∗
                                                  2.13∗∗∗      2.29∗∗∗     1.73∗∗∗     1.00∗∗∗
                      (0.18)           (0.20)     (0.11)       (0.11)      (0.09)      (0.07)
   fF OM C,t          1.90∗∗∗          6.17 ∗∗∗
                                                  4.79∗∗∗      4.99∗∗∗     3.40∗∗∗     1.84∗∗∗
                      (0.42)           (0.36)     (0.23)       (0.33)      (0.24)      (0.17)
     2
   R No Factor         0.41             0.36       0.35         0.35        0.34        0.29
     2
   R Release Factors   0.69             0.94 39 0.95            0.96        0.90        0.79

Table 12: As for Table 4, except with an unrestricted variance-covariance matrix for the background
noise.
                                                                                                                                                    corr = 0.68

          4
          2
          0
          −2
          −4




                               1995                    2000                            2005                 2010                                    2015
                                                                                           Date

                                               Factor                                  Non−farm Payroll Surprise (Standardized)



Figure 1: Shows the time series of nonfarm payrolls surprise and the latent factor estimated around
employment report days treating nonfarm payrolls surprise as unobservable.



                         corr = 0.96                                               corr = 0.95                                             corr = 0.94
                                                              −4 −2 0 2 4
                4




                                                                                                                    Employment Cost
                                                                                                                   −3 −2 −1 0 1 2
                                                                Durable Goods
                2
          CPI
                0
                −4 −2




                        −4        −2       0     2      4                         −4       −2       0        2                            −4        −2      0       2       4
                                     Single Factor                                        Single Factor                                               Single Factor
                                                                                                                   Employment Situation




                             corr = 0.92                                           corr = 0.86
                                                                                                                    −4 −2 0 2 4




                                                                                                                                               corr = 1
                2




                                                              −4 −2 0 2 4
                                                                 Initial Claims
          −6 −4 −2 0
               GDP




                        −6      −4     −2     0    2    4                         −4    −2      0       2    4                                 −5           0           5
                                     Single Factor                                        Single Factor                                               Single Factor


                                                                                   corr = 0.94
                                                              −4 −2 0 2 4




                         corr = 0.95                                                                                                       corr = 1
                                                                                                                             4
                4




                                                                 Retail Sales




                                                                                                                   −4 −2 0 2
          −4 −2 0 2




                                                                                                                        FOMC
                PPI




                        −4       −2      0       2      4                         −4     −2     0       2    4                            −5           0        5           10
                                   Single Factor                                          Single Factor                                               Single Factor




Figure 2: Scatter plot of the single factor and individual release factors around relevant event windows.



                                                                                            40
                      corr = 0.91
          4
          2
          0
          2




           
          4




           




               1992      1994       1996     1998   2000     2002       2004      2006    2008
                                                    Date

                                           FOMC Factor              Path Factor



Figure 3: Comparison of Gürkaynak et al. (2005) path factor and the estimated latent factor. Path
factor is standardized to have unit variance. Latent factor estimated from monetary policy surprises and
the asset price responses around monetary policy announcements. The sample is 1992-2007.




                                                    41
