NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT MATTERS TO INDIVIDUAL INVESTORS? EVIDENCE FROM THE HORSE’S
MOUTH
James J. Choi
Adriana Z. Robertson
Working Paper 25019
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25019

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018, Revised February 2020
We thank Ravi Bansal, Nicholas Barberis, Sebastien Betermier, Hector Calvo Pardo, John
Campbell, Raj Chetty, Joao Cocco, Lorenzo Garlappi, Richard Evans, Vincent Glode, William
Goetzmann, Luigi Guiso, Jonathan Ingersoll, Ravi Jagannathan, Marcin Kacperczyk, Panu
Kalmi, Raymond Kan, Alina Lerman, Tobias Moskowitz, Stefan Nagel, Monika Piazzesi,
Jonathan Reuter, Thomas Rietz, Harvey Rosen, Robert Shiller, Tao Shu, Paolo Sodini, Matthew
Spiegel, Adam Szeidl, Richard Thaler, Selale Tuzel, Raman Uppal, Annette Vissing-Jørgensen,
Jessica Wachter, Stephen Wu, Amir Yaron, Jianfeng Yu, and seminar participants at the
American Finance Association Annual Meeting, Canadian Economic Association Annual
Conference, CRC Workshop on Individual Heterogeneity, Baruch, Baylor, CEPR Household
Finance Workshop, Cornell, Drexel, FIRS Conference, FSU SunTrust Beach Conference,
Helsinki Finance Summit on Investor Behavior, University of Miami, NBER Behavioral Finance
Meeting, NYU, USC, and Yale for their comments. All shortcomings in the survey and analysis
are our own. The authors have no relevant or material financial interests related to the research in
this paper. No organization had the right to review this paper prior to publication. IRB approval
was obtained from Yale University. This research was supported by a Whitebox Advisors
research grant administered through the Yale International Center for Finance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by James J. Choi and Adriana Z. Robertson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Matters to Individual Investors? Evidence from the Horse’s Mouth
James J. Choi and Adriana Z. Robertson
NBER Working Paper No. 25019
September 2018, Revised February 2020
JEL No. D14,G11
ABSTRACT
We survey a representative sample of U.S. individuals about how well leading academic theories
describe their financial beliefs and decisions. We find substantial support for many factors
hypothesized to affect portfolio equity share, particularly background risk, investment horizon,
rare disasters, transactional factors, and fixed costs of stock market participation. Individuals tend
to believe that past mutual fund performance is a good signal of stock-picking skill, actively
managed funds do not suffer from diseconomies of scale, value stocks are safer and do not have
higher expected returns, and high-momentum stocks are riskier and do have higher expected
returns.

James J. Choi
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
james.choi@yale.edu
Adriana Z. Robertson
University of Toronto, Faculty of Law
78 Queen's Park
Toronto, ON, M5S 2C5
adriana.robertson@utoronto.ca

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25019

The finance literature offers no shortage of theories about investor motivations and beliefs, which
translate into choices that in aggregate determine asset prices. However, testing these theories with
observational data has been difficult. Finding empirical variation in a hypothesized factor that is
incontrovertibly uncorrelated with potentially relevant unobserved variables is often impossible.
If we instead evaluate models based primarily on their ability to match endogenous moments in
the data, we run up against the difficulty that predictions of competing models are often similar or
identical (Fama (1970), Cochrane (2017), Kozak, Nagel, and Santosh (2018)).1
In this paper, we take a different approach: we ask a nationally representative sample of
1,013 U.S. individuals in the RAND American Life Panel how well leading academic theories
describe the way they decided what fraction of their portfolio to invest in equities, their beliefs
about actively managed mutual funds, and their beliefs about the cross-section of individual stock
returns. Our questions aim to test key assumptions of leading theories about investor motivations
and beliefs more directly than the usual method of trying to infer the validity of these assumptions
by examining downstream outcomes. Because we test a wide range of theories on the same sample
using the same research design, it is easier to make apples-to-apples comparisons of different
theories. High-wealth investors constitute only a small fraction of our sample, so our results are
more informative about individual choices and beliefs than asset prices.2
We find substantial support for many of the factors that have been hypothesized to affect
portfolio equity share. Forty-eight percent of employed respondents say that the amount of time
left until their retirement is a very or extremely important factor in determining the current
percentage of their investible financial assets held in stocks, and 36% of all respondents say the
same about the amount of time left until a significant nonretirement expense. Background risks
such as health risk (47% of all respondents), labor income risk (42% of employed respondents),
and home value risk (29% of homeowners) are frequently rated as very or extremely important.
Many people say that discomfort with the market is a very or extremely important determinant of
their equity share, citing lack of trust in market participants (37% of all respondents), lack of
knowledge about how to invest (36% of all respondents), and lack of a trustworthy adviser (31%

1

Distinguishing between models that are observationally equivalent in existing data can be important because they
may have different welfare or policy implications. For example, knowing that the stock market’s expected returns
vary because of irrational cashflow forecasts instead of rational time-varying risk aversion would have profound
implications.
2
Bender et al. (2019) administer a survey similar to that in this paper on a sample of wealthy individuals.

1

of all respondents). Transactional considerations that have received scant attention in the academic
literature—needing to have enough cash on hand to pay for routine expenses (47% of all
respondents) and concern that stocks take too long to convert to cash in an emergency (29% of all
respondents)—are salient. Personal experience of living through stock market returns and personal
experience investing in the stock market are rated as very or extremely important by 27% and 26%
of respondents, respectively. Nonparticipation in the stock market is frequently driven by the fixed
costs of participation (49% of nonparticipants) and not liking to think about one’s finances (37%
of nonparticipants).
Moving to motives coming from representative-agent asset pricing models, we find
particularly strong support for rare disaster theories, with 45% of all respondents describing
concern about economic disasters as a very or extremely important factor. However, there is also
significant evidence for the importance of long-run aggregate consumption growth risk (30%),
long-run aggregate consumption growth volatility risk (26%), consumption composition risk
(29%), loss aversion (28%), internal habit (27%), and ambiguity/parameter uncertainty (27%).
Consumption commitments, which can be a microfoundation for a representative agent who has
external habit utility, garner significant support as well (36%). The stock market’s
contemporaneous return covariance with the marginal utility of money—the fundamental
consideration in many modern asset pricing and portfolio choice theories—is rated as very or
extremely important by 35% of respondents. Similar numbers describe return covariance with
contemporaneous aggregate consumption growth (30%), with contemporaneous aggregate
consumption growth volatility shocks (29%), and with their own marginal utility of consumption
(29%) as very or extremely important.
Although many factors appear to determine portfolio equity shares, the importance of each
factor is not distributed haphazardly within an individual. Among the 34 factors that were rated by
every respondent, only six principal components suffice to explain 54% of the variance in whether
they were rated as very or extremely important. These components can be roughly interpreted as
corresponding to 1) neoclassical asset pricing factors, 2) factors related to return predictability and
retirement savings plan defaults, 3) factors related to consumption needs, habit, and human capital,
4) factors related to discomfort with the market, 5) factors related to advice, and 6) factors related
to personal experience.

2

Turning to mutual funds, 51% of those who have purchased an actively managed equity
mutual fund say that the belief that the active fund would give them a higher average return than
a passive fund was very or extremely important in that purchase decision. However, 27% of active
fund investors say that a hedging motive—the belief that the active fund would have lower
unconditional expected returns than the passive fund but higher returns when the economy does
poorly—was very or extremely important. The recommendation of an investment adviser was very
or extremely important for 48% of active fund investors’ decision to buy an active fund. Consistent
with Berk and Green (2004), 46% of all respondents agree or strongly agree that a fund having
outperformed the market in the past is strong evidence that its manager has good stock-picking
skills. But inconsistent with Berk and Green (2004), only 18% agree or strongly agree that funds
have a harder time beating the market if they manage more assets.
Finally, collective expectations about the cross-sectional relationship between stock
characteristics and expected returns do not always match historical correlations. Twenty-eight
percent of respondents expect value stocks to normally have lower expected returns than growth
stocks, a proportion not statistically distinguishable from the 25% who believe the reverse. On the
other hand, consistent with the historical relationship, more respondents expect high-momentum
stocks to normally have higher expected returns than low-momentum stocks (24%) instead of the
reverse (14%). Forty-four percent expect value stocks to normally be less risky than growth stocks,
while only 14% believe the opposite. Twenty-five percent expect high-momentum stocks to
normally be riskier, while 14% expect them to be less risky.
Surveys on beliefs, motivations, and decision-making processes remain uncommon in
financial economics research despite the deep and enduring influence of Lintner’s (1956) classic
survey work on corporate dividend policy and Bewley’s (1999) interviews probing the reasons for
wage rigidity. Some notable recent exceptions in corporate finance that each seek to test a wide
range of academic theories in an area are Graham and Harvey (2001), Brav et al. (2005), Graham,
Harvey, and Rajgopal (2005), Gompers, Kaplan, and Mukharlyamov (2016), and Gompers et al.
(2016). Survey studies of investment professionals with a similarly wide theoretical scope include
Cheung and Wong (2000), Cheung and Chinn (2001), and Cheung, Chinn, and Marsh (2004). We
view our paper as a contribution to household finance in the spirit of these earlier papers.
Survey methodologies, of course, have weaknesses. Survey respondents might not be
highly motivated to give accurate responses, and the meaning of each response category (e.g.,

3

“very important”) probably differs across respondents. However, to the extent that such
measurement error is white noise, the ordinal ranking of importance and agreement ratings will
still be informative. More fundamentally, individuals might not know the true motivations for their
decisions because they have not introspected seriously enough, their memory has faded, or they
were subliminally influenced. A related critique is the argument that respondents may not regard
a factor as important but nonetheless invest “as if” it were (Friedman (1953)). Under this view, the
fact that an assumption is false is unimportant as long as it generates accurate predictions.
Our survey captures how individuals consciously perceive themselves to be making
financial decisions. Although individuals may not have full insight into the true reasons behind
their decisions, we argue that it is worthwhile to understand these perceptions for at least five
reasons. First, an individual’s perceptions are unlikely to be entirely unrelated to her true decisionmaking process. We suspect that even the most ardent acolyte of Friedman does not dismiss
conversations with friends and family members as completely uninformative about their thinking
and motivations. A model based on assumptions that are closer to the truth may be more likely to
successfully predict behavior out of sample; as Bewley (1999, p. 10) notes, “a false or unrealistic
set of assumptions might by accident perfectly predict the known phenomena, but prove
treacherous when conditions change.” Bewley’s concern is germane to many finance applications,
where theories are often reverse-engineered to fit known phenomena in data and then tested using
the same data. Hausman (1992) argues that having no interest in the accuracy of a theory’s
assumptions is akin to relying entirely on a road test to predict the future driving performance of a
used car and disregarding observations of what is under its hood. Harris and Keane (1998) find
that relative to a model that tries to predict insurance choices using only plan attributes, adding
individuals’ survey responses about how important these attributes are to them doubles the model’s
predictive power.
Second, perceptions and beliefs can help us choose between theories that have similar
predictions for prices and quantities but very different implications for our understanding of the
world. For example, a set of stocks could have lower expected returns because of over-optimism
about their cashflows or because they are hedges against some risk. The hedging story is less
plausible if investors report that these stocks have higher expected returns or higher risk.
Third, individuals’ perceptions of their decision-making process affect how they forecast
their future actions, which itself is an input into their actions today. Fourth, these perceptions can

4

affect an individual’s demand for debiasing mechanisms, information, and advice. Finally, we
believe that it is inherently interesting to know what individuals believe about themselves and the
reasons for their behavior. Barberis et al. (2015) argue that theory should endeavor to match survey
measures of investor beliefs.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section I discusses the process of
designing our questions and our survey sample. Section II presents our questions and results
relating to individuals’ equity allocation decisions. Section III presents the same for actively
managed equity mutual funds. Section IV discusses our questions and results regarding investors’
perceptions of value and momentum stocks. Section V concludes. The survey response data and
an Internet Appendix containing the full survey text are available on the Journal of Finance
website.
I. Survey Design and Sample
Our goal was to test a broad swath of the leading theories on the determinants of portfolio
equity share and the reasons individuals invest in actively managed mutual funds, and to get a
general sense of how individuals think about the cross-section of stock returns. We designed each
question to map as closely as possible to the applicable theory or concept while excluding other
theories or concepts and remaining comprehensible to a layperson.
We pilot-tested our survey questions using U.S. respondents recruited on Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk online labor market platform. To confirm that our respondents understood the
questions, we included “I don’t understand” as an answer option. We also included a free response
question at the end of the equity allocation section that gave respondents an opportunity to write
in additional factors that we had not mentioned in the survey. Based on the responses, we revised
our questions and added several new ones to the survey. We then ran a second pilot using
Mechanical Turk to confirm that these new questions were understood by respondents.
Next, we solicited feedback on the questions from other researchers, particularly those
associated with the theories we wished to test. After a second round of revisions, we ran a third
Mechanical Turk pilot to confirm that the new questions were clear to respondents. For the
overwhelming majority of the questions in our final pilot (61 out of 68), fewer than 1% of
respondents reported that they did not understand the question. Even the least understood question
had a “do not understand” rate of under 3% of respondents.

5

We conducted our final survey on the RAND American Life Panel (ALP), a sample of U.S.
adults. Panelists are paid to answer survey questions. The payment offered is based on the
anticipated time it will take to answer the survey, at a rate of $40 per hour and a minimum of $3
per survey. RAND charged us $34,500 to circulate a survey invitation to 2,148 members of the
ALP, with a target sample size of about 1,000 survey completions. Because we reached the target
number of survey completions sooner than expected, the survey invitation was closed early. Of
those invited, 1,255 read our informed consent disclosure and 1,202 gave consent. Out of the 1,202
who consented, 1,080 reported being “the person in your family most knowledgeable about your
assets, debts, and retirement planning,” which is a screen based on the criterion used to identify
the “financial respondent” in the Health and Retirement Study. An additional 27 reported sharing
that status equally with a spouse or partner. These 1,080 + 27 = 1,107 were then asked if they
would like to answer additional questions in exchange for additional monetary compensation.3 Of
the 1,098 who opted to do, we drop 46 individuals because they did not answer any of our
substantive questions, and an additional 39 because they gave identical responses to all of the
equity allocation factor questions, leaving 1,013 in our final sample.
The surveys were completed between December 14, 2016 and December 27, 2016. We
anticipated that the survey would take approximately 10 minutes to complete, and the median
respondent actually took 13 minutes. Table I reports summary statistics of respondent
characteristics.4 Responses are weighted using raked sample weights provided by the ALP to form

3

When asking the question about financial knowledge, we gave no indication that identifying oneself as a primary
financial decision-maker would result in an opportunity to earn more money. Consistent with our finding that a high
fraction of respondents report that they are the person most knowledgeable about their finances, a 2014 Money
magazine survey found that among married adults ages 25 or over with household income of at least $50,000, 97% of
men and 79% of women say that they are the primary or co-equal decision-maker on investments
(http://time.com/money/2800576/love-money-by-the-numbers, accessed March 16, 2017). We also computed the
results separately for unmarried individuals and find that their answers are highly correlated with those of married
individuals. For example, the correlation is 0.87 pooling across the fraction reporting that an equity allocation factor
is very or extremely important, the fraction reporting that a factor is very or extremely important in the decision to
buy an actively managed mutual fund, the fraction reporting that they agree or strongly agree with an empirical claim
about actively managed mutual funds, the fraction reporting that a stock characteristic is associated with higher risk,
and the fraction reporting that a stock characteristic is associated with higher expected returns.
4
The ALP measures income using two questions. In the first, participants choose among income categories ranging
from “Less than $5,000” to “$75,000 or more.” The second question, directed only to those who said their income
was at least $75,000 in the first question, asks participants to choose among income categories that range from
“$75,000 - $99,999” to “$200,000 or more.” In our sample, 80 participants said they earned less than $75,000 in the
first question but also have a response recorded for the second question. In these cases, we use only the participant’s
answer to the first income question.

6

a nationally representative sample of primary financial decision-makers.5 All percentages reported
hereafter are weighted percentages.
II. Equity Share of Portfolio
The first section of the survey asks about the factors that determine the fraction of the
individual’s wealth invested in equities. We begin by asking respondents the value of their
investible financial assets6 and what percentage of these assets is invested in stocks, either directly
or through mutual funds. We classify the 41% of respondents who report a zero allocation to
equities as nonparticipants, and the 59% who report a positive allocation as participants.7
We next ask participants, “How important are the following factors in determining the
percentage of your investable financial assets that is currently invested in stocks?” Nonparticipants
are asked, “How important are the following factors in causing you to not currently own any
stocks?” The options for each question are “not important at all,” “a little important,” “moderately
important,” “very important,” and “extremely important.”8
The candidate factors are presented to all respondents in the same order. For the exposition
that follows, we group these factors into six categories: background risks and assets, social and
personal factors, expected return beliefs, factors from neoclassical asset pricing models,
nonstandard preferences, and miscellaneous factors. When the direction in which a particular
factor should push the equity share does not seem self-evident, we ask respondents follow-up
questions regarding the directional effect of the factor.
In Table II, we present a high-level summary of the results across all categories to see
which factors are most important globally. The first column shows the percent of respondents who
report that a given factor is very or extremely important. The second column shows the percent
who report a given factor to be moderately, very, or extremely important. The third column shows

5

Raking was based on gender, age, race/ethnicity, education, number of household members, and household income.
See https://alpdata.rand.org/index.php?page=weights for more details.
6
We indicate that this value should include “bank accounts, brokerage accounts, retirement savings accounts,
investment properties, etc., but NOT the value of the home(s) you live in or any private businesses you own.”
7
This rate of stock market participation is somewhat higher than the 48.8% reported in the 2013 Survey of Consumer
Finances (Bricker et al. (2014)). Seven respondents did not answer the equity allocation question. These respondents
were asked about the factors determining the “percentage of your financial assets that is currently invested in stocks”
and were not asked about any factors that were asked only of either participants or nonparticipants.
8
The response options were presented in ascending order of importance to all respondents. There is some evidence
that survey responses are biased towards response options that appear earlier (e.g., Malhotra (2008)). Such a primacy
effect would lead us to systematically underestimate each factor’s importance.

7

the mean rating, where each possible response is given a numerical value between 1 (“not
important at all”) and 5 (“extremely important”). The fourth column shows the average value of a
standardized variable designed to capture whether a respondent indicated that a factor is important
relative to the other factors. This variable is constructed by subtracting the mean numerical value
of the respondent’s ratings from the numerical value of each response and dividing by the standard
deviation of that respondent’s numerical rating values. A standardized variable may be more
comparable across respondents if each individual interprets the rating scale differently. The
correlations between the first measure and each of the other three are 0.90 or higher, so for brevity
we focus on the percent who report a factor to be very or extremely important.
Table II shows that there is variation in ratings, but no single dominant factor drives equity
share decisions. Particularly important drivers specific to stock market nonparticipation are fixed
costs of participation (49% of nonparticipants indicate that their wealth being too small to invest
in stocks is a very or extremely important factor) and not liking to think about one’s finances (37%
of nonparticipants). Across both participants and nonparticipants, investment horizon as captured
by years left until retirement (48% of employed respondents), background risk of expenses due to
illness/injury (47% of all respondents) and labor income (42% of employed respondents), the need
to maintain cash on hand to pay for routine expenses (47% of all respondents), concern about rare
economic disasters (45% of all respondents), and lack of trust in market participants (37% of all
respondents) are frequently cited as very or extremely important.
At the other end of the spectrum, external habit, stock market returns before the
respondent’s birth, advice from peers and the media, rules of thumb, and failure to follow through
on intentions to invest in stocks are particularly unlikely (16% of respondents or less) to be rated
as very or extremely important. We note that consumption commitments, which Chetty and Szeidl
(2016) argue are a microfoundation for a representative agent who has external habit utility,
garners significant support (36% of all respondents). A large number of other factors are very or
extremely important to between 17% and 36% of respondents.
How likely would the observed variance in responses be if respondents were choosing
randomly? Let {p1, …, p5} be the empirically observed probabilities of the five response options,
pooled across all of the factors in Table II. We conduct a Monte Carlo analysis in which, in each
simulation run, each respondent to a question draws a response randomly and independently from
a distribution where the probability of each response is represented by {p1, …, p5}. We

8

overwhelmingly reject the null hypothesis of independent and random choice—the actual acrossfactor standard deviation in the fraction responding very or extremely important is 2.5 times larger
than the highest simulated standard deviation in 1,000 runs. As we discuss in Section II.H,
principal component analysis on the survey responses reveals a correlation structure among
responses that is economically sensible. We interpret both of these results as evidence that
respondents are not simply choosing responses at random, but rather are answering our questions
in a thoughtful and meaningful way.
In the tables that follow, we report statistics not only for the full sample, but also separately
by stock market participation status, by whether investible assets are at least $100,000 (close to
the median respondent’s assets), and by whether the respondent has a bachelor’s degree. We
consider the latter two splits because wealthier investors have a larger impact on prices, so their
motives may be of particular interest, and more educated individuals may be less subject to
behavioral biases, so their motives may provide more guidance for normative models. However,
for the sake of brevity, for the most part we do not discuss these subsample results.

A. Background Risks and Assets
We begin by exploring how risks and assets outside the stock market affect allocations to
equity. Table III presents the exact text used to describe each factor and the percent of respondents
who report that the factor is very or extremely important in determining their current portfolio
equity share.
For most people, their largest asset is their human capital, which is subject to wage and
health risk. If these risks are correlated with stock returns, then they should affect the willingness
to hold stocks (Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson (1992)). Even if the risks are uncorrelated with
stock returns, the optimal allocation to stocks could still decrease in principle (Pratt and
Zeckhauser (1987), Kimball (1993), Gollier and Pratt (1996)). The empirical literature on
background labor income risk generally finds negative effects on equity allocations (Guiso,
Jappelli, and Terlizzese (1996), Hochguertel (2003), Angerer and Lam (2009), Palia, Qi, and Wu
(2014), Schmidt (2016), Fagereng, Guiso, and Pistaferri (2018)), although the magnitude of these
estimates is often small, perhaps due to the econometric problems discussed by Fagereng, Guiso,
and Pistaferri (2018). Rosen and Wu (2004) also find that households in poor health hold a lower
share in risky assets. To capture portfolio effects of human capital risk, we ask respondents who

9

are currently employed about the importance of unemployment and wage growth risk for their
equity allocation decision (labeled in Table III as “labor income risk”). We ask all respondents
about the importance of the risk of expenses related to illness or injury to themselves or a family
member (“risk of illness/injury”).
A person’s human capital wealth generally declines with age, as the sum of expected future
labor income decreases with age. This should affect the allocation of one’s financial portfolio
because the financial portfolio share of the total wealth portfolio (financial plus human capital
wealth) changes (Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson (1992)). We therefore ask employed respondents
about the importance of the number of years remaining until retirement (“years left until
retirement”). Because time until retirement can affect portfolio choice even if respondents fail to
consider the human capital portion of their total wealth—for example, due to a belief in timediversification or negative serial correlation of stock returns (Barberis (2000))—we separately ask
about the importance of wages remaining to be earned in one’s lifetime relative to current financial
wealth (“human capital”) to isolate the human capital channel. In a model with intermediate-period
consumption, Wachter (2002) shows that the time remaining until a significant nonretirement
expense can also affect portfolio risk-taking. Accordingly, we also ask all respondents, whether
employed or not, about the importance of time remaining until a significant nonretirement expense
such as a car purchase, down payment on a home, or school tuition (“time until significant
nonretirement expense”).
Housing represents a large portion of the typical homeowner’s wealth, and Flavin and
Yamashita (2002), Cocco (2004), and Yao and Zhang (2005) present models in which housing
affects the demand for stocks. On the one hand, housing price risk crowds out stockholding as a
fraction of one’s total wealth portfolio. On the other hand, because a house diversifies against stock
risk, homeownership can increase stockholding as a fraction of one’s financial portfolio. We test
both of these channels, asking homeowners about concern that one’s home value might fall (“home
value risk”) and asking stock market participants about the belief that one can take more risks in
one’s financial portfolio because one’s non-financial assets, such as a home or a small business,
serve as a cushion against financial portfolio losses (“non-financial assets cushion losses in
financial assets”). We also ask about the importance of risk in non-financial assets other than the
home, such as small businesses (“non-financial risk”). Heaton and Lucas (2000) find that
households with high and volatile proprietary business income have lower stockholdings.

10

The last type of background risk that we investigate is inflation. Although the view that
stocks are a hedge against inflation has intuitive appeal because stocks are claims on real assets,
early empirical studies found that stock returns are negatively correlated with inflation (Lintner
(1975), Bodie (1976), Nelson (1976), Fama and Schwert (1977), Gultekin (1983)). Later studies
document that a long position in stocks hedges against inflation over longer horizons (e.g.,
Boudoukh and Richardson (1993), Solnik and Solnik (1997)). We ask stock market participants
about the importance of the belief that when their living expenses increase unexpectedly, the stock
market will tend to rise (“stocks are an inflation hedge”).
We ask one question only of nonparticipants, namely, whether the amount of money that
they have available to invest is an important factor in their decision not to invest in stocks (“wealth
too small”). Vissing-Jørgensen (2003) argues that fixed costs of stock market participation can
explain both nonparticipation and why it declines with wealth. We investigate what specifically
comprises these fixed costs in Section II.G.
Table III summarizes the results for these factors. At the high end, 49% of nonparticipants
say that not having enough money available to invest in stocks is very or extremely important in
their decision not to invest in stocks. Somewhat surprisingly, 19% of nonparticipants with at least
$100,000 of investible assets also feel this way, although this could be because other factors lead
them to perceive the per-dollar benefit of stockholding to be low, thus requiring a large amount of
wealth to make stockholding worthwhile.9
Among employed respondents, 48% report that the number of years remaining until
retirement is very or extremely important in determining their equity share. Barberis (2000) shows
that a longer investment horizon can increase the optimal equity allocation due to mean-reversion
of returns or decrease it due to greater parameter uncertainty. We therefore ask those who say this
factor is at least moderately important a follow-up question about how an increase in their time to
retirement would affect their equity allocation over the next year (for participants) or the likelihood
of their investing in stocks over the next year (for nonparticipants). Because we do not want the

9

Of those who rated “wealth too small” at least a moderately important factor, we further ask, “What is the least
amount of money you would need to have available to make it worthwhile to invest in stocks?” Among those who
rated “wealth too small” to be very or extremely important, the median respondent chose the category “$1,000 $4,999.” However, this response is difficult to interpret because 31% of these participants chose a category that is
smaller than the category they indicated for the amount of investible wealth that they had. One possibility is that some
participants interpreted “available” money to mean something other than all of their investible assets (for example,
money they would not need to have on hand for expenditures like a down payment in the near future).

11

increase in working life to be associated with a negative wealth shock, the scenario we present is
one in which, tomorrow, the respondent decides to retire 10 years later than previously planned
because she enjoys working so much.
Table IV shows the distribution of responses among those who reported that years until
retirement is very or extremely important. Increases in equity share or equity investment likelihood
in response to a longer investment horizon are nearly 10 times as likely as decreases (39% versus
4%). Surprisingly, 34% of respondents who say that time to retirement is very or extremely
important report that an increase in that time would have no effect on their equity allocation (or
their likelihood of participating). There are several potential explanations for this result. First, it
may be the case that even though an increase in investment horizon would lead these respondents
to eventually change their equity share, they would not do so during the one-year period we asked
about. Strong inertia in individuals’ portfolio allocations has been extensively documented in other
contexts (Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988), Choi et al. (2002, 2004)). Second, it may be the case
that the optimal policy function with respect to investment horizon is flat locally for the 34% but
is not flat globally. Third, even though we aim to capturethe partial derivative of equity share with
respect to investment horizon, respondents may be reporting the total derivative. Since a
lengthening of expected working life could be accompanied by other economic changes, the total
derivative may be zero even if the partial derivative is not. Finally, it is possible that some
respondents do not understand the question or answer carelessly. Respondents do seem to struggle
with the question—the nonresponse rate of 14% is unusually high relative to the nonresponse rates
to our other questions (see, for example, Tables XIII and X), and 9% indicate that they do not
know what effect a lengthening of expected working life would have—perhaps because it is about
an unfamiliar scenario that they had not considered before.
Returning to Table III, we find that the human capital fraction of total wealth is somewhat
less important than investment horizon, with 36% of respondents reporting that their financial
wealth relative to expected future wages is a very or extremely important factor. Close behind is
the number of years until a large nonretirement expenditure, which 36% of respondents describe
as very or extremely important. Two background risks stand out from among the six we ask about.
In particular, 47% of respondents report that the risk of illness or injury is very or extremely
important, even though this risk is unlikely to have much perceived or actual correlation with
equity returns, and 42% of employed respondents report that labor income risk is very or extremely

12

important. Home value risk is somewhat less salient, but is still very or extremely important to
29% of homeowner respondents. The remaining three background factors—stocks as an inflation
hedge, non-financial assets as a cushion, and non-financial risks—are each described as very or
extremely important by 19% to 20% of the relevant respondents.

B. Social and Personal Factors
We ask our respondents about 11 social and personal factors. Religion has been
hypothesized to influence economic risk-taking since at least Weber (1930). A large body of
empirical literature has found that Catholics are less risk averse than Protestants (Barsky et al.
(1997), Hilary and Hui (2009), Kumar (2009), Kumar, Page, and Spalt (2011), Shu, Sulaeman,
and Yeung (2012), Schneider and Spalt (2016, 2017), Benjamin, Choi, and Fisher (2016)). We
therefore ask respondents whether their religious beliefs, values, and experiences play an important
role in their equity allocation decision (“religion”).
Many authors argue that religion affects trust (e.g., Putnam (1993), Guiso, Sapienza, and
Zingales (2003), Benjamin, Choi, and Fisher (2016)), and Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008)
present evidence that a lack of trust in other market participants is an important determinant of
reluctance to invest in stocks. In light of this work, we ask respondents about the importance of
the concern that companies, managers, brokers, or other market participants may cheat them out
of their investments (“low trust in market participants”). Closely related is difficulty finding a
trustworthy investment adviser (“lack of trustworthy adviser”). We additionally ask about the
importance of advice from a professional financial adviser that the respondent hired (“advice from
professional financial adviser”), advice from a friend, family member, or coworker (“advice from
friend, family, or coworker”), advice from media sources (“advice from media”), and a general
lack of knowledge about how to invest (“lack of knowledge about how to invest”).
Extant literature also provides evidence on the role of personal experience in financial
decision-making. Malmendier and Nagel (2011) show that households that have lived through high
stock market return periods invest more in stocks, and Vissing-Jørgensen (2003) finds that the
idiosyncratic component of an investor’s own portfolio return positively affects his expectation of
future aggregate stock market returns. To investigate whether individuals are conscious of these
effects, we ask our respondents about the importance of feelings, attitudes, and beliefs about the
stock market gotten from living through stock market returns, regardless of whether they were

13

invested in stocks at the time (“experience of living through returns”), and the importance of
feelings, attitudes, and beliefs about the stock market gotten from personal experience investing in
the stock market (“personal experience investing in stock market”).
We ask nonparticipants about two additional personal factors. First, we ask about the
importance of “financial phobia” (Burchell (2003), Shapiro and Burchell (2012)) to their
nonparticipation (“don’t like to think about my finances”). Second, we ask about the importance
of having intended to invest in stocks but simply not having gotten around to it (“intended to invest
in stocks but never got around to it”), perhaps due to time-inconsistent procrastination (Laibson
(1997), O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999)).
Table V shows that a general lack of comfort with financial markets is a significant factor
influencing investment choices. The most commonly cited factor is low trust in market
participants, which is rated very or extremely important by 37% of respondents. Also common are
financial phobia (37% of nonparticipants), a lack of knowledge about how to invest (36%), and a
lack of a trustworthy adviser (31%). Experience of living though returns, advice from a
professional financial adviser, personal experience investing in the stock market, and religion are
all rated as very or extremely important by 26% to 27% of respondents. Relatively few people say
that advice from peers or the media is very or extremely important (15% and 12%, respectively),
and the least important factor is delay despite an intention to invest in stock (3% of
nonparticipants). Prior evidence shows that individuals’ financial choices exhibit considerable
inertia (Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988), Choi et al. (2002, 2004)), but people do eventually
move away from their status quo to what they perceive to be their optimum (Carroll et al. (2009)),
even if it takes them a few years. Therefore, in a sample that includes many middle-aged and older
adults, it may not be unexpected that procrastination is a relatively small determinant of stock
market nonparticipation.10

10

We asked non-participants who rated “intended to invest but never got around to it” at least moderately important
follow-up questions about which factors were important in their not getting around to investing in stocks. Appendix
Table AI shows the distribution of responses for those who rated “intended to invest but never got around to it” very
or extremely important. Only 18% said that procrastination for no good reason was very or extremely important. The
most salient factors were having less money available now than when they originally planned on investing in stocks
(42%) and discovering that it was costlier to invest in stocks than they expected (37%).

14

C. Expected Return Beliefs
We ask about the role of four categories of beliefs about expected stock market returns.
We begin with the belief that low stock market returns tend to be followed by more low stock
market returns (“stock market returns have momentum”). DeBondt (1993), Fisher and Statman
(2000), Vissing-Jørgensen (2003), and Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) find robust survey evidence
that individuals hold extrapolative beliefs about aggregate stock market returns on average. If
individuals understand the logic of hedging and its applicability here, positive return
autocorrelation should cause the unconditional willingness to hold equities to decrease, since poor
stock returns are associated with worse future investment opportunities. We also ask our
respondents whether a belief that low stock market returns tend to be followed by high stock
market returns plays an important role in their portfolio choice (“stock market returns meanrevert”). Mean-reversion implies that stocks are a hedge, so unconditionally, should make people
more willing to hold stocks (Barberis (2000)).
If individuals believe that expected returns are time-varying, then their equity share at a
particular point in time may be affected by their view that expected returns are particularly high or
low at that time. We therefore ask respondents whether a belief that the returns they can expect to
earn from investing in stocks right now are lower than usual plays an important role in their
portfolio choice (“expected stock returns lower than usual right now”). We also ask stock market
participants only the reverse question about expected returns being higher than usual (“expected
stock returns higher than usual right now”).
None of the above factors are rated by more than 25% of respondents as very or extremely
important (Table VI). The most popular—the belief that expected returns are currently lower than
usual—is described as very or extremely important by 25% of respondents and 25% of stock
market participants. The converse, that expected returns are currently higher than usual, finds
support among 24% of stock market participants. This balance of opinions about the market risk
premium may be partially due to the fact that the S&P 500 return in 2016, the year of the survey,
was 12%, close to its historical arithmetic average. There is also little difference between the
fraction who say that positive return autocorrelation is very or extremely important (19%) and the
fraction who say that negative return autocorrelation is very or extremely important (17%).
The fact that similar proportions report positive versus negative return autocorrelations to
be very or extremely important does not necessarily contradict the fact that stock return

15

expectations are extrapolative on average. Most individuals probably have not learned the
implications of return autocorrelations for hedging demand, and to the extent that nonzero return
autocorrelations are mentioned in popular financial advice, the emphasis is usually on negative
return autocorrelations, which cause stocks to be less risky for long-run investors. Individuals may
also not realize that their beliefs generally follow an extrapolative pattern, but instead reason that
“this time is different” each time they revise their beliefs.

D. Neoclassical Asset Pricing Factors
We investigate nine factors that have been hypothesized to affect the equity premium in
neoclassical asset pricing models with a representative agent. Because in equilibrium, the
representative agent must be willing to hold the market portfolio, these theories are implicitly
theories of portfolio choice.
A foundational feature of standard asset pricing models is that assets that tend to have low
payoffs when the marginal utility of money is high are less attractive than assets that tend to have
low payoffs when the marginal utility of money is low. The consumption-based capital asset
pricing model (CCAPM) (Rubenstein (1976), Breeden and Litzenberger (1978), Lucas (1978),
Breeden (1979)), where an asset’s return covariance with consumption growth determines its risk
premium, is a special case. To investigate whether individuals consciously think in these terms,
we ask each respondent to rate the importance of both of these factors (“return covariance with
marginal utility of money” and “return covariance with marginal utility of consumption,”
respectively). We did not want to tell respondents that the stock market’s return actually covaries
positively with, say, consumption growth, as we wanted to elicit whether they believed that this is
true and this had a significant effect on their asset allocation. Therefore, we ask respondents to rate
the importance of their “concern” about this covariance. If a given respondent believed that the
stated object of concern was not true, then her natural response would be to report that concern
about it is not important.
The failure of the CCAPM is well documented (Mehra and Prescott (1985)), leading to the
other models that we test in this section. Motivated by the rare disaster model of Rietz (1988) and
Barro (2006), we ask our respondents about the importance of a concern that a dollar invested in
stocks will lose more money than a dollar deposited in a bank savings account during an economic

16

disaster (“rare disaster risk”).11 Using the cutoff of Barro and Ursúa (2012), we specify that the
disaster in question is one in which the U.S. economy’s annual output drops by more than 10%.
In contrast to concerns about a sudden drop in output during disasters, the long-run risk
model (Bansal and Yaron (2004)) emphasizes concerns that stock returns tend to be low when bad
news arrives about the expectation and volatility of consumption growth over the long run. We
separately ask about the importance of stock return covariance with news about aggregate
consumption growth over the next year (“risk of aggregate consumption over next year”)—which
could be viewed as a nearly contemporaneous covariance—and about the importance of stock
return covariance with news about aggregate consumption growth over the five-year period
starting one year in the future (“risk of long-run aggregate consumption”). We choose the fiveyear period because the half-life of expected growth shocks is about 2.25 years in the Bansal, Kiku,
and Yaron (2012) calibration.
We ask analogous questions about economic uncertainty—the importance of stock return
covariance with news about aggregate consumption uncertainty over the next year (“risk of
aggregate consumption volatility over next year”) and stock return covariance with news about
aggregate consumption uncertainty over the 10-year period starting one year in the future (“risk of
long-run aggregate consumption volatility”). The decade-long period reflects the high persistence
of volatility in Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2012).
Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) posit that households have nonseparable preferences
over housing and a numeraire good, which leads them to fear “composition risk”—changes to the
relative share of housing in their consumption basket. In their model, assets that have low
numeraire payoffs when housing consumption is low relative to numeraire consumption command
a higher risk premium. To capture composition risk, we ask about the importance of a concern that
stock returns will tend to be low when consumption from one’s physical living situation is
dropping more quickly than the rest of one’s consumption basket (“consumption composition
risk”).
Finally, we ask respondents about the role that consumption commitments play in their
allocation decision (“consumption commitments”). Chetty and Szeidl (2007) and Chetty, Sándor,

11

The equity premium literature compares the average stock market return to the average return on a short-term
government bond. We ask respondents to compare the stock market’s return in a disaster to a bank savings account
return because we were concerned that some respondents may not know what a government bond is. Because deposit
accounts are insured by the government, they should have similar safety properties in a disaster.

17

and Szeidl (2017) show how components of the consumption bundle that are difficult to adjust in
the short run can induce individuals to invest less in risky assets. When part of one’s consumption
bundle cannot be easily adjusted, a negative shock must be accommodated entirely through
adjustment of uncommitted consumption (e.g., food). This raises the local curvature of utility.
We find it difficult to succinctly describe the exact mechanism through which consumption
commitments affect portfolio choice in a manner easy for a non-economist to understand.
Therefore, we simply ask whether consumption commitments are an important factor in
determining the respondent’s equity share without stating the specific concerns consumption
commitments generate or the direction in which they would push equity share. We then ask
respondents who report that consumption commitments are at least moderately important a followup question about whether an increase in consumption commitments as a fraction of their income
would increase, decrease, or have no effect on their equity share.
Table VII shows that the rare disaster model has more support among our respondents than
any other neoclassical asset pricing factor: 45% of respondents say that concern about a disaster
plays a very or extremely important role in determining their equity share.12 The rare disaster
model is an attempt to explain the equity premium within the CCAPM framework, but both the
marginal utility of cash and marginal utility of consumption factors draw less support (35% and
29%, respectively) than the rare disaster factor. That the majority of respondents do not cite
contemporaneous return covariance with marginal utility as very or extremely important is
consistent with the fact that much popular, practitioner, and academic discussion of investing
focuses on terminal wealth outcomes without reference to intermediate-period consumption. But
even an investor focused only on terminal wealth would be concerned about economic disasters
before the terminal period if returns are not strongly negatively autocorrelated.
The second-most popular factor is consumption commitments, with 36% of respondents
describing them as very or extremely important. In the responses to the follow-up question (shown
in Table VIII), among those who say that consumption commitments are very or extremely
important, over three times as many report that an increase in their consumption commitments as
a fraction of income would lead them to reduce their equity exposure (or in the case of stock market
nonparticipants, make them less likely to start participating in the stock market) rather than

12

Although we classify rare disasters as a neoclassical factor, beliefs about disaster likelihood and magnitude may not
be rational (Goetzmann, Kim, and Shiller (2016)). A similar caveat applies to our other “neoclassical” factors.

18

increase it or make them more likely to participate (45% versus 13%), as Chetty and Szeidl (2007)
and Chetty, Sándor, and Szeidl (2017) predict.
Like with the follow-up question regarding investment horizon, a surprisingly high fraction
(31%) of respondents who say that consumption commitments are very or extremely important
report that an increase in their consumption commitments would have no effect on their equity
allocation (or their likelihood of participating), and another 10% say that they do not know what
the portfolio effect would be. This may be because the respondent’s perceived optimal equity
allocation is locally flat with respect to consumption commitments (the question did not specify
how large the hypothetical consumption commitment increase was) or the portfolio adjustment
would occur outside of the time horizon the respondents assumed the question was asking about
(the question did not specify a time horizon). Changes in consumption commitments are likely to
be accompanied by other economic events. Some respondents may have given the total derivative
with respect to consumption commitments despite our intention to measure the partial derivative.
Others may have been able to compute the partial derivative but felt that we were asking for the
total derivative, and found themselves unable to integrate across all of the different scenarios to
provide an unconditional average effect. Finally, some respondents may have misunderstood the
question or answered carelessly.
The two questions about stock return covariance with bad news about aggregate
consumption growth and volatility over the next year garner 29% to 30% support. Because they
describe covariances between returns and news about nearly contemporaneous consumption, these
questions can be interpreted as the aggregate consumption analogues of the marginal utility of
consumption question, which pertains to contemporaneous covariance with individual-specific
marginal utility. The questions testing long-run risk—stock return covariance with news about
expected consumption growth and volatility starting one year in the future—attract similar levels
of support at 30% and 26%, respectively. Composition risk involving one’s physical living
situation also receives comparable ratings, with 29% of respondents describing it as very or
extremely important.

19

E. Nonstandard Preferences
We ask about four types of nonstandard preferences: loss aversion, ambiguity aversion
(which we do not separately identify from the effects of parameter uncertainty), internal habit, and
external habit.
Typically, when economists try to establish how nonstandard preferences affect portfolio
choices, they measure these preferences using an incentivized laboratory task or a hypothetical
choice.13 They then estimate correlations between the measured preference parameters and
portfolio choices to establish a causal link. A serious difficulty for this approach is that measured
preference parameters are correlated with many other variables that could plausibly have a direct
effect on portfolio choices; for example, the strength of loss aversion is negatively correlated with
cognitive ability (Benjamin, Brown, and Shapiro (2013)). To address this issue, researchers
additionally control for many potentially relevant covariates. But one can never be certain that
every important omitted variable has been controlled for, or that the variables that are controlled
for enter the regression with the correct functional form. Fundamentally, the identification problem
comes from the fact that there is no exogenous manipulation of preferences available for estimating
their causal effect.
Our survey differs in that we ask our respondents to perform the casual inference for us. In
principle, they are able to do this even without exogenous variation in their own preferences
because they can observe their internal decision-making process. By analogy, an engineer who has
the blueprints for a machine can infer the causal effect of removing a particular gear, even if she
never observes the machine’s operation both with and without the gear.
Loss aversion is frequently described as disliking losses more than enjoying gains of equal
magnitude (Kahneman and Tversky (1979)), but this property is true of risk-averse individuals as
well. Therefore, we focus on an implication of loss aversion that is not shared with classical risk
aversion: aversion to small gambles (Segal and Spivak (1990), Rabin (2000)). We ask respondents
if worry about the possibility of even small losses on their stock investments was an important
factor in their equity allocation decision (“loss aversion”). Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001),

13
There is also a sizable literature that tries to directly elicit a preference parameter (e.g., Barsky et al. (1997), Dohmen
et al. (2011)) while assuming that the preference that it is attempting to measure affects portfolio choices. The
estimated correlation between the measured preference and portfolio choice is intended to validate this measure of the
preference (by showing a nonzero correlation in the expected direction) rather than test whether the preference itself
affects portfolio choice.

20

Barberis and Huang (2001), and Barberis, Huang, and Thaler (2006) present models where loss
aversion reduces the demand for stocks. Dimmock and Kouwenberg (2010) estimate survey
respondents’ loss aversion parameters from their hypothetical intertemporal choices and find that
stronger loss aversion is associated with a lower probability of stock market participation.
Next, we ask about the role of ambiguity or parameter uncertainty, in the form of not having
a good sense of stocks’ average returns and risks, in their investment decisions
(“ambiguity/parameter uncertainty”). Bayesian investors will reduce their allocation to the risky
asset in the face of parameter uncertainty, and investors who are ambiguity-averse in the sense of
Ellsberg (1961) will reduce their risky allocation even further (Barberis (2000), Garlappi, Uppal,
and Wang (2007), Kan and Zhou (2007)). Dow and Werlang (1992) are the first to show
theoretically that ambiguity aversion can generate stock market nonparticipation. Dimmock et al.
(2016) find that those who exhibit ambiguity aversion in a laboratory experiment are less likely to
hold stocks, and conditional on holding stocks, allocate less to them.
We also ask respondents questions about the role of internal habit and external habit. In the
Constantinides (1990) internal habit model, individuals derive utility from consumption today
relative to their own past consumption, whereas in the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) external
habit model, individuals derive utility from their own consumption today relative to past aggregate
consumption. In either case, the result is to increase an individual’s risk aversion and hence
decrease her willingness to hold stocks. To investigate whether investors are consciously
considering these factors, we ask respondents about both the importance of the difference between
their current material standard of living and the level they are used to (“internal habit”) and the
importance of the difference between their current material standard of living and the level
everybody else around them has experienced recently (“external habit”).
Table IX shows that loss aversion is described as very or extremely important by 28% of
respondents, internal habit by 27% of respondents, and ambiguity/parameter uncertainty by 27%
of respondents. There is relatively little support for external habit, which is deemed very or
extremely important by only 16% of respondents. The latter result suggests that, to the extent that
external habit-like preferences are important, their microfoundation may be consumption
commitments (Chetty and Szeidl (2016)) rather than a psychological desire to keep up with the
Joneses.

21

The internal habit, external habit, and ambiguity/parameter uncertainty factor question
wordings do not imply any directionality of the factors’ effects. In addition, Dimmock et al. (2016)
find that although 52% of American adults are ambiguity-averse, 38% are ambiguity-seeking. We
therefore ask follow-up questions regarding directionality to anybody who rated one of these
factors as at least moderately important. Table X presents the distribution of responses to these
follow-up questions among those who rated a factor very or extremely important. We find that
consistent with theory, people are much more likely to report decreasing their equity allocation or
becoming less likely to invest in equities rather than increasing their equity allocation or becoming
more likely to invest in equities in response to a decrease in either their material standard of living
compared to what they are used to (42% versus 8%) or their material standard of living compared
to what everyone around them has experienced recently (47% versus 12%). Similarly, having a
better sense of the average returns and risks of investing in stocks is much more likely to result in
increasing, rather than decreasing, equity allocations or the probability of investing in equities
(58% versus 8%). As with previous follow-up questions, a sizable fraction respond that they would
not change their equity allocation or likelihood of investing in equities or that they do not know
how they would change these (48% for internal habit, 38% for external habit, and 32% for
ambiguity/parameter uncertainty).14

F. Miscellaneous Factors
Finally, we ask respondents about the role of five other factors. The first is a rule of thumb
such as investing 100 minus age % of assets in stocks, or investing one-third of one’s wealth in
each of stocks, bonds, and real estate (“rule of thumb”). The second is the default investment
allocation in their work-based retirement savings plan (“default allocation in retirement savings
plan”). Madrian and Shea (2001) and Choi et al. (2004) document that a sizeable fraction of
investors remain at the default asset allocation in their 401(k) plan if they are automatically
enrolled. We next ask about two transactional factors motivated by answers to the free-response
question in our initial pilot survey about important factors affecting respondents’ equity choices
that we had not asked about: the concern that stock investments will take too long to convert into

14

For the ambiguity/parameter uncertainty follow-up question, answering that one did not know which way one would
react to having more precise information might be the response we should expect, since the reaction should depend
on what the additional information is.

22

spendable cash in an emergency (“stocks take too long to convert to cash in emergency”), and the
amount of cash the respondent needs to have on hand to pay routine expenses (“need cash on hand
for routine expenses”). These concerns are related to those in the model of Lagos (2010), where
equities command a high expected return because they are less useful for facilitating exchange.
Finally, we ask respondents about the importance of what they know about the stock market’s
returns during the decades before they were born (“stock market returns before I was born”).
Table XI shows that a large fraction of respondents (47%) say that needing to have cash on
hand to pay routine expenses is a very or extremely important factor. The need for emergency
liquidity also has substantial support, at 29% of respondents. Even among high-wealth and higheducation respondents, the absolute levels of importance are quite high—for example, 40% for
needing cash on hand and 23% for stocks taking too long to convert to cash among high-wealth
respondents.
Only 26% of respondents identify the default investment allocation in a work-based
retirement savings plan as very or extremely important. Although this might seem low in light of
the evidence on how sticky defaults are, one must keep in mind that only about half of American
workers have access to a work-based “salary reduction plan” (predominantly 401(k) and 403(b)
plans), and only about half of 401(k)/403(b) plans automatically enroll their employees and hence
have an asset allocation default (Copeland (2013), Vanguard (2014)).15
In line with the findings of Malmendier and Nagel (2011) that personally experienced
returns have a greater effect than returns one can only read about, only 16% of respondents say
that stock returns before their birth play a very or extremely important role in their equity allocation
decision, which is significantly lower than the 27% of respondents in Table V who say that stock
market returns that they had lived through are very or extremely important. Those younger than
40 are more likely to rate these pre-birth returns as very or extremely important (20.3%, standard
error = 5.3%) than those who are at least 60 (12.0%, standard error = 2.3%), although this
difference is not statistically significant. Rules of thumb receive relatively little support, with only
13% of respondents regarding them as very or extremely important.

15

Table II shows that 54% of respondents say that a work-based retirement savings plan default asset allocation is at
least moderately important. It is unlikely that 54% of American workers are subject to automatic 401(k) enrollment at
their current employer. However, this 54% figure may not be implausible given that the question also asks about one’s
spouse/partner’s workplace retirement savings plan default, and both the respondent and spouse/partner may be
influenced by asset allocation defaults at past employers.

23

G. Fixed Costs of Stock Market Participation
Among stock market nonparticipants, 49% say that not having enough money to invest in
stocks is a very or extremely important factor in their decision not to participate, suggesting that
there are fixed participation costs. In this section, we explore what these fixed costs are. We ask
nonparticipants who rate “wealth too small” at least a moderately important factor a series of
follow-up questions about how important various factors are in causing the amount of money they
have to be too small. We analyze the responses of those who rate “wealth too small” as very or
extremely important.
Vissing-Jørgensen (2003) suggests that the fixed costs of stock market participation include
the entry costs of acquiring information about investing and setting up accounts, as well as the
ongoing costs of keeping abreast of the market, transacting, and preparing tax returns that are made
more complicated by stockholding. We therefore ask nonparticipants about the importance of the
amount of time, money, and/or effort it would take to learn about stocks (“costs of learning about
stocks”), hire an investment adviser (“costs of hiring an adviser”), set up an investment account
(“costs of setting up an account”), stay up-to-date on the stock market (“costs of staying up-todate”), maintain a relationship with an investment adviser after hiring him or her (“costs of
maintaining an adviser”), maintain an investment account after setting it up (“costs of maintaining
an account”), and deal with a tax return that is harder to prepare (“tax complexity”).
We further ask one question to homeowners about whether owning a home is important in
causing them to not have enough money to make it worthwhile to invest in stocks (“home crowdout”). This question is motivated by the model of Cocco (2004), where the purchase of a house
can leave the individual with so little liquid wealth that paying the fixed cost to participate in the
stock market is not worthwhile. Although the purchase of a home will mechanically leave a
household with less money available to potentially invest in stocks, the household’s wealth may
be sufficiently inframarginal that the purchase does not push it from participation to
nonparticipation.
Table XII shows that information costs—both the costs of staying up-to-date about stocks
and the cost of learning about them in the first place—are the most important factors explaining
why respondents felt that the money they have available is not enough to make investing in stocks
worthwhile (45% and 41% rate these as very or extremely important, respectively). Costs of hiring

24

and maintaining an adviser are close behind, at 39% and 37%, respectively.16 The area where there
is the largest gap between the up-front fixed cost and the ongoing fixed cost is with respect to
investment accounts: 37% cite the costs of maintaining an account as very or extremely important,
while 31% cite the costs of setting one up as very or extremely important. A smaller fraction (28%)
cite tax complexity as very or extremely important. Finally, 27% of homeowners who cite fixed
costs as very or extremely important report that home ownership is a very or extremely important
factor in causing them not to have enough money to make it worthwhile to invest in stocks.

H. Principal Component Analysis
Do people who find certain factors important for their equity share decision also tend to
find other related factors important? In this section, we describe the results of a principal
component analysis conducted on the equity share factors in Table II that were asked of every
respondent.17 The outcome variables are binary indicators for whether the respondent rated each
factor as very or extremely important.18
Using the common criterion of retaining only factors with an eigenvalue above one, we
find that six factors capture 54% of the variation in the data. To aid interpretation, we perform an
orthogonal varimax rotation of the factors.19 Following the suggestion of Tabachnick and Fidell
(2007), we only consider loadings of at least 0.32 to be economically significant when interpreting
the factors. However, in Table XIII, we show all factors whose loading on a principal component
is at least 0.199, a cutoff that leads each factor except non-financial asset risk to be associated with
at least one principal component.20
The first principal component appears to capture concern about neoclassical asset pricing
factors: the consumption CAPM, long-run risk, and return covariance with marginal utility. The

16

Wealthy nonparticipants who rate fixed costs as very or extremely important are much more likely than non-wealthy
nonparticipants to cite every cost except tax complexity as very or extremely important. However, since only 11
wealthy nonparticipants rate fixed costs as very or extremely important, these figures should not be taken too seriously.
17
Note that principal component analysis does not tell us which factors are important determinants of equity share; it
merely tells us whether respondents who rate certain factors as important tend to also rate certain other factors as
important. Therefore, a factor could be highly ranked in Table II but not have a significant loading in Table XIII.
18
The results are broadly similar if we instead use as outcome variables binary indicators for whether the respondent
rated each factor at least moderately important or the numerical coding of the factor ratings. Using the standardized
numerical ratings as outcome variables yields rather different results, resulting in 11 principal components with an
eigenvalue above one.
19
An oblique promax rotation yields virtually identical results.
20
Non-financial asset risk loads most heavily (0.17) on the third principal component.

25

second principal component primarily captures beliefs related to aggregate stock market return
predictability. In particular, it loads on the belief that expected stock returns are lower than usual
right now, retirement savings plan defaults, the belief that stock market returns mean-revert, and
the belief that stock market returns have momentum. Although a positive association between
these last two factors might seem contradictory, this need not be so if, for example, respondents
thought the market is subject to both short-term reversals and long-run momentum—consistent
with the empirical fact that individuals are net sellers of stocks with high returns over the past
quarter and net buyers of stocks with more distant high past returns (Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000,
2001), Griffin, Harris, and Topaloglu (2003), Kaniel, Saar, and Titman (2008), Barber et al.
(2009)).
The third principal component loads on consumption needs, habit, and human capital—in
particular, consumption commitments, time until a significant nonretirement expense, internal
habit, and human capital as a fraction of total wealth. The fourth principal component is associated
with discomfort with the market—a lack of knowledge about how to invest, ambiguity and
parameter uncertainty, a lack of a trustworthy adviser, and loss aversion. The fifth principal
component loads on advice—advice from the media and advice from a friend, family member, or
coworker. The final principal component loads on personal experience with returns and stock
investing.
The fact that responses to the equity share factor questions have a sensible correlation
structure is further evidence that respondents answer in a thoughtful, coherent manner.
For completeness, we explore how individuals’ equity share relates to their first six
principal component scores, using either ordinary least squares or tobit regressions where the
dependent variable is considered censored at 0% and 100%. The first and third columns of Table
XIV show that when only the principal components are used as explanatory variables, those
respondents who report that neoclassical asset pricing factors and discomfort with the market are
more important invest less in stocks, whereas those who report that a belief in market return
predictability, defaults, and personal experience are more important invest more in stocks. The
relationship between equity share and the third principal component (consumption needs, habit,
and human capital) and fifth principal component (advice) scores is negative but insignificant in
both regressions. The results are qualitatively similar when we additionally control for respondent
demographics in the second and fourth columns, except that the relationship with personal

26

experience loses significance. We caution that because a respondent’s principal component scores
may be correlated with other unobserved factors that affect portfolio allocation, such as risk
aversion, these regression coefficients should not necessarily be interpreted as the causal impact
of placing more weight on the factors in each principal component.

I. Description Complexity and Importance Ratings
Although our pilot testing indicates that our questions were understood by nearly every
respondent, it is still possible that some factor descriptions created more confusion than others. If
people respond to a confusing factor description by rating the factor as less important than it really
is, our estimate of the factor’s overall importance will be biased downwards. Conversely, a
confusing factor description could lead a respondent to rate it as more important than it really is to
try to appear sophisticated to the researchers, even though the survey was administered remotely
through the Internet with no respondent identities revealed to us.
We look for a relationship between factor importance ratings and factor description
complexity by measuring complexity in two ways: the number of words used to describe the factor,
and the factor description’s Fleisch-Kincaid grade level score.21 Taking all of the factors in Table
II for which every respondent gave an importance rating, we regress the fraction of respondents
who say the factor is very or extremely important on either the word count (standard deviation =
9.5) or the grade level score (standard deviation = 4.0). There is no evidence of a significant
relationship. The coefficient is 0.14 with a t-statistic of 0.86 (p = 0.39) for word count, and 0.024
with a t-statistic of 0.06 (p = 0.95) for grade level score (where the dependent variable’s units are
such that 1% is coded as 1, not 0.01). These null results suggest that our survey responses are not
driven by the complexity of the questions.
III. Actively Managed Mutual Funds
The second section of our survey explores the reasons why individuals purchase actively
managed equity mutual funds. The amount of investment in active management is puzzling given
that in aggregate passive funds outperform active funds (e.g., Gruber (1996), French (2008), Fama
and French (2010)). French (2008) hypothesizes that investors misperceive the relative returns to

The Fleisch-Kincaid grade level is computed by the formula 0.39 × (total words/total sentences) + 11.8 × (total
syllables/total words) – 15.59.
21

27

active management versus passive management as a whole, or are overconfident about their ability
to pick outperforming active managers. Del Guercio and Reuter (2014) find that underperformance
in active management is concentrated in funds sold through brokers, suggesting that much
investment in active funds is the result of an agency problem that causes brokers to advise clients
to invest in poorly performing funds. Moskowitz (2000), Glode (2011), Kosowski (2011), and
Savov (2014) argue that investment in active funds could be rational despite their lower average
returns, since active funds outperform in states of the world in which marginal utility is high. In
the model of Berk and Green (2004), active management should on average match passive
management returns. Managers have heterogeneous skill in generating alpha, and this skill has
decreasing returns to scale. In equilibrium, there is neither persistence in alphas nor
outperformance of active management because money rationally flows to funds with high past
returns (and exits funds with low past returns) up to the point where every manager’s alpha going
forward is the same in expectation.
We ask questions related to each of the above explanations. We begin by asking whether
the respondent knows what a mutual fund is. Fifty-five percent of respondents told us that they do.
We then show all respondents the definition of a mutual fund, an actively managed stock mutual
fund, and a passively managed stock mutual fund.22 We next ask whether respondents have ever
purchased shares in an actively managed stock mutual fund.23 The 35% who say yes are asked to
rate the importance of four factors in their decision to do so. First, we ask about the importance of
the belief that the active fund would give them higher returns on average than a passive fund
(“higher returns”). Second, we ask about the importance of the recommendations of an investment
adviser that they hired (“adviser recommendation”). Third, we ask about the importance of the
belief that even though the active fund would have lower returns than a passive fund on average,
it would have higher returns when the economy is doing poorly (“hedging”). Fourth, in light of the
importance of employer-sponsored retirement savings plans in many individuals’ financial lives,

22

We give the following definitions: “A mutual fund is a company that brings together money from many people and
invests it in stocks, bonds or other assets. In an actively managed stock mutual fund, the fund manager tries to beat
the overall stock market’s return by picking stocks to buy. In contrast, a passively managed stock mutual fund (also
known as a stock index fund) holds stocks in order to match the performance of a market benchmark (such as the S&P
500 stock market index) as closely as possible.”
23
Among respondents who reported not knowing what a mutual fund is, only 40 say they have bought an actively
managed stock mutual fund after being told the definition of a mutual fund.

28

we ask about the importance of a suitable passive fund not being available within the investment
menu of their employer-sponsored retirement savings plan (“passive not available”).
We ask all respondents, whether or not they had invested in an active fund before, how
much they agreed with the statement that when an actively managed stock mutual fund has had
significantly higher past returns than the overall stock market, this is strong evidence that its
manager has good stock-picking skills (“managerial skill”). Response options are “strongly
disagree,” “disagree,” “neither agree nor disagree,” “agree,” and “strongly agree.” We also ask
how much respondents agreed with the statement that when an actively managed stock mutual
fund gets more money to manage, it becomes harder for it to generate higher returns than the
overall stock market (“decreasing returns to scale”).
The results are summarized in Table XV. By far the most important factors behind active
fund purchase are a belief that active funds would supply higher returns on average (cited as very
or extremely important by 51% of respondents who had experience with actively managed equity
mutual funds) and the recommendation of a financial adviser (cited by 48% of eligible
respondents). Hedging demand has nontrivial support, described as very or extremely important
by 27% of eligible respondents. A lack of passive funds in a retirement savings plan investment
menu is the least important factor, with only 18% describing this as very or extremely important.
Regarding the assumptions of Berk and Green (2004), 46% of respondents agree or
strongly agree that past returns are evidence of skill, but only 18% agree or strongly agree that
there are decreasing returns to scale in active money management. High-wealth respondents are
substantially more likely than low-wealth respondents to believe that high past returns are strong
evidence of skill (56% versus 41%), and modestly more likely to believe in decreasing returns to
scale (25% versus 15%).
IV. Cross-Section of Equity Returns
Differences in expected returns across stock portfolios formed on value and momentum
are well established (Fama and French (1992), Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)), but whether these
differences are driven by mispricing or rational responses to risk remains controversial. In the final
section of the survey, we investigate what our respondents believe about the expected returns and
risks of value and momentum stocks.
We begin by asking respondents whether they are familiar with the terms “growth stock”
and “value stock.” Twenty-five percent report being familiar with both, 68% report not being
29

familiar with either term, and 5% report being familiar with only one of the terms. We then show
a simple definition of a growth stock and of a value stock.24
Next, we ask respondents to complete the following sentence about the relative risk of
growth versus value: “Compared to a growth stock, I expect a value stock to normally be…”
Respondents choose among four possible answers: “riskier over the next year, on average,”
“equally risky over the next year, on average,” “less risky over the next year, on average,” and “no
opinion.” We ask them to complete another sentence about the relative expected return of growth
versus value: “Compared to a growth stock, I expect a value stock to normally have...” Here, the
response choices are “higher returns over the next year, on average,” “about the same returns over
the next year, on average,” “lower returns over the next year, on average,” and “no opinion.” We
also ask respondents to complete two similar sentences about the risk and expected returns of highversus low-momentum stocks, this time comparing “a stock whose price fell a lot over the past
year” to “a stock whose price rose a lot over the past year.”
Table XVI shows that respondents’ collective belief about the relationship between
value/growth and expected returns differs from the historical empirical relationship.25 Slightly
more respondents expect value stocks to normally have lower returns (28%) rather than higher
returns (25%), but this difference is not statistically significant. More consistent with the historical
data is respondents’ tendency to expect high-momentum stocks to normally have higher returns
rather than lower returns (24% versus 14%). There is a comparatively broad consensus that value
stocks are less risky (44%) rather than more risky (14%), while respondents are only modestly
more likely to expect high-momentum stocks to normally be riskier (25%) rather than less risky
(14%). Thus, in aggregate, our respondents believe that value stocks are a good deal, with lower
risk than but similar expected returns to growth stocks, while the relative merits of highmomentum stocks are more ambiguous. We note that for each of these questions, about a quarter
of respondents state they have no opinion.
Value stocks are seen as even more appealing among those who have at least $100,000 in
investible assets. Wealthy investors are more likely to believe that value stocks have higher

24
We give the following definitions: “A value stock is a stock that has a low price relative to its company’s current
profits (and other fundamentals). A growth stock is a stock that has a high price relative to its company’s current
profits (and other fundamentals).”
25
This difference need not be irrational, since we ask about forward-looking expectations, and rational expectations
of future returns may not coincide with historical realizations.

30

expected returns (28%) rather than lower expected returns (22%), although the difference is not
significant, and they strongly believe that value stocks are less risky (54%) rather than more risky
(16%). Wealthy investors tend to believe that high-momentum stocks have higher expected returns
(26%) rather than lower expected returns (20%), but by a smaller margin than the overall sample.
Like the overall sample, wealthy investors are more likely to think that high-momentum stocks are
more risky (24%) rather than less risky (14%).
We use regression analysis to investigate whether respondents’ answers to these questions
vary with demographics more generally. Betermier, Calvet, and Sodini (2017) find that older,
wealthier, and female Swedish investors tend to exhibit greater portfolio tilts towards value stocks,
whereas investors with higher current labor income and education tend to exhibit greater portfolio
tilts away from value stocks. We construct three dummy variables for whether the respondent says
that value stocks have (1) higher expected returns than growth stocks, (2) higher risk than growth
stocks, or (3) higher expected returns than growth stocks without higher risk than growth stocks,
or the same expected returns as but lower risk than growth stocks.26 This third variable captures
the perception that value stocks have higher risk-adjusted expected returns than growth stocks.27
We construct three analogous variables for high-momentum stocks relative to low-momentum
stocks. The explanatory variables are respondent age in years and dummies for having at least a
bachelor’s degree, having at least $100,000 in investible financial assets, having household income
of at least $100,000, and being female. The results are presented in Table XVII.
We find no significant demographic correlates of stating that value stocks have higher
expected returns or that value stocks are riskier. However, we do find that wealthier respondents
are more likely to say that value stocks have higher risk-adjusted returns, consistent with the
holding pattern found by Betermeier, Calvet, and Sodini (2017). Of course, these sorts of
perceptions will have imperfect mappings to portfolio holdings, as individuals may misperceive
which stocks are value stocks, beliefs about value stocks in general may not apply to the particular
value stocks that an individual chooses to hold, and portfolio holdings in equilibrium depend not
just on perceptions of risk and return but also one’s risk tolerance relative to other investors.

26

The third dummy variable is coded as zero if the respondent reported no opinion about or did not respond to the
questions regarding relative expected returns and risk.
27
However, this variable does no capture the perception that value stocks have higher risk-adjusted expected returns
than growth stocks while also having higher risk than growth stocks.

31

Turning to momentum, we find no significant correlates of stating that high-momentum
stocks have higher expected returns, but younger and male respondents are more likely to regard
high-momentum stocks as riskier than low-momentum stocks. We also find that older individuals
are more likely to say that high-momentum stocks have better risk-adjusted returns than lowmomentum stocks.
V. Conclusion
In our survey of primary household financial decision-makers in the U.S., we find that
individuals consider a wide variety of factors hypothesized in the academic literature when
deciding what fraction of their portfolio to invest in stocks. We find particularly strong support for
background risks, investment horizon, rare disasters, transactional factors, and fixed costs of stock
market participation, but many other factors attract significant support as well. The largest
determinants of investing in active equity mutual funds are the belief that these funds provide
higher average returns than passive funds and the advice of a professional investment adviser.
Households tend to believe that past fund performance is a good signal of stock-picking skill but,
contrary to Berk and Green (2004), do not generally believe that funds suffer from diseconomies
of scale. Regarding the cross-section of stock returns, households tend to believe that value stocks
are safer and (contrary to historical data) do not have higher expected returns, while highmomentum stocks are riskier and (consistent with historical data) have higher expected returns.

REFERENCES
Angerer, Xiaohong, and Pok-Sang Lam, 2009, Income risk and portfolio choice: An empirical
study, Journal of Finance 64, 1037-1055.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron, 2012, An empirical evaluation of the long-run risks
model for asset prices, Critical Finance Review 1, 183-221.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481-1509.
Barber, Brad M., Yi-Tsung Lee, Yu-Jane Liu, and Terrance Odean, 2009, Just how much do
individual investors lose by trading? Review of Financial Studies 22, 609-632.
Barberis, Nicholas, 2000, Investing for the long run when returns are predictable, Journal of
Finance 55, 225-264.
Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2015, X-CAPM: An
extrapolative capital asset pricing model, Journal of Financial Economics 115, 1-24.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Ming Huang, 2001, Mental accounting, loss aversion, and individual stock
returns, Journal of Finance 56, 1247-1292.

32

Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Tano Santos, 2001, Prospect theory and asset prices,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1-53.
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Richard H. Thaler, 2006, Individual preferences, monetary
gambles, and stock market participation: A case for narrow framing, American Economic
Review 96, 1069-1090.
Barro, Robert J., 2006, Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 121, 823-866.
Barro, Robert J., and José F. Ursúa, 2012, Rare macroeconomic disasters, Annual Review of
Economics 4, 83-109.
Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1997, Preference
parameters and behavioral heterogeneity: An experimental approach in the Health and
Retirement Study, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 537–579.
Bender, Svetlana Gherzi, James J. Choi, Danielle Dyson, and Adriana Z. Robertson, 2019, Rich
investors speak: What drives their personal investment decisions? Working paper, Yale
University.
Benjamin, Daniel J., Sebastian A. Brown, and Jesse M. Shapiro, 2013, Who is ‘behavioral’?
Cognitive ability and anomalous preferences, Journal of the European Economic Association
11, 1231–1255.
Benjamin, Daniel J., James J. Choi, and Geoffrey Fisher, 2016, Religious identity and economic
behavior, Review of Economics and Statistics 98, 617-637.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual fund flows and performance in rational
markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269-1295.
Betermier, Sebastien, Laurent E. Calvet, and Paolo Sodini, 2017, Who are the value and growth
investors? Journal of Finance 72, 5-46.
Bewley, Truman, 1999, Why Wages Don't Fall During a Recession (Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA).
Bodie, Zvi, 1976, Common stocks as a hedge against inflation, Journal of Finance 31, 459-470.
Bodie, Zvi, Robert C. Merton, and William F. Samuelson, 1992, Labor supply flexibility and
portfolio choice in a life cycle model, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 16, 427449.
Boudoukh, Jacob, and Matthew Richardson, 1993, Stock returns and inflation: A long-horizon
perspective, American Economic Review 83, 1346-1355.
Brav, Alon, John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Roni Michaely, 2005, Payout policy in the
21st century, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 483-527.
Breeden, Douglas T., 1979, An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption and
investment opportunities, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265-296.
Breeden, Douglas T., and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1978, Prices of state-contingent claims implicit
in option prices, Journal of Business 51, 621-651.
Bricker, Jesse, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Kevin B. Moore, John Sabelhaus,
Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A. Windles, 2014, Changes in U.S. family finances from 2010
to 2013: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances, Federal Reserve Bulletin 100(4).
Burchell, Brendan J., 2003, Identifying, describing and understanding financial aversion: Financial
phobes, Report for EGG.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based
explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205-251.

33

Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick,
2009, Optimal defaults and active decisions, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1639-1674.
Chetty, Raj, László Sándor, and Adam Szeidl, 2017, The effect of housing on portfolio choice,
Journal of Finance 72, 1171-1212.
Chetty, Raj, and Adam Szeidl, 2007, Consumption commitments and risk preferences, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 122, 831-877.
Chetty, Raj, and Adam Szeidl, 2016, Consumption commitments and habit formation,
Econometrica 84, 855-890.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, and Menzie D. Chinn, 2001, Currency traders and exchange rate dynamics:
A survey of the U.S. market, Journal of International Money and Finance 20, 439-471.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie D. Chinn, and Ian W. Marsh, 2004, How do UK-based foreign
exchange dealers think their market operates? International Journal of Finance and
Economics 9, 289-306.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, and Clement Yuk-Pang Wong, 2000, A survey of market practitioners’ views
on exchange rate dynamics, Journal of International Economics 51, 401-419.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2002, Defined
contribution pensions: Plan rules, participant choices, and the path of least resistance, Tax
Policy and the Economy 16, 67-113.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2004, For better or for
worse: Default effects and 401(k) savings behavior, in David A. Wise, ed.: Perspectives on
the Economics of Aging (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).
Cochrane, John H., 2017, Macro-finance, Review of Finance 21, 945-985.
Cocco, Joao F., 2004, Portfolio choice in the presence of housing, Review of Financial Studies 18,
535-567.
Constantinides, George M., 1990, Habit formation: A resolution of the equity premium puzzle,
Journal of Political Economy 98, 519-543.
Copeland, Craig, 2013, Retirement plan participation: Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP) data, 2012, EBRI Notes 34(8).
DeBondt, Werner, 1993, Betting on trends: Intuitive forecasts of financial risk and return,
International Journal of Forecasting 9, 355-371.
Del Guercio, Diane, and Jonathan Reuter, 2014, Mutual fund performance and the incentive to
generate alpha, Journal of Finance 69, 1673-1704.
Dimmock, Stephen G., and Roy Kouwenberg, 2010, Loss-aversion and household portfolio
choice, Journal of Empirical Finance 17, 441-459.
Dimmock, Stephen G., Roy Kouwenberg, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Kim Peijnenburg, 2016,
Ambiguity aversion and household portfolio choice puzzles: Empirical evidence, Journal of
Financial Economics 119, 559-577.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, Jürgen Schupp, and Gert G. Wagner, 2011,
Individual risk attitudes: Measurement, determinants, and behavioral consequences, Journal
of the European Economic Association 9, 522–550.
Dow, James, and Sérgio Ribeiro da Costa Werlang, 1992, Uncertainty aversion, risk aversion, and
the optimal choice of portfolio, Econometrica 60, 197-204.
Ellsberg, Daniel, 1961, Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms, Quarterly Journal of Economics
75, 643-669.
Fagereng, Andreas, Luigi Guiso, and Luigi Pistaferri, 2018, Portfolio choices, firm shocks, and
uninsurable wage risk, Review of Economic Studies 85, 437-474.

34

Fama, Eugene F., 1970, Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work, Journal
of Finance 25, 383-417.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
Journal of Finance 47, 427-465.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2010, Luck versus skill in the cross-section of mutual
fund returns, Journal of Finance 65, 1915-1947.
Fama, Eugene F., and G. William Schwert, 1977, Asset returns and inflation, Journal of Financial
Economics 5, 115-146.
Fisher, Kenneth, and Meier Statman, 2000, Investor sentiment and stock returns, Financial
Analysts Journal 56, 16-23.
Flavin, Marjorie, and Takashi Yamashita, 2002, Owner-occupied housing and the composition of
the household portfolio, American Economic Review 92, 345-362.
French, Kenneth R., 2008, Presidential address: The cost of active investing, Journal of Finance
63, 1537-1573.
Friedman, Milton, 1953, Essays in Positive Economics (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).
Garlappi, Lorenzo, Raman Uppal, and Tan Wang, 2007, Portfolio selection with parameter and
model uncertainty: A multi-prior approach, Review of Financial Studies 20, 41-81.
Glode, Vincent, 2011, Why mutual funds “underperform”, Journal of Financial Economics 99,
546-559.
Goetzmann, William N., Dasol Kim, and Robert J. Shiller, 2016, Crash beliefs from investor
surveys, NBER Working Paper 22143.
Gollier, Christian, and John W. Pratt, 1996, Risk vulnerability and the tempering effect of
background risk, Econometrica 64, 1109-1123.
Gompers, Paul, William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2016, How do venture
capitalists make decisions? NBER Working Paper 22587.
Gompers, Paul, Steven N. Kaplan, and Vladimir Mukharlyamov, 2016, What do private equity
firms say they do? Journal of Financial Economics 121, 449-476.
Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001, The theory and practice of corporate finance:
Evidence from the field, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187-243.
Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal, 2005, The economic implications of
corporate financial reporting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 40, 5-73.
Greenwood, Robin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2014, Expectations of returns and expected returns,
Review of Financial Studies 27, 714-746.
Griffin, John M., Jeffrey H. Harris, and Selim Topaloglu, 2003, The dynamics of institutional and
individual trading, Journal of Finance 58, 2285-2320.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2000, The investment behavior and performance of various
investor types: A study of Finland’s unique data set, Journal of Financial Economics 55, 4367.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2001, What makes investors trade? Journal of Finance 56,
589-616.
Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual funds, Journal
of Finance 51, 783-810.
Guiso, Luigi, Tullio Jappelli, and Daniele Terlizzese, 1996, Income risk, borrowing constraints,
and portfolio choice, American Economic Review 86, 158-172.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2003, People’s opium? Religion and economic
attitudes, Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 225-282.

35

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2008, Trusting the stock market, Journal of
Finance 63, 2557-2600.
Guletkin, N. Bulent, 1983, Stock market returns and inflation: Evidence from other countries,
Journal of Finance 38, 49-65.
Harris, Katherine M., and Michael P. Keane, 1998, A model of health plan choice: Inferring
preferences and perceptions from a combination of revealed preference and attitudinal data,
Journal of Econometrics 89, 131-157.
Hausman, Daniel M., 1992, Why look under the hood? in Essays on Philosophy and Economic
Methodology (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK).
Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas, 2000, Portfolio choice and asset prices: The importance of
entrepreneurial risk, Journal of Finance 55, 1163-1198.
Hilary, Gilles, and Kai Wai Hui, 2009, Does religion matter in corporate decision making in
America? Journal of Financial Economics 93, 455–473.
Hochguertel, Stefan, 2003, Precautionary motives and portfolio decisions, Journal of Applied
Econometrics 18, 61-77.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1979, Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk,
Econometrica 47, 263-292.
Kan, Raymond, and Guofu Zhou, 2007, Optimal portfolio choice with parameter uncertainty,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 42, 621-656.
Kaniel, Ron, Gideon Saar, and Sheridan Titman, 2008, Individual investor trading and stock
returns, Journal of Finance 63, 273-310.
Kimball, Miles S., 1993, Standard risk aversion, Econometrica 61, 589-611.
Kosowski, Robert, 2011, Do mutual funds perform when it matters most to investors? U.S. mutual
fund performance and risk in recessions and expansions, Quarterly Journal of Finance 1, 607664.
Kozak, Serhiy, Stefan Nagel, and Shrihari Santosh, 2018, Interpreting factor models, Journal of
Finance 73, 1183-1223.
Kumar, Alok, 2009, Who gambles in the stock market? Journal of Finance 64, 1889-1933.
Kumar, Alok, Jeremy Page, and Oliver Spalt, 2011, Religious beliefs, gambling attitudes, and
financial market outcomes, Journal of Financial Economics 102, 671-708.
Lagos, Ricardo, 2010, Asset prices and liquidity in an exchange economy, Journal of Monetary
Economics 57, 913-930.
Laibson, David, 1997, Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting, Quarterly Journal of Economics
112, 443-477.
Lintner, John, 1956, Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained earnings,
and taxes, American Economic Review 46, 97-113.
Lintner, John, 1975, Inflation and stock returns, Journal of Finance 30, 259-280.
Lucas, Robert E., 1978, Asset prices in an exchange economy, Econometrica 46, 1429-1445.
Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea, 2001, The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
participation and savings behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1149-1187.
Malhotra, Neil, 2008, Completion time and response order effects in web surveys, Public Opinion
Quarterly 72, 914-934.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel, 2011, Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences
affect risk taking? Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 373-416.

36

Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott, 1985, The equity premium: A puzzle, Journal of
Monetary Economics 15, 145-161.
Moskowitz, Tobias, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stockpicking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses: Discussion, Journal of Finance 55,
1695-1703.
Nelson, Charles R., 1976, Inflation and rates of return on commons stocks, Journal of Finance 31,
471-483.
O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin, 1999, Doing it now or later, American Economic Review
89, 103-124.
Palia, Darius, Yaxuan Qi, and Yangru Wu, 2014, Heterogeneous background risks and portfolio
choice: Evidence from micro-level data, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 46, 16871720.
Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel, 2007, Housing, consumption and asset
pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 83, 531-569.
Pratt, John W., and Richard J. Zeckhauser, 1987, Proper risk aversion, Econometrica 55, 143-154.
Putnam, Robert, 1993, Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy (Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Rabin, Matthew, 2000, Risk aversion and expected-utility theory: A calibration theorem,
Econometrica 68, 1281-1292.
Rietz, Thomas A., 1988, The equity risk premium: A solution, Journal of Monetary Economics
22, 117-131.
Rosen, Harvey S., and Stephen Wu, 2004, Portfolio choice and health status, Journal of Financial
Economics 72, 457-484.
Rubenstein, Mark, 1976, The valuation of uncertain income streams and the pricing of options,
Bell Journal of Economics 7, 407-425.
Samuelson, William, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1988, Status quo bias in decision making, Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty 1, 7-59.
Savov, Alexi, 2014, The price of skill: Performance evaluation by households, Journal of
Financial Economics 112, 213-231.
Schmidt, Lawrence D. W., 2016, Climbing and falling off the ladder: Asset pricing implications
of labor market event risk, Working paper, MIT.
Schneider, Christoph, and Oliver Spalt, 2016, Conglomerate investment, skewness, and the CEO
long shot bias, Journal of Finance 71, 635-672.
Schneider, Christoph, and Oliver Spalt, 2017, Acquisitions as lotteries: Do managerial gambling
attitudes influence takeover decisions? Critical Finance Review 6, 77-132.
Segal, Uzi, and Avia Spivak, 1990, First order versus second order risk aversion, Journal of
Economic Theory 51, 111-125.
Shapiro, Gilla K., and Brendan J. Burchell, 2012, Measuring financial anxiety, Journal of
Neuroscience, Psychology, and Economics 5, 92-103.
Shu, Tao, Johan Sulaeman, and P. Eric Yeung, 2012, Local religious beliefs and mutual fund risktaking behaviors, Management Science 58, 1779-1796.
Solnik, Bruno, and Vincent Solnik, 1997, A multi-country test of the Fisher model for stock
returns, Journal of International Financial Markets 7, 289-301.
Tabachnick, Barbara G., and Linda S. Fidell, 2007, Using Multivariate Statistics, 5th edition
(Pearson Education, Inc., Boston, MA).

37

Vanguard. 2014, How America Saves 2014: A Report on Vanguard 2013 Defined Contribution
Plan Data (Vanguard Group, Valley Forge, PA).
Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette, 2003, Perspectives on behavioral finance: Does ‘irrationality’
disappear with wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions, NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 18, 139-194.
Wachter, Jessica A., 2002, Portfolio and consumption decisions under mean-reverting returns: An
exact solution for complete markets, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37, 6391.
Weber, Max, 1930, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (Allen and Unwin, London).
Yao, Rui, and Harold H. Zhang, 2005, Optimal consumption and portfolio choices with risky
housing and borrowing constraints, Review of Financial Studies 18, 197-239.

38

Table I
Unweighted Sample Summary Statistics
This table shows the unweighted percent of our respondents who have various characteristics, as well as stock market participation rates conditional on having
each characteristic. Variables other than homeownership, employment status, investible financial assets, and stock ownership were not collected in our survey,
but were previously measured by the ALP for our respondents.

Male
Age
21-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70+
Living situation
Married or living with partner
Separated
Divorced
Widowed
Never married
Education
< High school
High school diploma or equiv.
Some college, no degree
Associate degree
Bachelor’s degree
Graduate degree
Race
White
Black
American Indian
Asian
Hispanic or Latino

% of sample
(1)
47.9%

% who own stocks
(2)
70.5%

3.2%
11.5%
14.0%
24.8%
28.9%
17.7%

40.6%
50.0%
62.0%
71.5%
69.7%
70.4%

59.0%
2.6%
16.3%
6.7%
15.4%

73.1%
53.8%
57.3%
56.7%
53.9%

2.4%
11.1%
23.0%
12.5%
26.2%
24.9%

43.5%
45.0%
50.0%
58.7%
77.3%
83.7%

82.5%
9.6%
0.9%
2.3%
12.0%

70.0%
42.1%
33.3%
60.9%
42.1%

Own home they live in
Employment status
Working
Unemployed, looking for work
Temporarily laid off, on sick or
other leave
Disabled
Retired
Homemaker
Household income
< $15,000
$15,000 - $24,999
$25,000 - $49,999
$50,000 - $74,999
$75,000 - $99,999
$100,000 - $124,999
$125,000 - $199,999
$200,000+
Investible financial assets
$0
$1 - $999
$1,000 - $4,999
$5,000 - $9,999
$10,000 - $24,999
$25,000 - $49,999
$50,000 - $74,999
$75,000 - $99,999
$100,000+

% of sample
(3)
71.9%

% who own stocks
(4)
75.9%

54.7%
4.4%
1.0%

74.0%
28.9%
55.6%

8.4%
30.9%
6.6%

23.8%
70.6%
49.2%

9.8%
9.3%
22.4%
20.6%
12.5%
10.1%
10.5%
4.7%

13.4%
26.6%
60.3%
72.5%
82.4%
86.3%
94.3%
97.9%

6.6%
7.1%
6.5%
5.1%
8.5%
7.5%
6.2%
5.0%
47.3%

4.5%
5.6%
21.2%
36.5%
59.0%
67.1%
82.5%
78.4%
90.4%

Table II
Summary of Importance of Equity Allocation Factors
Column (1) shows the percent of respondents (N = 1,013) who described the factor as very or extremely important.
Column (2) shows the percent of respondents who described the factor as at least moderately important. Column (3)
shows the mean response, where the responses are translated into a five-point scale: not important = 1, a little important
= 2, moderately important = 3, very important = 4, and extremely important = 5. Column (4) shows the average value
of a standardized variable designed to capture whether a respondent indicated that a factor is important relative to the
other factors. This variable is constructed by subtracting the mean numerical value of the respondent’s ratings from
the numerical value of each response and dividing by the standard deviation of that respondent’s rating numerical
values. All statistics are calculated using sampling weights. * Among stock market nonparticipants only (N = 342).
** Among stock market participants only (N = 664). *** Among employed respondents only (N = 715). **** Among
homeowners only (N = 728).

Wealth too small to invest in stocks *
Years left until retirement ***
Risk of illness/injury
Need cash on hand for routine expenses
Rare disaster risk
Labor income risk ***
Lack of trust in market participants
Don’t like to think about my finances *
Lack of knowledge about how to invest
Human capital fraction of total wealth
Time until significant non-retirement expense
Consumption commitments
Return covariance with marginal utility of money
Lack of trustworthy adviser
Risk of aggregate consumption over next year
Risk of long-run aggregate consumption
Stocks take too long to convert to cash in emergency
Return covariance with marginal utility of consumption
Risk of aggregate consumption volatility over next year
Consumption composition risk
Home value risk ****
Loss aversion
Experience of living through stock market returns
Internal habit
Ambiguity / Parameter uncertainty
Advice from a professional financial adviser
Risk of long-run aggregate consumption volatility
Personal experience investing in stock market
Default allocation in retirement savings plan
Religious beliefs, values, and experiences
Expected stock returns lower than usual right now
Expected stock returns higher than usual right now **
Stocks are an inflation hedge **
Non-financial assets cushion losses in financial assets **
Non-financial asset risk
Stock market returns have momentum
Stock market returns mean-revert
External habit
Stock market returns before I was born
Advice from a friend, family member, or coworker
Rule of thumb
Advice from media
Intended to invest in stocks but never got around to it *

Very or
extremely
important
(1)
48.9%
47.5%
47.3%
47.2%
45.5%
41.6%
37.5%
37.3%
36.2%
35.9%
35.7%
35.5%
35.2%
31.1%
30.3%
29.8%
29.1%
29.1%
28.7%
28.6%
28.5%
28.2%
26.9%
26.9%
26.7%
26.7%
26.3%
25.8%
25.7%
25.6%
25.2%
24.3%
20.4%
19.6%
19.2%
18.7%
17.2%
16.3%
15.9%
15.3%
12.7%
11.9%
3.2%

Moderately
important
or more
(2)
58.0%
67.3%
71.6%
69.0%
70.2%
64.8%
59.9%
57.0%
61.4%
65.5%
59.1%
61.7%
60.6%
51.9%
58.4%
55.8%
50.7%
56.7%
55.8%
52.5%
54.3%
51.8%
58.2%
53.8%
55.7%
47.9%
53.5%
54.8%
53.5%
43.1%
47.6%
55.6%
57.3%
50.5%
39.9%
42.0%
44.9%
41.5%
37.4%
41.0%
36.5%
36.6%
23.0%

Mean
rating
(3)
2.98
3.14
3.28
3.19
3.22
3.04
2.91
2.82
2.87
2.99
2.84
2.93
2.87
2.65
2.76
2.70
2.65
2.72
2.73
2.68
2.77
2.61
2.76
2.64
2.63
2.44
2.67
2.66
2.57
2.40
2.52
2.64
2.63
2.55
2.21
2.36
2.37
2.28
2.23
2.24
2.13
2.10
1.64

Mean
standardized
rating
(4)
0.32
0.42
0.65
0.48
0.53
0.36
0.21
0.26
0.19
0.28
0.17
0.24
0.20
-0.01
0.09
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.07
0.03
0.24
-0.06
0.10
-0.03
-0.02
-0.13
0.01
0.01
-0.08
-0.24
-0.13
-0.05
-0.04
-0.14
-0.43
-0.29
-0.26
-0.38
-0.41
-0.39
-0.46
-0.51
-0.97

Table III
Background Risks and Assets
This table presents the percent of respondents who described the factor in the left column as very or extremely important, either for the full
sample or split by stock market participation, wealth (at least $100,000 versus below $100,000 in investible financial assets), and education
(with versus without a bachelor’s degree). Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates. All statistics are calculated using
sampling weights. * Among stock market nonparticipants only. ** Among stock market participants only. *** Among employed respondents
only. **** Among homeowners only.
All

Wealth too small*
Years left until
retirement***
Risk of illness/injury
Labor income risk***

Human capital

Time until significant nonretirement expense
Home value risk****
Stocks are an inflation
hedge**
Non-financial assets
cushion losses in financial
assets**
Non-financial risk

Survey text
(1)
The amount of money I have available to invest in stocks
is too small
The number of years I (and my spouse/partner, if
applicable) have left until retirement
The risk of expenses due to illness or injury to me or
someone else in my family
Concern that I (or my spouse/partner, if applicable) might
become unemployed, receive a pay cut, or not receive an
expected pay increase
The difference between how much money I have available
to invest right now and all the money I (and my
spouse/partner, if applicable) expect to earn in wages over
the rest of my life
How soon I will have significant expenses (like a car
purchase, a down payment on a home, school tuition, etc.)
Concern that my home value might fall
A belief that stocks are attractive because when my living
expenses increase unexpectedly, the stock market will tend
to rise
A belief that I can afford to take more risks in my financial
portfolio because my non-financial assets (such as my
home or small business) will cushion me against losses in
my financial portfolio
Concern my non-financial assets other than my home—
such as my small business—might lose value

(2)
48.9%
(5.5)
47.5%
(3.5)
47.3%
(3.0)
41.6%
(3.7)

Participant
Yes
No
(3)
(4)
--48.9%
(5.5)
58.7%
30.1%
(3.7)
(5.3)
47.7%
46.9%
(3.3)
(5.5)
39.7%
45.8%
(3.9)
(7.1)

Wealth
High
Low
(5)
(6)
19.0%
51.5%
(7.8)
(5.8)
60.3%
41.1%
(4.2)
(4.5)
48.1%
46.9%
(3.8)
(4.1)
35.4%
44.8%
(4.5)
(4.9)

Education
High
Low
(7)
(8)
73.7% 43.9%
(5.9)
(6.5)
48.4% 47.0%
(4.4)
(4.8)
36.9% 52.3%
(3.4)
(3.9)
33.2% 46.3%
(3.9)
(5.0)

35.9%
(3.0)

31.5%
(3.2)

42.4%
(5.6)

32.5%
(3.9)

37.6%
(4.1)

30.9%
(3.7)

38.3%
(4.1)

35.7%
(2.8)
28.5%
(2.7)
20.4%
(2.9)

36.1%
(3.4)
26.6%
(3.1)
20.4%
(2.9)

35.6%
(4.8)
33.2%
(5.3)
---

28.5%
(3.6)
29.1%
(3.8)
20.4%
(4.1)

39.5%
(3.9)
28.0%
(3.7)
20.4%
(4.1)

38.2%
(3.9%)
20.0%
(2.9)
11.5%
(2.5)

34.6%
(3.7)
33.9%
(3.9)
27.6%
(4.6)

19.6%
(2.7)

19.6%
(2.7)

---

21.0%
(3.5)

18.1%
(4.0)

12.8%
(2.4)

25.0%
(4.3)

19.2%
(2.2)

16.2%
(2.4)

23.5%
(4.2)

16.5%
(3.2)

20.5%
(2.9)

13.0%
(2.5)

22.2%
(3.0)

Table IV
Responses to Increase in Investment Horizon
This table presents the distribution of responses to the question “Suppose that tomorrow, because you enjoy working so much, you decide to
retire 10 years later than you had previously planned. Would this cause you to increase or decrease the percentage of your investable financial
assets held in stocks over the next year?” (for stock market participants) or “Suppose that tomorrow, because you enjoy working so much,
you decide to retire 10 years later than you had previously planned. Would this make you more or less likely to invest in stocks over the next
year?” (for stock market nonparticipants). In the first column, the population over which these percentages are calculated is all respondents
who rated the number of years left until retirement to be a very or extremely important factor in their equity allocation decision (N = 354).
Subsequent columns report percentages over subsamples split by stock market participation, wealth (at least $100,000 versus below $100,000
in investible financial assets), and education (with versus without a bachelor’s degree). Standard errors are in parentheses below the point
estimates. All statistics are calculated using sampling weights.
All

Decrease equity allocation percentage / less likely to invest in
equities
Neither increase nor decrease equity allocation percentage /
neither more nor less likely to invest in equities
Increase equity allocation percentage / more likely to invest in
equities
I don’t know
Did not respond

(1)
4.3%
(1.2)
33.7%
(4.2)
39.1%
(4.2)
9.1%
(3.7)
13.8%
(3.1)

Participant
Yes
No
(2)
(3)
3.9%
5.6%
(1.2)
(3.4)
34.2%
30.5%
(4.9)
(8.3)
42.1%
30.5%
(5.1)
(7.5)
9.4%
8.5%
(4.8)
(3.8)
10.3%
24.9%
(3.2)
(7.6)

Wealth
High
Low
(4)
(5)
3.4%
4.9%
(1.4)
(1.9)
33.6%
33.8%
(6.1)
(5.7)
41.8%
37.1%
(6.2)
(5.7)
4.7%
12.3%
(2.0)
(6.1)
16.4%
11.9%
(5.0)
(3.8)

Education
High
Low
(6)
(7)
5.5%
3.6%
(2.4)
(1.3)
36.0%
32.4%
(6.1)
(5.5)
45.3%
35.6%
(5.8)
(5.7)
4.5%
11.7%
(2.1)
(5.6)
8.7%
16.6%
(3.3)
(4.4)

Table V
Social and Personal Factors
This table presents the percent of respondents who described the factor in the left column as very or extremely important, either for the full
sample or split by stock market participation, wealth (at least $100,000 versus below $100,000 in investible financial assets), and education
(with versus without a bachelor’s degree). Some factor ratings were elicited only from stock market nonparticipants. Standard errors are in
parentheses below the point estimates. All statistics are calculated using sampling weights. * Among stock market nonparticipants only.
All

Low trust in market
participants
Don’t like to think
about my finances*
Lack of knowledge
about how to invest
Lack of trustworthy
adviser
Experience of living
through returns

Advice from
professional financial
adviser
Personal experience
investing in stock
market
Religion
Advice from friend,
family, or coworker
Advice from media
Intended to invest but
never got around to
it*

Survey text
(1)
Concern that companies, managers, brokers, or
other market participants might cheat me out of my
investments
I don’t like to think about my finances
My lack of knowledge about how to invest
Difficulty in finding a trustworthy adviser
The feelings, attitudes, and beliefs about the stock
market I’ve gotten from living through stock market
ups and downs (whether or not I was invested in
stocks at the time)
Advice from a professional financial adviser I hired

The feelings, attitudes, and beliefs about the stock
market I’ve gotten from my personal experiences of
investing in the stock market
My religious beliefs, values, and experiences
Advice from a friend, family member, or coworker
Advice from a book or an article I read, or from
somebody on TV, radio, or the internet
I intended to invest in stocks but never got around
to it

(2)
37.5%
(3.0)

Participant
Yes
No
(3)
(4)
34.2%
42.2%
(3.1)
(5.6)
---

Wealth
High
Low
(5)
(6)
37.1%
37.6%
(3.8)
(4.1)

Education
High
Low
(7)
(8)
26.0%
43.1%
(3.3)
(4.1)

34.1%
(9.5)
30.6%
(3.7)
32.9%
(3.7)
38.3%
(3.7)

37.6%
(5.4)
39.2%
(3.8)
30.2%
(3.4)
21.2%
(2.8)

29.6%
(7.6)
28.1%
(3.2)
23.9%
(3.0)
30.9%
(3.3)

38.8%
(5.8)
40.2%
(3.8)
34.7%
(3.5)
25.0%
(3.1)

37.3%
(5.0)
36.2%
(2.8)
31.1%
(2.6)
26.9%
(2.3)

33.3%
(3.4)
29.3%
(3.0)
30.5%
(3.0)

37.3%
(5.0)
39.4%
(4.9)
33.7%
(4.7)
22.5%
(3.7)

26.7%
(2.4)

34.0%
(3.2)

16.3%
(3.1)

35.3%
(3.5)

22.4%
(3.1)

27.5%
(3.1)

26.4%
(3.2)

25.8%
(2.4)

29.3%
(3.0)

21.6%
(3.7)

34.3%
(3.7)

21.6%
(2.9)

28.9%
(3.3)

24.4%
(3.1)

25.6%
(2.4)
15.3%
(2.2)
11.9%
(2.0)
3.2%
(0.9)

24.0%
(2.8)
12.2%
(2.5)
11.8%
(2.6)
---

26.8%
(4.4)
19.6%
(4.0)
12.3%
(3.0)
3.2%
(0.9)

20.3%
(2.9)
6.4%
(2.1)
9.2%
(2.7)
3.2%
(2.0)

28.3%
(3.4)
19.8%
(3.1)
13.3%
(2.6)
3.2%
(1.0)

17.8%
(3.0)
14.0%
(3.2)
9.2%
(2.7)
7.6%
(3.6)

29.4%
(3.4)
15.9%
(2.8)
13.2%
(2.6)
2.4%
(0.8)

Table VI
Expected Return Beliefs
This table presents the percent of respondents who described the factor in the left column as very or extremely important, either for the full
sample or split by stock market participation, wealth (at least $100,000 versus below $100,000 in investible financial assets), and education
(with versus without a bachelor’s degree). Only stock market participants were asked about the importance of the belief that expected stock
returns are higher than usual right now. Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates. All statistics are calculated using sampling
weights. ** Among stock market participants only.
All

Expected stock returns lower
than usual right now
Expected stock returns higher
than usual right now**
Stock market returns have
momentum
Stock market returns meanrevert

Survey text
(1)
A belief that the returns I can expect to earn from
investing in stocks right now are lower than usual
A belief that the returns I can expect to earn from
investing in stocks right now are higher than usual.
A belief that low stock market returns tend to be
followed by more low stock market returns
A belief that low stock market returns tend to be
followed by high stock market returns

(2)
25.2%
(2.7)
24.3%
(3.5)
18.7%
(2.3)
17.2%
(2.1)

Participant
Yes
No
(3)
(4)
25.4%
24.9%
(3.4)
(4.4)
24.3%
--(3.5)
16.3%
21.9%
(2.8)
(4.1)
19.8%
13.3%
(3.0)
(2.9)

Wealth
High
Low
(5)
(6)
22.2%
26.7%
(3.8)
(3.6)
23.8%
24.8%
(4.2)
(5.6)
17.0%
19.6%
(3.7)
(3.0)
21.3%
15.0%
(3.8)
(2.5)

Education
High
Low
(7)
(8)
15.1%
30.1%
(2.6)
(3.7)
11.9%
34.2%
(2.4)
(5.4)
10.1%
22.8%
(2.2)
(3.3)
10.9%
20.3%
(2.1)
(3.0)

Table VII
Neoclassical Asset Pricing Factors
This table presents the percent of respondents who described the factor in the left column as very or extremely important, either for the full sample or split by stock
market participation, wealth (at least $100,000 versus below $100,000 in investible financial assets), and education (with versus without a bachelor’s degree).
Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates. All statistics are calculated using sampling weights. * Among stock market nonparticipants only. **
Among stock market participants only. *** Among employed respondents only. **** Among homeowners only.
All
Participant
Wealth
Education
Survey text
Yes
No
High
Low
High
Low
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Rare disaster risk
Concern that in an economic disaster where the amount that
45.5% 46.6% 44.5% 46.8%
44.7%
38.9% 48.6%
the U.S. economy produces in a year shrinks by more than
(3.0)
(3.3)
(5.6)
(3.7)
(4.1)
(3.5)
(4.0)
10%—like the Great Depression—a dollar I invested in
stocks would lose more value than a dollar I put in a bank
savings account
Consumption
My fixed expenses (like mortgage payments, rent, car
35.5% 29.7% 43.7% 25.6%
40.6%
30.3% 38.0%
commitments
payments, utility bills, etc.) that are difficult to adjust in the
(2.7)
(3.0)
(5.2)
(3.4)
(3.8)
(3.5)
(3.7)
short run
Return covariance with
Concern that when I especially need the money, the stock
35.2% 31.2% 41.5% 31.9%
36.8%
28.0% 38.7%
marginal utility of
(3.0)
(3.1)
(5.6)
(3.7)
(4.1)
(3.2)
(4.1)
market will tend to drop
money
Risk of aggregate
Concern that when bad news arrives about how the U.S.’s
30.3% 25.6% 37.0% 25.0%
33.1%
20.0% 35.3%
consumption over next
material standard of living will change over the next year,
(2.7)
(3.1)
(5.0)
(3.1)
(3.7)
(2.5)
(3.7)
year
the stock market will tend to drop
Risk of long-run
Concern that when bad news arrives about how the U.S.’s
29.8% 25.5% 35.6% 25.6%
32.0%
20.0% 34.6%
aggregate consumption
material standard of living will change over the 5 year
(2.6)
(2.7)
(5.0)
(3.3)
(3.5)
(2.6)
(3.6)
period starting 1 year in the future, the stock market will
tend to drop
Return covariance with
Concern that when I have to cut my spending, the stock
29.1% 25.0% 35.1% 27.0%
30.1%
18.8% 34.0%
marginal utility of
market will tend to drop
(2.9)
(2.9)
(5.7)
(3.7)
(4.0)
(2.5)
(4.1)
consumption
Risk of aggregate
Concern that when uncertainty increases about how the
28.7% 26.1% 32.6% 22.8%
31.8%
22.4% 31.8%
consumption volatility
U.S.’s material standard of living will change over the next
(2.6)
(3.2)
(4.6)
(3.0)
(3.6)
(3.0)
(3.6)
over next year
year, the stock market will tend to drop
Consumption
Concern that when the quality of my physical living situation 28.6% 24.4% 34.6% 25.4%
30.1%
19.2% 33.2%
composition risk
(how nice my housing is, the safety of my neighborhood,
(2.6)
(3.1)
(4.7)
(3.6)
(3.5)
(2.6)
(3.6)
etc.) is dropping faster than the rest of my material quality of
life, the stock market will tend to drop
Risk of long-run
Concern that when uncertainty increases about how the
26.3% 24.7% 28.5% 25.5%
26.7%
23.9% 27.4%
aggregate consumption
U.S.’s material standard of living will change over the 10
(2.3)
(2.8)
(4.1)
(3.2)
(3.1)
(3.0)
(3.1)
volatility
year period starting 1 year in the future, the stock market
will tend to drop

Table VIII
Responses to Increase in Consumption Commitments
This table presents the distribution of responses to the question “If your fixed expenses rose as a fraction of your income, would this rise cause
you to increase or decrease the percentage of your investable financial assets held in stocks?” (for stock market participants) or “If your fixed
expenses rose as a fraction of your income, would this rise make you more or less likely to invest in stocks?” (for stock market nonparticipants).
In column (1), the population over which these percentages are calculated is all respondents who rated consumption commitments to be a very
or extremely important factor in their equity allocation decision (N = 340). Subsequent columns report percentages over subsamples split by
stock market participation, wealth (at least $100,000 versus below $100,000 in investible financial assets), and education (with versus without
a bachelor’s degree). Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates. All statistics are calculated using sampling weights.
All
(1)

Participant
Yes
No
(2)
(3)

Wealth
High
Low
(4)
(5)

Education
High
Low
(6)
(7)

Decrease equity allocation percentage / less likely to
invest in equities
Neither increase nor decrease equity allocation percentage
/ neither more nor less likely to invest in equities
Increase equity allocation percentage / more likely to
invest in equities
I don’t know

45.1%
(4.6)
30.7%
(3.7)
13.0%
(3.4)
9.5%
(2.2)

31.1%
(5.3)
45.2%
(5.8)
13.0%
(5.2)
7.5%
(2.9)

58.8%
(6.5)
16.2%
(3.9)
13.3%
(4.4)
11.7%
(3.5)

37.6%
(8.1)
38.4%
(7.0)
10.1%
(5.1)
7.3%
(3.4)

47.5%
(5.5)
28.3%
(4.4)
14.0%
(4.1)
10.3%
(2.7)

44.1%
(6.9)
34.2%
(6.9)
9.4%
(4.7)
11.7%
(4.7)

45.5%
(5.8)
29.4%
(4.4)
14.4%
(4.3)
8.7%
(2.5)

Did not respond

1.6%
(1.4)

3.3%
(2.9)

0.0%
(0.0)

6.6%
(5.6)

0.0%
(0.0)

0.6%
(0.6)

2.0%
(2.0)

Table IX
Nonstandard Preferences
This table presents the percent of respondents who described the factor in the left column as very or extremely important, either for the full
sample or split by stock market participation, wealth (at least $100,000 versus below $100,000 in investible financial assets), and education
(with versus without a bachelor’s degree). Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates. All statistics are calculated using
sampling weights.
All
Survey text
(1)
The possibility of even small losses on
Loss aversion
my stock investments makes me worry
The difference between my current
Internal habit
material standard of living and the level I
am used to
Ambiguity/parameter I don’t have a good sense of the average
uncertainty
returns and risks of investing in stocks
The difference between my current
External habit
material standard of living and the level
everybody else around me has
experienced recently

(2)
28.2%
(2.6)
26.9%
(2.6)

Participant
Yes
No
(3)
(4)
22.2% 37.3%
(2.9)
(5.0)
24.7% 29.6%
(3.3)
(4.3)

High
(5)
24.0%
(3.6)
22.4%
(3.5)

Low
(6)
30.4%
(3.5)
29.3%
(3.5)

Education
High
Low
(7)
(8)
17.7% 33.3%
(2.8)
(3.6)
18.7% 30.9%
(3.0)
(3.5)

26.7%
(2.3)
16.3%
(2.1)

23.6%
(2.7)
11.8%
(2.4)

23.1%
(3.3)
13.1%
(3.2)

28.5%
(3.2)
17.9%
(2.8)

22.0% 29.0%
(2.9)
(3.2)
8.5% 20.0%
(2.0)
(3.0)

31.6%
(4.4)
22.6%
(4.0)

Wealth

Table X
Follow-Up Questions on Nonstandard Preferences
This table presents the distribution of responses to questions among those who indicated that internal habit (Panel A, N = 241), external habit
(Panel B, N = 131), or ambiguity/parameter uncertainty (Panel C, N = 268) are very or extremely important. Stock market participants were
asked, “If your material standard of living fell compared to what you are used to, would this fall cause you to increase or decrease the percentage
of your investable financial assets held in stocks?,” “If your material standard of living fell compared to what everybody else around you has
experienced recently, would this fall cause you to increase or decrease the percentage of your investable financial assets held in stocks?,”
and/or “If you had a better sense of the average returns and risks of investing in stocks, would that cause you to increase or decrease the
percentage of your investable financial assets held in stocks?” Nonparticipants were asked analogous questions regarding whether these factors
would “make you more or less likely to invest in stocks.” In column (1), the population over which these percentages are calculated is all
respondents who rated the relevant factor to be a very or extremely important factor in their equity allocation decision. Subsequent columns
report percentages over subsamples split by stock market participation, wealth (at least $100,000 versus below $100,000 in investible financial
assets), and education (with versus without a bachelor’s degree). Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates. All statistics are
calculated using sampling weights.

All

Participant
Wealth
Education
Yes
No
High
Low
High
Low
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Panel A: Internal Habit – Response to fall in standard of living compared to what you are used to
Decrease equity allocation percentage / less likely to
41.9%
39.0%
44.3%
45.5%
40.5%
60.6%
36.4%
invest in equities
(5.3)
(8.1)
(7.1)
(9.4)
(6.4)
(7.6)
(6.1)
Neither increase nor decrease equity allocation
26.1%
29.3%
22.9%
34.1%
22.9%
28.5%
25.4%
percentage / neither more nor less likely to invest in
(4.2)
(6.1)
(6.3)
(8.3)
(4.9)
(6.3)
(5.2)
equities
Increase equity allocation percentage / more likely to
7.6%
4.4%
11.6%
2.8%
9.4%
4.3%
8.5%
invest in equities
(3.4)
(2.2)
(6.7)
(1.4)
(4.6)
(1.9)
(4.3)
I don’t know
22.3%
23.4%
21.1%
10.0%
27.1%
5.7%
27.2%
(5.5)
(8.5)
(6.9)
(4.7)
(7.1)
(2.4)
(6.8)
Did not respond
2.1%
3.9%
0.0%
7.5%
0.0%
1.0%
2.4%
(1.9)
(3.5)
(0.0)
(6.4)
(0.0)
(1.0)
(2.4)
Panel B: External Habit – Response to fall in standard of living compared to what everybody else around you has experienced recently
Decrease equity allocation percentage / less likely to
46.9%
34.3%
57.2%
53.3%
44.5%
58.3%
44.5%
invest in equities
(7.1)
(11.1)
(9.5)
(13.5)
(8.1)
(11.1)
(8.1)
Neither increase nor decrease equity allocation
23.3%
22.9%
21.9%
20.1%
24.5%
29.9%
21.9%
percentage / neither more nor less likely to invest in
(5.9)
(6.7)
(9.0)
(7.8)
(7.4)
(9.3)
(6.9)
equities
Increase equity allocation percentage / more likely to
12.0%
19.5%
6.7%
3.8%
15.1%
6.5%
13.1%
invest in equities
(5.2)
(11.1)
(2.8)
(2.9)
(6.9)
(5.0)
(6.2)
I don’t know
14.3%
15.0%
14.1%
10.1%
15.9%
3.1%
16.7%
(4.9)
(6.4)
(7.2)
(7.0)
(6.1)
(2.4)
(5.8)
Did not respond
3.5%
8.3%
0.0%
12.8%
0.0%
2.1%
3.8%
(3.1)
(7.1)
(0.0)
(10.7)
(0.0)
(2.2)
(3.7)
Panel C: Ambiguity / Parameter Uncertainty – Response to having a better sense of the average returns and risks of investing in stocks
Decrease equity allocation percentage / less likely to
8.1%
3.9%
12.6%
0.2%
11.4%
1.3%
10.6%
invest in equities
(3.6)
(2.3)
(6.7)
(0.3)
(4.9)
(1.1)
(4.8)
Neither increase nor decrease equity allocation
17.3%
17.1%
17.6%
19.5%
16.5%
19.6%
16.5%
percentage / neither more nor less likely to invest in
(3.2)
(4.0)
(5.0)
(5.7)
(3.8)
(4.9)
(3.9)
equities
Increase equity allocation percentage / more likely to
57.7%
60.0%
55.5%
57.6%
57.9%
61.4%
56.3%
invest in equities
(4.7)
(6.1)
(7.1)
(8.0)
(5.8)
(6.3)
(5.9)
I don’t know
14.6%
14.8%
13.9%
15.5%
13.9%
16.9%
13.7%
(2.7)
(3.4)
(4.4)
(4.4)
(3.4)
(4.0)
(3.5)
Did not respond
2.3%
4.1%
0.3%
7.3%
0.2%
0.8%
2.8%
(1.9)
(3.6)
(0.3)
(6.2)
(0.2)
(0.8)
(2.6)

Table XI
Miscellaneous Factors
This table presents the percent of respondents who described the factor in the left column as very or extremely important, either for the full
sample or split by stock market participation, wealth (at least $100,000 versus below $100,000 in investible financial assets), and education
(with versus without a bachelor’s degree). Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates. All statistics are calculated using
sampling weights.
All

Need cash on hand for
routine expenses
Stocks take too long to
convert to cash in
emergency
Default allocation in
retirement savings plan

Stock market returns
before I was born
Rule of thumb

Survey text
(1)
The amount of cash I need to have on hand to
pay routine expenses
Concern that stock investments will take too
long to convert into spendable cash in an
emergency
The default investment allocation in my (and/or
my spouse/partner’s, if applicable) work-based
retirement savings plan (for example, 401(k),
403(b), Thrift Savings Plan)
What I know about the stock market’s returns
during the decades before I was born
A rule of thumb (for example, “The percent
you invest in stocks should be 100 minus your
age” or “Invest one-third in stocks, one-third in
bonds, and one-third in real estate”)

(2)
47.2%
(3.0)
29.1%
(3.1)

Participant
Yes
No
(3)
(4)
38.6%
59.9%
(3.4)
(5.0)
24.2%
36.6%
(3.0)
(5.8)

Wealth
High
Low
(5)
(6)
40.2%
50.7%
(3.9)
(4.0)
22.5%
32.4%
(3.7)
(4.2)

Education
High
Low
(7)
(8)
35.4% 52.9%
(3.7)
(3.9)
18.0% 34.5%
(3.0)
(4.2)

25.7%
(3.0)

27.3%
(3.0)

24.1%
(6.0)

24.5%
(3.3)

26.4%
(4.2)

20.4%
(3.0)

28.3%
(4.1)

15.9%
(2.2)
12.7%
(1.8)

14.4%
(2.6)
11.1%
(2.3)

18.4%
(3.9)
14.2%
(3.0)

15.4%
(3.1)
11.6%
(2.8)

16.2%
(2.9)
13.3%
(2.4)

16.1%
(3.0)
7.5%
(1.9)

15.8%
(2.9)
15.2%
(2.6)

Table XII
Fixed Costs of Stock Market Participation
This table presents, among respondents who said that “the amount of money I have available to invest in stocks is too small” is a very or
extremely important factor in their not holding stocks, the percent who described the factor in the left column as very or extremely important
in causing the amount of money they have to be too small. The percentages are calculated over either the full subsample (N = 211) or over the
subsample split by stock market participation, wealth (at least $100,000 versus below $100,000 in investible financial assets), and education
(with versus without a bachelor’s degree). The question about home crowd-out is asked only of homeowners in the subsample (N = 96).
Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates. All statistics are calculated using sampling weights. **** Among homeowners
only.
All

Costs of staying up-todate
Costs of learning
about stocks
Costs of hiring an
adviser
Costs of maintaining
an account
Costs of maintaining
an adviser
Costs of setting up an
account
Tax complexity
Home crowd-out****

Survey text
(1)
The ongoing time, money, and/or effort it would take
to stay up-to-date on the stock market
The amount of time, money, and/or effort it would
take to learn about stocks
The amount of time, money, and/or effort it would
take to hire an investment adviser
The ongoing time, money, and/or effort it would take
to maintain an investment account after setting it up
The ongoing time, money, and/or effort it would take
to maintain a relationship with an investment adviser
after hiring him or her
The amount of time, money, and/or effort it would
take to set up an investment account
Stock investments would make my tax returns harder
to prepare
You said you own your home. How important is that
in causing you to not have enough money to make it
worthwhile to invest in stocks?

Wealth

(2)
45.3%
(7.2)
41.2%
(6.8)
39.3%
(6.7)
37.4%
(6.4)
37.4%
(6.4)

High
(3)
78.5%
(11.4)
76.9%
(12.1)
65.7%
(15.9)
56.2%
(18.4)
59.8%
(17.7)

Low
(4)
44.2%
(7.3)
40.1%
(6.8)
38.5%
(6.8)
36.8%
(6.6)
36.7%
(6.5)

Education
High
Low
(5)
(6)
47.6%
44.6%
(10.1)
(8.9)
40.8%
41.4%
(9.4)
(8.4)
31.8%
41.7%
(8.5)
(8.5)
37.8%
37.3%
(9.3)
(7.9)
35.5%
38.0%
(9.0)
(7.9)

30.8%
(5.8)
27.6%
(5.4)
26.6%
(6.9)

58.6%
(17.8)
14.9%
(9.5)
62.9%
(18.2)

29.9%
(5.8)
28.0%
(5.6)
23.8%
(7.0)

24.0%
(7.8)
25.8%
(8.6)
26.0%
(9.5)

32.9%
(7.4)
28.2%
(6.6)
26.9%
(9.2)

Table XIII
Principal Components Analysis
This table shows loadings on the first six principal components computed over the equity share factors asked of every respondent in Table II.
* indicates factors with a loading above 0.32.
Principal component 1:
Neoclassical asset pricing
factors

Principal component 2:
Return predictability and
defaults

Principal component 3:
Consumption needs,
habit, and human capital

Principal component 4:
Discomfort with market

Principal component 5:
Advice

Principal component 6:
Personal experience

Risk of aggregate
consumption over
next year

0.41*

Stock market
returns meanrevert

0.48*

Consumption
commitments

0.45*

Lack of
knowledge
about how to
invest

0.50*

Advice from
media

0.52*

Experience of
living through
stock market
returns

0.66*

Risk of aggregate
consumption
volatility over next
year

0.39*

Expected stock
returns lower than
usual right now

0.40*

Time until
significant nonretirement
expense

0.43*

Ambiguity /
Parameter
uncertainty

0.49*

Advice from a
friend, family
member, or
coworker

0.51*

Personal
experience
investing in
stock market

0.64*

Risk of long-run
aggregate
consumption

0.39*

Stock market
returns have
momentum

0.37*

Internal habit

0.37*

Lack of
trustworthy
adviser

0.42*

External habit

0.29

Stock market
returns before I
was born

0.21

Risk of long-run
aggregate
consumption
volatility

0.38*

Default allocation
in retirement
savings plan

0.34*

Human capital
fraction of total
wealth

0.34*

Loss aversion

0.38*

Rule of thumb

0.28

Return covariance
with marginal
utility of
consumption

0.35*

Rule of thumb

0.26

External habit

0.31

Lack of trust in
market
participants

0.29

Advice from a
professional
financial
adviser

0.25

Return covariance
with marginal
utility of money

0.33*

Religious beliefs,
values, and
experiences

0.25

Risk of
illness/injury

0.31

Stock market
returns before I
was born

0.25

Consumption
composition risk

0.25

Stocks take too
long to convert to
cash in emergency

0.24

Need cash on
hand for routine
expenses

0.27

Rare disaster risk

0.20

Table XIV
Regression of Equity Share on Principal Component Scores
This table shows coefficients from regressions of the fraction of each respondent’s investible financial assets held in equities on the
respondent’s first six principal component scores normalized by each of their standard deviations. The regressions in columns (2) and (4)
additionally control for respondent demographics: age, age squared, and dummies for gender, living situation, education, race, Hispanic or
Latino identification, and household income category. Columns (1) and (2) are estimated using OLS, and columns (3) and (4) are estimated
using tobit regressions censored at 0% and 100%. Observations are not weighted by their sampling weights (i.e., each is equally weighted).
Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses below each point estimate. The regressions exclude seven respondents who did
not answer the equity allocation percentage question and four respondents who reported an allocation percentage greater than 100% (these four
responses were 5,000% or above). Regressions with demographic controls exclude one respondent who did not provide information on race
and one respondent who answered the question on home ownership with “unsure.” * Significant at the 5% level. ** Significant at the 1% level.
OLS

Tobit

Principal component 1
(Neoclassical asset pricing factors)

(1)
-3.65*
(1.43)

(2)
-3.16*
(1.34)

(3)
-5.26*
(2.41)

(4)
-4.53*
(2.15)

Principal component 2
(Return predictability and defaults)

4.78**
(1.50)

4.73**
(1.47)

8.67**
(2.60)

7.90**
(2.44)

Principal component 3
(Consumption needs, habit, and human capital)

-2.29
(1.48)

0.042
(1.40)

-4.70
(2.49)

0.13
(2.31)

-9.21**
(1.38)

-6.45**
(1.34)

-15.58**
(2.46)

-10.94**
(2.30)

Principal component 5
(Advice)

-0.77
(1.23)

1.41
(1.16)

-1.74
(2.18)

2.38
(2.00)

Principal component 6
(Personal experience)

6.06**
(1.15)

1.77
(1.16)

9.22**
(1.73)

1.92
(1.63)

Constant

36.54**
(1.08)

11.70
(14.69)

25.55**
(1.85)

-16.14
(24.61)

No
1,002

Yes
1,000

No
1,002

Yes
1,000

Principal component 4
(Discomfort with market)

Demographic controls
Observations

Table XV
Actively Managed Mutual Funds
Panel A presents, among respondents who said that they had ever purchased shares in an actively managed stock mutual fund (N = 459), the percent who described
the factor in the left column as very or extremely important in their decision to invest in an actively managed stock fund instead of a passive stock fund. Panel B
presents, among all survey respondents (N = 1,013), the percent who agree or strongly agree with the statement in the column (1). The percentages are calculated
over either the full sample for the panel or over the panel’s sample split by whether the respondent reported knowing what a mutual fund is, wealth (at least
$100,000 versus below $100,000 in investible financial assets), and education (with versus without a bachelor’s degree). Standard errors are in parentheses below
the point estimates. All statistics are calculated using sampling weights.
Knew what mutual
Wealth
Education
fund is
All
Survey text
Yes
No
High
Low
High
Low
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Panel A: How important were the following factors in your decision(s) to invest in an actively managed stock fund instead of a passively managed stock fund?
Percent responding factor is very or extremely important
Higher returns
A belief that the actively managed stock mutual
51.1%
48.7%
64.7%
47.8%
55.7%
44.9%
58.4%
fund would give me higher returns on average
(4.0)
(4.2)
(10.3)
(4.7)
(6.8)
(5.0)
(6.0)
than a passively managed stock mutual fund
Adviser recommendation
The recommendation of an investment adviser I
47.9%
45.6%
60.7%
45.5%
51.2%
50.3%
45.0%
hired
(4.0)
(4.2)
(11.9)
(4.6)
(7.0)
(5.0)
(6.2)
Hedging
A belief that even though the actively managed
27.3%
24.9%
40.9%
23.4%
32.8%
25.8%
29.2%
stock mutual fund would have lower returns on
(3.5)
(3.6)
(11.3)
(3.6)
(6.6)
(4.8)
(5.3)
average than a passively managed stock mutual
fund, the actively managed fund would have
higher returns than the passively managed fund
when the economy does poorly (for example,
during recessions or stock market crashes)
Passive not available
A suitable passively managed stock mutual fund
18.2%
16.4%
28.1%
15.7%
21.6%
15.1%
21.8%
wasn’t available in my employer-sponsored
(3.5)
(3.7)
(10.5)
(4.0)
(6.3)
(4.0)
(6.0)
retirement savings plan
Panel B: How much do you agree with the following statement? Percent responding agree or strongly agree
Managerial skill
When an actively managed stock mutual fund has
46.0%
53.9%
37.0%
56.0%
40.9%
49.1%
44.6%
had significantly higher past returns than the
(2.9)
(3.3)
(4.7)
(3.7)
(3.8)
(3.8)
(3.8)
overall stock market, this is strong evidence that
its manager has good stock-picking skills
Decreasing returns to scale When an actively managed stock mutual fund gets
18.2%
20.8%
15.2%
25.2%
14.6%
17.8%
18.4%
more money to manage, it becomes harder for it to
(2.2)
(2.7)
(3.8)
(3.5)
(2.8)
(2.6)
(3.1)
generate higher returns than the overall stock
market

Table XVI
Cross-Section of Stock Returns
This table presents the distribution of responses to questions about the expected returns and risks
of value stocks versus growth stocks, and high-momentum stocks versus low-momentum stocks.
The high wealth subsample is those with at least $100,000 of investible assets. Standard errors are
in parentheses below the point estimates. All statistics are calculated using sampling weights.

Higher returns
About the same
Lower returns
No opinion
No response

Riskier
Equally risky
Less risky
No opinion
No response

Panel A: Expected returns
Compared to a stock whose price fell
a lot over the past year, I expect a
stock whose price rose a lot over the
Compared to a growth stock, I expect
a value stock to normally have… over past year to normally have… over the
next year on average
the next year, on average
All
High wealth
All
High wealth
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
24.7%
27.7%
24.3%
26.0%
(2.3)
(3.2)
(2.9)
(3.3)
20.3%
29.2%
32.1%
32.1%
(2.0)
(3.4)
(2.7)
(3.5)
28.1%
22.4%
14.2%
20.3%
(3.2)
(3.2)
(2.0)
(3.4)
25.5%
17.3%
28.0%
18.2%
(2.4)
(2.8)
(2.5)
(2.3)
1.4%
3.4%
1.4%
3.4%
(0.6)
(1.7)
(0.6)
(1.7)
Panel B: Risk
Compared to a stock whose price fell a
lot over the past year, I expect a stock
whose price rose a lot over the past
Compared to a growth stock, I expect
year to normally be… over the next
a value stock to normally be… over
year on average
the next year, on average
All
High wealth
All
High wealth
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
14.0%
16.0%
24.7%
23.9%
(1.7)
(2.8)
(3.1)
(3.6)
15.8%
13.4%
33.6%
43.9%
(1.9)
(2.3)
(2.5)
(3.7)
43.9%
54.0%
14.3%
13.6%
(3.0)
(3.7)
(2.0)
(2.1)
25.0%
13.1%
26.1%
15.2%
(2.4)
(2.0)
(2.5)
(2.1)
1.4%
3.4%
1.4%
3.4%
(0.6)
(1.7)
(0.6)
(1.7)

Table XVII
Correlates of Beliefs About the Cross-Section of Stock Returns
This table shows ordinary least squares regression coefficients, where the dependent variables are dummies for the respondent saying
that value stocks have higher expected returns than growth stocks, value stocks have higher risk than growth stocks, value stocks have
higher risk-adjusted returns than growth stocks, and analogous variables for high-momentum stocks. The explanatory variables are age
in years divided by 100 and dummies for having at least a bachelor’s degree, having at least $100,000 in investible financial assets,
having income of at least $100,000, and being female. Observations are not weighted by their sampling weights (i.e., each is equally
weighted). Two respondents for whom wealth in unavailable and four respondents for whom income is unavailable are coded as nonhigh wealth and non-high income, respectively. The results are virtually identical if we omit these six respondents from the regression.
Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses below the point estimates. * Significant at the 5% level. ** Significant at
the 1% level.
Value stocks

Age/100
High education
High wealth
High income
Female
Constant
Observations

Higher expected
returns
(1)
-0.001
(0.105)
0.008
(0.029)
0.058
(0.034)
0.026
(0.039)
-0.054
(0.029)
0.261**
(0.064)
1,013

Higher risk
(2)
0.077
(0.088)
-0.009
(0.025)
0.003
(0.028)
-0.012
(0.030)
-0.007
(0.023)
0.121*
(0.051)
1,013

Higher riskadjusted returns
(3)
0.060
(0.109)
0.026
(0.032)
0.082*
(0.036)
0.029
(0.041)
-0.050
(0.030)
0.254**
(0.068)
1,013

High-momentum stocks
Higher expected
Higher riskHigher risk
returns
adjusted returns
(5)
(4)
(6)
0.122
-0.251*
0.294**
(0.104)
(0.098)
(0.101)
0.053
0.052
0.021
(0.030)
(0.027)
(0.029)
-0.047
0.025
-0.053
(0.034)
(0.030)
(0.033)
0.067
0.033
0.012
(0.037)
(0.036)
(0.035)
0.021
-0.090**
0.025
(0.028)
(0.026)
(0.027)
0.161**
0.351**
0.062
(0.061)
(0.060)
(0.058)
1,013
1,013
1,013

Appendix Table AI
Why Did You Not Get Around to Investing in Stocks?
This table presents, among respondents who said that “I intended to invest in stocks but never got around to it” is a very or extremely
important factor in their not holding stocks, the percent who described the factor in the left column as very or extremely important in
causing them to not get around to investing in stocks. The percentages are calculated over either the full subsample (N = 79) or over the
subsample split by stock market participation, wealth (at least $100,000 versus below $100,000 in investible financial assets), and
education (with versus without a bachelor’s degree). Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates. All statistics are
calculated using sampling weights.
All

Procrastinated

Survey text
(1)
I have less money available now than when I
originally planned on investing in stocks
I discovered that it takes more time, money,
and/or effort to invest in stocks than I expected
I procrastinated for no good reason

Too busy

I was too busy

Not important
enough

I decided it wasn’t important enough to think
about it

Less money
available now
Too costly

(2)
42.0%
(13.4)
36.5%
(12.0)
18.3%
(7.0)
17.9%
(7.0)
12.6%
(5.8)

Wealth
High
(3)
9.8%
(10.7)
29.2%
(25.0)
53.2%
(24.4)
26.0%
(19.1)
0.0%
(0.0)

Low
(4)
42.9%
(14.0)
36.7%
(12.4)
17.3%
(7.0)
17.7%
(7.1)
12.9%
(6.1)

Education
High
Low
(5)
(6)
61.3%
36.9%
(13.4)
(14.8)
63.6%
29.4%
(12.8)
(12.4)
12.1%
19.9%
(6.8)
(9.1)
38.7%
12.4%
(14.2)
(6.2)
29.1%
8.2%
(15.2)
(4.7)

