NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF OWN-GENDER JURIES ON CONVICTION RATES
Mark Hoekstra
Brittany Street
Working Paper 25013
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25013

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Mark Hoekstra and Brittany Street. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Own-Gender Juries on Conviction Rates
Mark Hoekstra and Brittany Street
NBER Working Paper No. 25013
September 2018
JEL No. J16,K41,K42
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the extent to which criminal conviction rates are affected by the similarity in
gender of the defendant and jury. To identify effects, we exploit random variation in both the
assignment to jury pools and the ordering of potential jurors. We do so using detailed
administrative data on the juror selection process and trial proceedings for two large counties in
Florida. Results indicate that own-gender juries result in significantly lower conviction rates on
drug charges, though we find no evidence of effects for other charges. Estimates indicate that a
one standard deviation increase in expected own-gender jurors (~10 percentage points) results in
an 18 percentage point reduction in conviction rates on drug charges, which is highly significant
even after adjusting for multiple comparisons. This results in a 13 percentage point decline in the
likelihood of being sentenced to at least some jail time. These findings highlight how drawing an
opposite-gender jury can impose significant costs on defendants, and demonstrate that owngender bias can occur even in settings where the importance of being impartial is actively pressed
on participants.

Mark Hoekstra
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
3087 Allen Building
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
markhoekstra@tamu.edu
Brittany Street
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843-4228
brittany210@tamu.edu

1

Introduction

A central right of the accused in the U.S. criminal justice system is the right to a trial before an impartial
jury. This right is enshrined in the 6th amendment of the Bill of Rights to the U.S. Constitution, and
was inherited from the Magna Carta, which guaranteed that no man be punished without “the lawful
judgment of his peers.” There are ongoing concerns, however, about the actual impartiality of juries
in general, and whether jurors favor those similar to themselves in particular. These concerns have
resulted in court rulings that prohibit excluding potential jurors on the basis of race, ethnicity, or sex
(Batson v. Kentucky, 1986; J.E.B. v. Alabama, 1994). However, while recent research has documented
bias in favor of own-race defendants (Anwar, Bayer and Hjalmarsson, 2012), there is little evidence
on whether modern juries favor own-gender defendants. The purpose of this paper is to test whether
own-gender juries affect criminal conviction rates and sentencing outcomes.
The primary difficulty in doing so is that seated juries are the outcome of a nonrandom jury selection
process over which prosecutors, defense attorneys, and jurors have significant influence. As a result,
it is difficult to distinguish the effect of own-gender juries from confounding factors, such as defense
attorney quality, that lead some cases to have more jurors of the same gender as the defendant. To
overcome this selection problem, we use the randomization of the initial juror pool, and the random
ordering of potential jurors within that pool, to predict the proportion of female jurors seated on the
jury. This enables us to use only the variation in jury gender due to the fact women are (randomly)
assigned to some jury pools more than others, and women are (randomly) assigned lower numbers
in the ordering of some jury pools than in others. Because the seated jury consists of the first six or
twelve ordered jurors who are not excluded by either a challenge for cause or a peremptory challenge
(i.e., a challenge for which no reason must be given), this variation is orthogonal to other determinants
of trial outcomes. We use this quasi-random variation in jury gender to identify own-gender effects by
differencing out the impact of defendant and jury gender, similar to studies on racial bias (e.g., Price
and Wolfers, 2010; Shayo and Zussman, 2011; West, 2017).
To implement this research design, we use a new data set on juror characteristics and conviction and
sentencing outcomes for Palm Beach and Hillsborough counties, which are the third and fourth most
populous counties in Florida. These data include all felony and misdemeanor trials over a two year
period, and contain detailed information on defendant characteristics as well as case characteristics
measured at both the charge and trial levels. Importantly, the data also include demographic information
on potential jurors and the randomly-assigned ordering of each potential juror within the jury pool. Using
this ordering and the empirical probabilities that jurors assigned a given number are seated on the jury,
we predict the expected proportion of women on each jury, thereby isolating the as-good-as-random
variation in the gender composition of seated juries. Importantly, we show that the predicted proportion

1

of women on the jury is strongly predictive of the gender composition of the seated jury. We also show
that this variation is uncorrelated with defendant and case characteristics, and with expected conviction
rates of male and female defendants as predicted using exogenous characteristics.
Results provide strong evidence of own-gender juries on conviction rates for drug offenses. Estimates indicate that a one standard deviation increase in own-gender jurors (∼10 percentage points)
results in a 18 percentage point reduction in conviction rates on drug charges. Importantly, this effect is
significant at the five percent level even after performing the multiple inference adjustment proposed by
Anderson (2008). We also show that this change in jury gender composition leads to a 13 percentage
point reduction in the likelihood of being sentenced to jail. In contrast, we find no evidence of effects for
driving, property, or violent crime offenses. We hypothesize that the large effects for drug offenses are
consistent with a model in which jurors are more likely to exhibit bias in cases where they have significant disagreements with U.S. law. However, we emphasize that we cannot rule out other explanations
for the heterogeneity in own-gender effects. In addition, we present suggestive evidence that effects are
driven largely by cases in which the jury reaches a verdict, as opposed to cases in which a plea deal is
reached prior to the trial.
To our knowledge, this is the first paper to use random variation in own-gender juries to examine
effects on convictions in modern criminal courts. In doing so, the paper contributes to two literatures.
The first is the broad literature examining gender bias in education, labor, housing, and product markets.1 In addition, this paper complements a smaller body of research examining the impact of judge
and jury characteristics on criminal trial outcomes. It is most similar to Anwar, Bayer and Hjalmarsson
(2012), who document the impact of having a black juror in the jury pool on felony conviction outcomes.
It is also related to Anwar, Bayer and Hjalmarsson (forthcoming), who show that while the introduction
of women on English juries in 1919 had no effect on overall conviction rates, it resulted in additional
convictions for sex offenses and for violent crime cases with female versus male victims.2 In assessing
the role of jurors in affecting male versus female sentencing outcomes, this paper also complements a
growing literature that documents and explains gender differences in sentencing (Bindler and Hjalmarsson, 2017; Butcher, Park and Piehl, 2017). More generally, this study relates to a broader literature
on the impact of judge gender (Johnson, 2014; Knepper, 2018; Schanzenbach, 2005; Steffensmeier
and Hebert, 1999) and other judge and jury characteristics.3 Finally, in documenting how defendants

1 For

example, see Abrevaya and Hamermesh (2012); Ayres and Siegelman (1995); Bagues and Esteve-Volart (2010); Bagues,
Sylos-Labini and Zinovyeva (2017); Breda and Ly (2015); Dahl and Moretti (2008); De Paola and Scoppa (2015); Goldin and
Rouse (2000); Lavy (2008); Neumark, Bank and Van Nort (1996); Moss-Racusin, Dovidio, Brescoll, Graham and Handelsman
(2012)
2 While we focus on the effect of own-gender juries in this paper, we also examine the effect of jury gender composition on
overall conviction rates. Results are shown in Appendix Table A1, in which we regress an indicator for conviction on our measure
of expected proportion women on the jury. Overall, we find no evidence that additional female jurors are more or less likely to
convict overall.
3 Examples include Anwar, Bayer and Hjalmarsson (2014; 2015); Mitchell, Haw, Pfeifer and Meissner (2005); Cohen and Yang
(forthcoming); Depew, Eren and Mocan (2017); and George (2001).

2

who draw opposite-gender juries are more likely to be convicted and sentenced, this paper also complements recent papers documenting unfairness in conviction and sentencing based on other factors
(Eren and Mocan, 2018; Philippe and Ouss, 2017).
The results of this study have important implications. First, they suggest that even in settings where
participants are actively reminded of the importance and necessity of being fair and impartial, sizeable
gender biases can still occur. In addition, we note that there is strong evidence that higher conviction
and incarceration rates lead to increased recidivism and worsened labor market outcomes (Aizer and
Doyle Jr, 2015; Mueller-Smith, 2015). As a result, our findings suggest that drawing an opposite-gender
jury can impose significant long-run costs on defendants.

2

Background and Data

2.1

The Assignment of Potential Jurors to the Jury Pool and the Voir Dire Process

As described above, a critical feature of our research design is the random assignment of residents
to panels of potential jurors, and the random ordering of residents within each panel. In the Florida
counties we study, county court offices randomly mail jury summons to residents who have a driver’s
license or identification card. Potential jurors arrive at the courthouse on the assigned day and enter
their information into a computer system. Each potential juror is then randomly assigned to a case. In
addition, within each case each potential juror is assigned a number.
The potential jurors for a given case are then escorted to the courtroom for the voir dire, or jury questioning, process. As described by U.S. Supreme Court Justice Rehnquist, “Voir dire examination serves
to protect [the right to an impartial jury] by exposing possible biases, both known and unknown, on the
part of the jurors. Demonstrated bias in the responses to questions on voir dire may result in a juror’s
being excused for cause; hints of bias not sufficient to warrant challenge for cause may assist parties in
exercising their peremptory challenges” (McDonough Power Equipment, Inc. v. Greenwood, 1984, page
464). Prosecutors and defense attorneys are allowed unlimited challenges for cause, though meeting
the requirements for removing a potential juror is difficult, and such requests are not always granted
by the judge. In Hillsborough and Palm Beach Counties, each side is typically allowed up to three
peremptory challenges to remove jurors they believe unlikely to be favorable toward their side of the
case. The final jury thus consists of the first six or twelve jurors not struck by either side, beginning with
the potential juror assigned number one. Any remaining potential jurors are then excused or returned
to jury services to be reassigned.

3

2.2

Data

We obtained detailed administrative data for all misdemeanor and felony cases that were assigned
potential juror pools in preparation for trial in Palm Beach and Hillsborough Counties from 2014 to 2016.4
These are the third and fourth largest counties in Florida, respectively, each with a 2016 population of
over 1.3 million people. Importantly, these data include comprehensive information on the voir dire
process along with case attributes. Specifically, we observe the pool of jurors randomly assigned to
each case including name, seat number, and outcome of the selection process.
Data from Hillsborough County also include the gender of potential jurors, as well as date of birth,
race, and address. For Palm Beach County, we infer gender on the basis of the first name. We do so
using an online application programming interface called genderize.io. The application predicts gender
based on first name using a large dataset comprised of user profiles from several major social networks. Using this approach, we are able to predict probabilistic genders for 92% of potential jurors.
For the names that we do not predict, we assign 0.5 to the female gender indicator variable under the
assumption that the missing name is equally likely to be male or female. To verify the accuracy of this
approach to inferring gender, we compare predicted gender to actual observed gender in Hillsborough
County, and find that we accurately predict gender 94.38% of the time. We then combine potential juror
order and the gender of each potential juror to predict the number of women we would expect to serve,
on average, for each trial.
From these data we are able to compute empirical probabilities of being seated on the jury for each
spot in the order in the jury panel.5 To do so, we let the probability vary by size of the potential jury pool
and the number of jurors being selected. Standard juries in Florida consist of six jurors, though the judge
may decide to seat 12 jurors in some cases. Importantly, this decision is made prior to the assignment
of the jury pool, and thus should not affect the internal validity of our approach. These probabilities
are shown in Figure 1, where panel a shows the probability of being seated on the jury for six-person
juries, and panel b shows the same for twelve-person juries. For example, for six-person jury trials with
a panel size of 20 or less, the probability of being selected for the jury is around 40 percent for the first
10 or so potential jurors, and then declines to around 20 percent for the 20th-ordered potential juror. By
comparison, for 12-person juries selected from panels of 50 to 100 potential jurors, the probability of
being seated ranges from 25 to 30 percent for the first 40 jurors to close to zero for the potential juror

4 There

are 32 cases in Palm Beach County and 1 case in Hillsborough County where there should be a jury panel but the
information was not in the case file. Only two of these cases involve drug related charges.
5 In some cases, a second panel of potential jurors was used. Our understanding is this sometimes occurred because the
first panel did not result in enough seated jurors, and sometimes because the judge chose not use the first panel at all for some
reason. However, we still observe the first (and subsequent) juror panels in those cases, and we order the jurors accordingly. For
example, if each of the first two panels had 50 potential jurors, we assign number 51 to the the first ordered juror in the second
panel, and number 100 to the last juror in that second panel. We do so even if no jurors from the first panel were seated on the
jury.

4

assigned last (e.g., 100th) in the jury pool.
To predict the number of women that will be seated on the jury, we interact the estimated probabilities
shown in Figure 1 with a gender indicator variable equal to one for females.6 Summing this over the
pool of potential jurors gives the expected number of females seated. Since trials in our data consist of
both six and 12 person juries, we divide by the jury size to get the expected proportion of females. This
enables us to make meaningful comparisons across jury panel sizes. In Section 3.1 we demonstrate
that the predicted proportion of women on the jury is highly correlated with the actual proportion of
women on the jury. In addition, in Section 3.2 we show that the expected proportion of women on the
jury is uncorrelated with case and charge characteristics, which is consistent with random assignment
to panels and random ordering within panels.
For each case in our data, we observe the charges brought against the defendant and the outcome
of each charge including verdict and sentencing. Our primary outcome of interest is an indicator for
whether the defendant is convicted of the charge. Importantly, our data include guilty and innocent
verdicts issued for all cases for which a jury panel was assigned in preparation for trial. For example,
we observe guilty pleas that arise after the jury pool was assigned as well as verdicts found by the jury.
This precludes the possibility of selection bias, since some cases settle after the prosecutor or defense
attorney observes the composition of the potential jury pool or the actual seated jury. In addition, we
note that for some charges in Florida, a verdict can be given in which adjudication is withheld. In that
case the defendant is assigned a term of probation, and upon successful completion of that term is
spared a conviction on his or her record. This is the outcome in only 3.56 percent of all charges in
our sample, and only 4.05 percent of drug charges. For the main analysis we treat this outcome as
guilty, though in Table 7 we show that estimates are similar if we instead classify it as not guilty. Our
second outcome of interest is whether and for how long a defendant is sentenced to be incarcerated
upon the conclusion of the trial. We define this outcome at the trial level, rather than charge level,
since the sentences of individual charges are often served concurrently. In each case we observe the
defendant’s gender and race along with additional case characteristics including the severity of charges
and the judge assigned to the case.
Finally, we note that because the purpose of this paper is to examine the effect of own-gender
juries, we exclude cases linked to charges in which fewer than 10 percent of defendants are female.
Consequently, we only consider cases that involve a drug, driving, property, or violent crime. In addition,
we limit violent crimes to domestic crimes, assaults, and robberies. This is due to the low number of
female defendants in other violent crime categories, such as sexual assault and murder, which gives us
very little variation in defendant gender.

6 The

probability of a potential juror being female is used for panels in Palm Beach County.

5

Summary statistics are shown in Table 1, where Panel A shows characteristics at the trial level,
and Panel B shows characteristics at the charge level. We have a total of 1,542 cases/defendants,
representing 3,055 separate charges. Sixty-seven percent of defendants are convicted of at least one
charge, while men are convicted at somewhat higher rates than women (67 versus 63 percent). Across
all cases, on average defendants are sentenced to 1,673 days in jail, though men are sentenced for
significantly longer than women (1,931 versus 268 days).7 Sixteen percent of our defendants are female,
48 percent are white, and the average age is 37.

3

Methods

In order to identify the effects of own-gender juries, we use a generalized difference-in-differences approach. Specifically, we estimate the following linear probability model:

Convictct =β1 Def F emalet + β2 E(P ropF emale)t + β3 Def F emaleXE(P ropF emale)t
(1)
+ Xt + Countyt + CountyXCrimect + ct
where the outcome of interest Convictct is a binary variable equal to one if the defendant is convicted
guilty of charge c in trial t. Def F emalet an indicator variable equal to 1 if the defendant in trial t is
female, controls for differences in conviction based on defendant gender. Similarly, E(P ropF emale)t ,
the expected proportion of females seated on the jury for trial t, accounts for differences in the decision
to convict due to the gender of jurors. The coefficient of interest, β3 , measures the effect of own-gender
juries on the outcome. Xt is the set of control variables at the trial level including defendant’s age
and race, the total number of charges against the defendant, if the case involves a violent charge, the
predicted age of the jury pool, and judge gender. All specifications include county fixed effects along
with county-by-crime fixed effects when considering more than one crime category. Observations are
weighted by the inverse of the total number of charges in a trial.
Robust standard errors are clustered at the defendant level to allow for errors to be correlated across
charges and trials for a given defendant. In addition, because we also test for the presence of owngender juries by crime severity (felony vs. misdemeanor), and by crime type (drug, driving, property,
and violent), we also report False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted Q-values. These are computed using
the method proposed by Anderson (2008), and adjust for the fact that we examine effects on conviction
for six different categories of crime.8 These are interpreted similarly to p-values from a two-tailed test,

7 We

assign a sentence of zero days to those defendants who are sentenced to time served.
we also test for sentencing effects, the focus of the paper and therefore the multiple inference adjustment is on convictions. This is because in these counties, conviction is the only outcome over which juries have direct control. In these counties,
sentencing decisions are made by judges based on those conviction outcomes.
8 While

6

and explicitly adjust for the increased likelihood of estimating extreme coefficients when making multiple
comparisons.
In addition, we also test whether the effect of own-gender juries on conviction translates to differences in sentencing, which is decided by a judge rather than the jury. For that reason, we focus primarily
on the category of charges for which we find an effect on conviction. Due to the discrete nature of prison
sentences, the presence of many zero observations, and the wide dispersion of sentence lengths, we
estimate the effect of own-gender juries on the distribution of sentences using binary indicators. This is
done at the trial level as the sentences for individual charges are often served concurrently. Formally
we estimate the following ordinary least squares regression for each binary sentence length:
AtleastXDayst =β1 Def F emalet + β2 E(P ropF emale)t + β3 Def F emaleXE(P ropF emale)t
(2)
+ Xt + Countyt + CountyXCrimet + t
where AtleastXDayst is a binary indicator for X days sentenced in trial t with X starting with at least
1 day and increasing by 6 month increments to 10 years. The covariates are defined as in the previous
equation where β3 is interpreted as the degree of own gender juries. We allow for correlation in errors
among trials with the same defendant by clustering at the defendant level.
The intuition of this generalized difference-in-differences approach is to compare the difference in
how male and female defendants are judged by less-female juries to the difference in how male and
female defendants are judged by more-female juries. This approach allows more-female juries to convict
at different rates than more-male juries, so long as this difference is constant across male and female
defendants. Equivalently, we allow male defendants to be “more guilty” than female defendants, though
we require that this difference in underlying guilt be similar for more-male and more-female juries.
The identifying assumption of this approach is that while male defendants may have different underlying likelihood of conviction than female defendants, in the absence of a treatment effect the difference
in their conviction rates should be the same for more-male juries as for more-female juries. This assumption could be violated in a couple of different ways. The first is if our measure of jury gender
is correlated with other factors that affect conviction rates. For example, if skilled defense attorneys
are able to strike opposite-gender jurors at higher-than-average rates, then we might observe lower
conviction rates when there are more same-sex jurors and falsely attribute it to own-gender juries. To
overcome this problem, we construct a measure of expected jury gender composition that is based on
the random assignment of individuals to jury pools and the random ordering of individuals within the
jury pool. We show that this measure of jury gender is both strongly correlated with the composition of
the seated jury, and is orthogonal to other observed determinants of conviction rates such as defendant
and case characteristics. We also show that the difference in the guilt propensity of male and female
defendants, as predicted using all exogenous characteristics, does not vary with the gender composition
7

of the jury.
The second way in which the identification assumption can fail is if female jurors tend to be more
likely to convict defendants of certain crimes (or when certain other crimes are also being charged), and
if those crimes are disproportionately committed by certain genders. For example, if women are more
likely to convict on a theft charge when a violent crime was also committed at the same time, and if
male defendants are more likely than female defendants to be charged with both theft and violent crime,
this approach could overstate the effect of own-gender juries. Similarly, if women are more likely than
men to convict blacks, and if there is a higher proportion of black male defendants than black female
defendants, then our estimated could be biased. To address this possibility, we show the robustness
of our estimates to the inclusion of controls that interact the (expected) gender composition of the jury
with various case characteristics, such as race and whether the defendant is also being charged with a
violent crime. In addition, we include controls that interact the gender composition of the jury with other
defendant characteristics, such as race. If the inclusion of these interactions were to result in a decline
in our estimate of interest, it suggests that at least some of the effect is due not to own-gender bias, but
to differential treatment of some other defendant characteristic correlated with defendant gender.

4

Results

4.1

Correlation between expected jury gender and actual jury gender

We begin by demonstrating that our measure of jury gender, which is the expected proportion of women
on the jury based on the random potential juror assignments and orderings, is predictive of actual jury
composition. Note that in contrast to the main analysis, this exercise can only be performed for those
cases in which a jury was seated for the trial. The underlying data are shown in Figure 2, which graphs
the actual proportion of women seated on the jury against the expected proportion of women seated.
It shows strong positive correlations for both 6-person juries and 12-person juries. In both cases the
slope is close to one, suggesting that our (exogenous) measure of jury gender composition is strongly
correlated with observed jury gender composition.
Regression results are shown in Table 2. Specifically, we estimate an equation of the same form
as equation (1) above in that we regress the actual proportion of females on the predicted proportion
of females, along with county-by-crime fixed effects. Results are consistent with Figure 2 in showing
strong correlations between actual and expected gender composition. Column 1 shows a correlation
of 0.949, significant at the 1 percent level, for all case types. The remaining columns show that this
correlation remains strong for felonies, misdemeanors, and cases that include infractions related to
drugs, driving, property crime, and violent crime. Correlations range from 0.860 for driving cases to

8

1.042 for misdemeanor cases. All estimates are statistically significant at the 1 percent level. As a
result, it is clear that the combination of more women being assigned to a jury pool and being assigned
earlier in the ordering leads to large subsequent differences in the actual gender composition of the
seated jury.

4.2

Exogeneity tests of the measure of expected jury gender composition

The validity of our empirical approach depends in large part on the assumption that predicted jury gender composition is uncorrelated with confounding factors. While we expect this assumption to hold
based on our understanding of how potential jurors are assigned to and ordered within jury pools, we
can also provide some empirical evidence. To do so, we regress exogenous defendant and case characteristics on the expected proportion of jurors who are female. These characteristics include jury panel
size as well as defendant gender, race, age, the number of offenses, and whether the defendant is being
charged with a felony, drug, driving, property, or violent crime. In addition, we also test whether average
juror age (available only for Hillsborough County) or judge gender is correlated with our measure of the
expected proportion of women on the jury.
Results are shown in Table 3, with estimates at the trial level shown in Panel A, and at the charge
level in Panel B. Overall, there is little evidence that these exogenous characteristics are correlated with
our measure of expected jury gender composition. Of the 24 estimates shown, two are significant at the
10 percent level, and one is significant at the five percent level, which is consistent with random chance.
This contrasts with results from the same exercise using actual proportion of women on the seated jury,
rather than our measure of expected jury gender composition. In that exercise, the results of which are
shown in Appendix Table A.2, nine of the 24 estimates are significant at the 10 percent level, and three
are significant at the five percent level.9 This reflects the fact that the actual proportion of women seated
for the jury is the outcome of the non-random jury selection process.
In addition, we also provide another test. The intuition of the test is to use all of the exogenous
case and defendant characteristics shown in Table 3, along with county-by-crime fixed effects, to predict conviction rate for each charge for each individual. This predicted conviction rate is thus a linear
combination of all observable characteristics about that case and individual, where the weights are optimally chosen to best predict the likelihood of being convicted on that charge. We graph these predicted
conviction rates for male and female defendants against our measure of expected jury gender composition. Our identifying assumption requires that the difference in the underlying propensity for guilt of
male and female defendants be orthogonal to jury gender.

9 In cases where no jury is seated, we assign actual proportion female to be the expected proportion female. If we instead
limit the sample to those trials in which jurors were seated, six estimates are significant at the 10 percent level with five estimates
significant at the 5 percent level.

9

Results for all charges are shown in Figure 3a. The symbols represent local averages for charges
against male and female defendants, and are grouped into 10 equal-sized bins. In addition, we fit
separate lines to the underlying data for male and female defendants. Figure 3a shows that while
male defendants are predicted to be found guilty more often than female defendants, this difference is
constant across jury gender. This suggests that there is little reason, based on observable case and
defendant characteristics, to expect a nonzero difference-in-differences estimate in the absence of an
effect of own-gender juries.
Results in Figure 3b show predicted conviction rates for drug charges, where we later show large
effects of own-gender juries. Results are similar to Figure 3a in that while male defendants are predicted
to have higher conviction rates than female defendants, this difference does not vary with expected jury
gender. This is consistent with the identifying assumption, and suggests that any nonzero difference-indifference estimate of the effect of jury gender will be due to the effect of jury gender, rather than some
confounding factor.

4.3

Effect of own-gender juries on conviction rates

Next, we turn to estimating the effect of jury gender on convictions. Before presenting formal estimates,
we first show the raw data. Figure 4 graphs the conviction rates of male and female defendants against
the expected proportion of females on the jury. Results for all charges are shown in Figure 4a. It shows
that the conviction rates of male defendants are relatively flat as the expected proportion of female jurors
increases. By comparison, the conviction rates of females seem to decline somewhat as the expected
proportion of female jurors increases, though the difference in slopes is relatively subtle.
Conviction rates for drug offenses are shown in Figure 4b. Conviction rates for male defendants
appear to increase somewhat as the expected proportion of female jurors increases. In contrast, conviction rates of female defendants decline sharply as the expected proportion of female jurors increases.
The locally averaged conviction rates for female defendants facing juries with an expected proportion of
females less than 0.5 range between 60 and 100 percent. By comparison, locally averaged conviction
rates for juries expected to be more than half female range from 20 to 50 percent. In short, female
defendants are much less likely to be convicted of a drug charge as the jury is more female, while if
anything men are more likely to be convicted as the jury is more female.
Estimation results are shown in Table 4. All specifications control for the expected proportion of
female jurors as well as an indicator for whether the defendant is female. In addition, all specifications
control for county-by-crime fixed effects. Column 1 shows the estimate of own-gender juries for all
crimes. The coefficient is -0.247 and is not statistically significant. The magnitude of the coefficient
implies that a 10 percentage point change in the expected gender of the jury is associated with a 2.47
percentage point reduction in the conviction rate.
10

Column 2 additionally controls for other defendant and case characteristics such as the defendant’s
age and race, judge gender, the number of charges in the case, and whether the defendant was also
charged with a violent crime such as assault. Consistent with the identifying assumption, the coefficient
changes little to -0.256 and remains insignificant.
As discussed earlier, a major threat to identification is the possibility that more male or more female
juries are responding not to defendant gender, but to a feature of the case or defendant that is systematically correlated with defendant gender. For example, if women convict at higher rates for all charges
when the defendant is also charged with a violent crime, and if male defendants are more likely to be
charged with violent crimes along with other crimes, then we can estimate a nonzero own-gender effect
even if women apply this standard equally across all defendants. In order to address this concern, in
the third column we examine the robustness to our estimate to the inclusion of controls that interact
case characteristics with defendant gender and the expected proportion of female jurors. Specifically,
we include interactions of the proportion of female jurors with defendant race, age, judge gender, number of charges in the case, whether the individual is being charged with a violent crime, and whether
the defendant is being charged with a felony. This allows for the possibility that jurors are responding
differentially to defendant characteristics that may be correlated with defendant gender.
Results from a specification that includes these pairwise interactions are shown in column 3 of
Table 4. As shown there, the coefficient of interest becomes somewhat larger at -0.329, though is still
statistically insignificant.
Columns 4 – 6 of Table 4 show results for felonies. Estimates range from -0.321 to -0.468, though
none are statistically significant at conventional levels. Similarly, results in columns 7 – 9 show results
for misdemeanor charges. Again, all estimates are negative ranging from -0.469 to -0.485 and none
are statistically significant. Importantly, due to the fact that we report results for several different subcategories of crime, we also report False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted Q-values for each estimate
in Table 4. These are computed using the method proposed by Anderson (2008), and adjust for the
fact we examine a total of six subcategories of crime (felony, misdemeanor, drug, driving, property, and
violent). The adjusted Q-values, which are interpreted similarly to two-sided p-values, range from 0.531
to 0.657 for the estimates in columns 4 – 9.
Next, we examine effects by category of the criminal charge. Specifically, we examine effects on
conviction for driving, property, violent, and drug crime charges. Results are shown in Table 5. The
format is similar to Table 4 in that the first column for each category includes only county fixed effects,
the second column adds controls for defendant and case characteristics, and the third column adds
controls for interactions between jury gender and defendant and case characteristics.
Results in columns 1 – 9 suggest there is little evidence that own-gender juries affect convictions
for driving, property, or violent crimes. In contrast, results in columns 10 - 12 indicate there is strong

11

evidence of own-gender juries on conviction for drug charges. The estimate of -2.205 in column 10
suggests that a 10 percentage point change in the expected own-gender composition of the jury results
in a 22 percentage point reduction in the conviction rate of defendants. Adding controls changes the estimate only slightly to -2.192, and further adding interaction controls results in an estimate of -1.815. All
estimates are statistically significant at the one percent level. More importantly, FDR-adjusted Q-values
are 0.002, 0.002, and 0.078, respectively. This indicates that even after accounting for the multiple
statistical tests across the six major categories of crime charges in Tables 4 and 5, the coefficients in
columns 10 – 12 of Table 5 are sufficiently extreme as to be unlikely to arise due to chance.
To put these estimates in perspective, we note that Anwar, Bayer and Hjalmarsson (2012) estimate
that the impact of having one black potential juror in the jury pool (and thus likely less than a 10 percentage point increase in the expected proportion of jurors that are black) results in a 16 percentage point
reduction in the conviction rates for black defendants.

4.4

Effects of own-gender juries on sentencing decisions

Next, we turn to the question of whether own-gender juries affect sentencing. While one may expect
increased convictions to result in additional incarceration, we note that this link is a priori ambiguous for
two reasons. The first is that the additional convictions may be for charges that do not result in incarceration. In addition, while juries make conviction decisions, in these counties judges decide sentencing.
On the one hand, if judges treat all convictions similarly, we would expect to observe own-gender effects
on sentencing for drug cases. On the other hand, if judges exercise discretion in sentencing based on
either the facts of the case or even on the gender composition of the jury, we may not see evidence of
own-gender effects in sentencing outcomes.
Results are shown in Figure 5, with panels a and b showing results for all cases and drug cases,
respectively. Each panel shows estimates of the effect of own-gender juries in which the outcome of
interest is whether the defendant was sentenced for at least one day, at least six months, at least one
year, at least 18 months, etc., up to at least 10 years. Results for all cases shown in Figure 5a indicate
that while there is some evidence that own-gender juries resulted in reduced sentences – especially on
the left-hand side of the distribution – none of the estimates are statistically significant.
Results in Figure 5b indicate there is a statistically significant decline in the likelihood of receiving a
sentence of at least one day. Estimates for the effect on longer sentences are positive but not statistically
significant. This suggests that juries are less likely to convict those own-gender defendants who might
otherwise be convicted and sentenced to relatively short sentences.
These results are shown more formally in Table 6, which shows estimates of the effect of owngender juries on the probability of being sentenced to at least some jail time. Consistent with Figure 5a,
estimates in columns 1 – 3 for all charges are negative but not statistically significant. In contrast,
12

estimates for cases that include at least one drug charge shown in columns 4 – 6 range from -1.264
to -1.453, and are all statistically significant at conventional levels. These estimates imply that a 10
percentage point change in the expected gender composition of the jury results in a 13 to 15 percentage
point change in the likelihood of being sentenced to jail or prison.
These findings have several important implications. First, they suggest that own-gender juries do
lead to differences in sentencing outcomes, even when sentencing decisions are made by judges. This
mean that judges are either unwilling or unable to exercise discretion in an effort to offset the effect
of jury gender composition on conviction decisions. In addition, the effects on sentencing imply that
not only does drawing an opposite-gender jury lead to a criminal record, but it also leads to increased
incarceration. Existing research on the effect of conviction and incarceration on recidivism and employment suggests that this results in significant long-term harm to defendants on drug charges (Aizer and
Doyle Jr, 2015; Mueller-Smith, 2015).

5

Robustness

As discussed earlier, a major threat to identification of own-gender jury effects is the possibility that
jurors of a given gender are responding not to the defendant’s gender, but to some other defendant
or case characteristic correlated with defendant gender. We test for this by including interactions of
jury gender with the number of charges in the case, whether there was a charge for a violent crime in
the case, judge gender, and defendant race and age. Results in column 12 of Table 5 indicate our
estimates are robust to the inclusion of these interactions, which provides evidence that the effects are
due to the interaction of jury and defendant gender and not something else. However, one may also be
concerned that jurors of different gender could respond differently to the type of drug charge in the case,
which could be correlated with defendant gender. To test for this, we additionally include interactions of
expected jury gender with indicators for marijuana possession, possession of other drugs, and possession of drug paraphernalia, where drug trafficking is the excluded group. Results are shown in column
2 of Table 7, where column 1 replicates our main estimate for drug charges of -1.815 from column
12 of Table 5. Results in column 2 show that including these interactions increases the magnitude of
the estimate to -2.092. This provides further evidence that the effects shown are due to the interaction
of defendant and jury gender, rather than the interaction of jury gender with some other characteristic
correlated with defendant gender.
In addition, we also test the robustness of our estimates to different specifications as well as to
alternative ways of constructing our predicted jury gender measure. In column 3 of Table 7 we estimate
the effect controlling for predicted juror age, which we only observe in Hillsborough County. The estimate
is similar at -2.296, and is significant at the five percent level. Column 4 shows the estimate from our

13

main specification when we classify outcomes in which adjudication was withheld as not guilty rather
than guilty, which occurs in 4.05 percent of the drug charges. The magnitude of the estimate is reduced
slightly to -1.659, but is still statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
In columns 5 – 7 of Table 7, we estimate the own-gender jury effect when we classify the gender of
potential jurors differently. Specifically, we classify jurors for whom we could not identify gender using
genderize.io as either all female (column 5) or all male (column 6), respectively, rather than as having
an equal likelihood of being male as female. Estimates are similar in magnitude and significance at
-1.614 and -1.844, respectively. In addition, in column 7 we classify the gender of jurors based on the
names and genders recorded in Florida by the Social Security Administration. The resulting estimate is
-1.749, which is similar to the baseline estimate of -1.815.
Finally, in columns 8 – 10 of Table 7 we show that our estimate of own-gender juries is robust
to alternative methods of predicting jury gender. In column 8 we estimate the effect when we do not
smooth the probability of being seated on the jury for a given jury and panel size using a local linear
estimation with epanechnikov kernel, as we did for our main results. Instead, we use the raw probability
that a juror assigned that number in a panel in a given range was seated on the jury. The estimate is
-1.681 and is significant at the five percent level. The estimated effect is also similar if we use probit
instead of local linear estimation, as shown by the estimate of -1.887 in column 9. The same is true
when we use a local linear smoother but do not condition on jury panel size (-1.698), as shown in
column 10.
In summary, we find no evidence that our estimated effect of own-gender juries on convictions in
drug cases is due to male or female jurors responding differentially to a characteristic correlated with
defendant gender, rather than defendant gender itself. In addition, we find that this own-gender effect is
robust to alternative ways of defining the outcome and predicting jury gender.

6

Discussion and Interpretation

There are several potential mechanisms through which own-gender juries could have such large effects
on conviction and sentencing outcomes. The first is that seated jurors may exhibit own-gender bias
when making conviction decisions on drug charges. Given that we do not observe true guilt, it is
difficult for us to assess which jurors – male or female – are biased, and in what direction. But under
this interpretation, the results would be due to male and/or female jurors being either too lenient to
own-gender defendants, being too tough (i.e., wrongfully convicting) on opposite-gender defendants, or
both.
Relatedly, effects could be due to the expectation of juror bias in criminal drug trials. For example,
a defendant may be more likely to accept an otherwise unappealing plea deal if the expected jury

14

composition is largely opposite-gender. It is also possible that prosecutors or defendants falsely believe
jurors will engage in gender bias during the trial, resulting in a change in plea deal behavior prior to the
start of the trial.
Finally, an increase in the number of opposite-gender jurors could lead the defense to use their
peremptory challenges on opposite-gender potential jurors. This would mean the attorney would have
fewer peremptory challenges to use on other unfavorable jurors, thereby weakening the defendant’s
chances at acquittal. However, we note that doing so would violate the legal standard set by Batson
v. Kentucky (1986) and J.E.B. v. Alabama (1994). In addition, the fact that predicted jury gender is so
highly correlated with actual jury gender provides empirical evidence that the attorneys are unable to
significantly offset random changes in expected jury gender.
Data limitations make it difficult for us to distinguish between these potential mechanisms with any
certainty. However, to shed some light on this question, we estimate effects separately for cases that did
and did not get to trial.10 Results are shown in Appendix Table A3, which shows that both sets of point
estimates are statistically significant at the one percent level. However, the magnitude of the effect for
charges decided by jury is twice as large as the effect when the case was decided prior to the conclusion
of the trial. We interpret this as suggestive evidence that effects are largely driven by changes during or
after the trial, such as gender bias by juries. We note, however, that selection into whether a case goes
to trial after the jury panel is assigned makes it difficult to interpret these differences with certainty.
A second question regarding the interpretation of this study’s findings relates to the strength of the
effects for drug charges compared to driving, property, and violent crime. Unfortunately, our data are
not well-suited for explaining this difference across crime types. We speculate it is because even though
Americans are supportive of existing and even stronger penalties for DUIs, violent crime, and property
crime, Americans are critical of the prosecution of drug crimes. For example, recent surveys indicate
that 40 percent of Americans believe the prison sentences for non-violent drug crimes are too harsh,
and 64 percent support the full legalization of marijuana (YouGov/Huffington Post, 2015; Gallup News
Service, 2017). Two-thirds of American adults believe the government should focus more on treatment
for illegal users, compared to only 26 percent who believe more focus should be on prosecuting illegal
users (Pew Research Center, 2014). A nontrivial proportion of Americans even disagree with the prosecution of “harder” drug crimes; 16 percent favor decriminalization of cocaine possession, and 9 percent
favor legalization (Morning Consult, 2016). This shift in attitudes on drug laws is also reflected in recent
state policy changes regarding drug possession.11 These views are particularly relevant given the drug

10 For

this analysis we exclude the 67 cases representing 150 charges where the records did not indicate whether the case was
decided by trial or prior to the start of the trial.
11 The National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) reports that from 2011 to 2016, at least nine states have lowered
some drug possession crimes from felonies to misdemeanors, and another nine have reduced mandatory sentences for some
drug offenders (National Conference of State Legislatures , NCSL). In addition, as of 2018 over 20 states have decriminalized

15

charges in our sample, over 58 percent of which are for possession of drugs or drug paraphernalia
without intent to distribute.
In contrast, there is little to no public support for weakening the enforcement of non-drug laws, and
significant support for even strengthening enforcement. While surveys of Americans’ perceptions of
non-drug offense prosecution are less common, what evidence there is contrasts sharply with views
on drug crime enforcement. For example, only 11 and 1 percent of adults believe that the sentences
typically given for non-violent property crimes and violent crimes, respectively, are too harsh (Huffington
Post/YouGov, 2013). As a result, we interpret this study’s findings as most consistent with a model in
which jurors fairly enforce the laws with which they mostly agree, but disproportionately favor own-group
defendants when deciding whether to enforce laws with which they might not agree. That is, while a
juror may be willing and able to convict out-group defendants who break a law with which the juror
disagrees, she is perhaps less willing to convict in-group defendants of the same crime. We emphasize,
however, that there could be other explanations for the difference in results for across crime types.

7

Conclusion

In this study, we test for the effect of own-gender juries on conviction and sentencing outcomes. To
overcome potential bias due to nonrandom jury selection, we exploit the fact that potential jurors are
randomly assigned to jury pools for each case, and are randomly ordered within each jury pool. This
enables us to predict the gender composition of each jury for each case set to go to trial, thereby
isolating the as-good-as-random variation in jury gender. We combine this variation with variation in
defendant gender to estimate the effect of own-gender juries.
Results provide strong evidence that own-gender juries result in lower conviction rates for drug
offenses. We estimate that a ten percentage point change in the expected own-gender composition of
the jury results in a 18 percentage point decline in conviction rates on drug charges. A similar change
in jury gender results in a 13 percentage point reduction in the likelihood of being sentenced to at least
some jail time. These are large effects, though we note this is consistent with prior research on the
effect of juror race (Anwar, Bayer and Hjalmarsson, 2012).12
We hypothesize that the reason we see such strong own-gender effects for drug charges but not
others is because many Americans disapprove of the prosecution of drug crimes. We emphasize,
however, that we cannot rule out other interpretations. Similarly, while we show evidence that effects
are largest for cases that go to trial, it is difficult for us to determine which part of our effect is due to

certain marijuana possession offenses (National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws , NORML). While Florida is not
among the states making these changes, jurors there are likely experiencing similar shifts in their views about drug laws.
12 They find that one black individual in the jury pool – and thus in expectation much less than one black juror on the seated jury
– results in a 16 percentage point change in conviction rates.

16

gender bias by jurors when deciding to convict, and what is due to changes in the offering or acceptance
of plea deals based on perceptions of jury bias.
Our results are important for the debate over the use of peremptory challenges in selecting a jury.
By documenting the significant harm that can arise to defendants who draw opposite-gender juries,
we highlight the potential benefits to the prosecution of removing same-gender individuals from the
jury pool. Similarly, defendants in drug cases stand to benefit greatly if their attorneys are able to
successfully remove opposite-gender jurors from the jury pool. As a result, our results provide support
for recent court rulings that disallow prosecutors or defense attorneys to strike potential jurors from the
jury pool on the basis of gender.
In addition, our results add evidence to a growing literature documenting own-gender bias in decisionmaking. Our findings suggest that such bias can arise even in settings where the objective of impartiality
is heavily emphasized and protected. Specifically, throughout the juror selection process the necessity
of being impartial and fair is actively pressed on potential jurors. In addition, the process explicitly allows
for both sides to remove potential jurors from the jury if they are shown or believed to be unfair. We find
that even in this process, the similarity in gender of the jury to the defendant has a significant effect on
conviction and sentencing outcomes.

17

References
Abrevaya, Jason and Daniel Hamermesh, “Charity and Favoritism in the Field: Are Female Economists
Nicer (to Each Other)?,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2012, 94 (1), 202–207.
Aizer, Anna and Joseph Doyle Jr, “Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and Future Crime: Evidence
from Randomly Assigned Judges,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (2), 759–803.
Anderson, Michael, “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Intervention: A
Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 2008, 103 (484), 1481–1495.
Anwar, Shamena, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson, “The Impact of Jury Race in Criminal Trials,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (2), 1017–1055.
Anwar, Shamena, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson, “The Role of Age in Jury Selection and Trial
Outcomes,” Journal of Law and Economics, 2014, 57 (4), 1001–1030.
Anwar, Shamena, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson, “Politics in the Courtroom: Political Ideology
and Jury Decision Making,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2015.
Anwar, Shamena, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson, “A Jury of Her Peers: The Impact of the First
Female Jurors on Criminal Convictions,” Economic Journal, Forthcoming.
Ayres, Ian and Peter Siegelman, “Race and Gender Discrimination in Bargaining for a New Car,”
American Economic Review, 1995, pp. 304–321.
Bagues, Manuel and Berta Esteve-Volart, “Can Gender Parity Break the Glass Ceiling? Evidence from
a Repeated Randomized Experiment,” Review of Economic Studies, 2010, 77 (4), 1301–1328.
Bagues, Manuel, Mauro Sylos-Labini, and Natalia Zinovyeva, “Does the Gender Composition of
Scientific Committees Matter?,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (4), 1207–38.
Batson v. Kentucky, “476 US 79,” 1986.
Bindler, Anna and Randi Hjalmarsson, “The Persistence of the Criminal Justice Gender Gap: Evidence
from 200 Years of Judicial Decisions,” 2017. Working paper.
Breda, Thomas and Son Thierry Ly, “Professors in Core Science Fields Are Not Always Biased against
Women: Evidence from France,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2015, 7 (4),
53–75.
Butcher, Kristin, Kyung Park, and Anne Morrison Piehl, “Comparing Apples to Oranges: Differences in
Women’s and Men’s Incarceration and Sentencing Outcomes,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2017,
35 (S1), S201–S234.
Cohen, Alma and Crystal Yang, “Judicial Politics and Sentencing Decisions,” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, Forthcoming.
Dahl, Gordon and Enrico Moretti, “The Demand for Sons,” Review of Economic Studies, 2008, 75 (4),
1085–1120.
De Paola, Maria and Vincenzo Scoppa, “Gender Discrimination and Evaluators’ Gender: Evidence
from Italian Academia,” Economica, 2015, 82 (325), 162–188.
Depew, Briggs, Ozkan Eren, and Naci Mocan, “Judges, Juveniles, and In-Group Bias,” Journal of Law
and Economics, 2017, 60 (2), 209–239.
Eren, Ozkan and Naci Mocan, “Emotional Judges and Unlucky Juveniles,” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 2018, 10 (3), 171–205.
Gallup News Service, “Record-High Support for Legalizing Marijuana use in U.S.,” 2017. Accessed
8-March-2018 at
http://news.gallup.com/poll/221018/record-high-support-legalizing-marijuana.aspx.

18

George, Tracey, “Court Fixing,” Arizona Law Review, 2001, 43 (1), 9–62.
Goldin, Claudia and Cecilia Rouse, “Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of ”Blind” Auditions on
Female Musicians,” American Economic Review, 2000, 90 (4), 715–741.
Huffington Post/YouGov, “Survey,” 2013. Accessed 10-March-2018 at
http://big.assets.huffingtonpost.com/toplines_sentences_0813142013.pdf.
J.E.B. v. Alabama, “511 US 127,” 1994.
Johnson, Brian, “Judges on Trial: A Reexamination of Judicial Race and Gender Effects across Modes
of Conviction,” Criminal Justice Policy Review, 2014, 25 (2), 159–184.
Knepper, Matthew, “When the Shadow Is the Substance: Judge Gender and the Outcomes of
Workplace Sex Discrimination Cases,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2018, 36 (3), 623–664.
Lavy, Victor, “Do Gender Stereotypes Reduce Girls’ or Boys’ Human Capital Outcomes? Evidence
from a Natural Experiment,” Journal of Public Economics, 2008, 92 (10-11), 2083–2105.
McDonough Power Equipment, Inc. v. Greenwood, “464 U.S. 548,” 1984.
Mitchell, Tara, Ryann Haw, Jeffrey Pfeifer, and Christian Meissner, “Racial Bias in Mock Juror
Decision-Making: A Meta-Analytic Review of Defendant Treatment,” Law and Human Behavior,
2005, 29 (6), 621–637.
Morning Consult, “National Tracking Poll 160304,” 2016. Accessed 10-March-2018 at https://cdn0.
vox-cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/6189021/Morning_Consult_Vox_drug_poll.0.pdf.
Moss-Racusin, Corinne, John Dovidio, Victoria Brescoll, Mark Graham, and Jo Handelsman, “Science
Faculty’s Subtle Gender Biases Favor Male Students,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 2012, 109 (41), 16474–16479.
Mueller-Smith, Michael, “The Criminal and Labor Market Impacts of Incarceration,” 2015. Working
paper.
National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL), “Drug Sentencing Trends,” 2016. Accessed
10-March-2018 at
http://www.ncsl.org/research/civil-and-criminal-justice/drug-sentencing-trends.aspx.
National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML), “States That Have Decriminalized,”
2018. Accessed 10-March-2018 at
http://norml.org/aboutmarijuana/item/states-that-have-decriminalized.
Neumark, David, Roy Bank, and Kyle Van Nort, “Sex Discrimination in Restaurant Hiring: An Audit
Study,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (3), 915–941.
Pew Research Center, “America’s New Drug Policy Landscape,” 2014. Accessed 10-March-2018 at
http://www.people-press.org/2014/04/02/
section-1-perceptions-of-drug-abuse-views-of-drug-policies/.
Philippe, Arnaud and Aurélie Ouss, “”No Hatred or Malice, Fear or Affection”: Media and Sentencing,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2017.
Price, Joseph and Justin Wolfers, “Racial Discrimination among NBA Referees,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2010, 125 (4), 1859–1887.
Schanzenbach, Max, “Racial and Sex Disparities in Prison Sentences: The Effect of District-Level
Judicial Demographics,” Journal of Legal Studies, 2005, 34 (1), 57–92.
Shayo, Moses and Asaf Zussman, “Judicial Ingroup Bias in the Shadow of Terrorism,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (3), 1447–1484.
Stanley, Tom and Stephen Jarrell, “Gender Wage Discrimination Bias? A Meta-Regression Analysis,”
Journal of Human Resources, 1998, pp. 947–973.

19

Steffensmeier, Darrell and Chris Hebert, “Women and Men Policymakers: Does the Judge’s Gender
Affect the Sentencing of Criminal Defendants?,” Social Forces, 1999, 77 (3), 1163–1196.
West, Jeremy, “Racial Bias in Police Investigations,” 2017. Working paper.
YouGov/Huffington Post, “Poll Results: Commuting Sentences,” 2015. Accessed 10-March-2018 at
https://today.yougov.com/news/2015/04/06/poll-results-commuting-sentences/.

20

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Probability seated
(a) jury trials with 6 jurors

(b) jury trials with 12 jurors

Notes: Each line is fit with a local linear polynomial at each panelist position using a epanechnikov kernel with
varying Rule-of-Thumb (ROT) bandwidths. Figure 1a from smallest to largest panel size uses a one-sided
bandwidth of 1,1,2,2, and 10. Figure 1b from smallest to largest panel size uses a one-sided bandwidth of 4, 6,
and 14.

21

Figure 2: Correlation between actual jury gender composition and expected gender composition

22

Figure 3: Predicted conviction rates for male and female defendants
(a) all charges

(b) drug charges only

Notes: For each charge, we predict the probability of conviction using all observable characteristics. The line
represents a linear fit across all predicted conviction rates.

23

Figure 4: Actual conviction rates for male and female defendants
(a) all charges

(b) drug charges only

Notes: Each figure graphs the actual conviction rates for male and female defendants against the expected gender
composition of the jury. Observations are grouped such that each circle represents an equal number of charges.

24

Figure 5: Estimated effects of own-gender juries on sentencing
(a) all cases

(b) drug-related cases only

Notes: Each estimate shown represents the effect of own-gender juries on total sentencing in the case. The
outcomes of interest, from left to right, are a set of indicators for sentenced to at least one day, sentenced to at
least six months, 1 year, 1.5 years, 2 years, etc., up to at least 10 years. Figure 4a includes all drug, driving,
property, and violent crime cases. Figure 4b restricts to cases with at least one drug charge.

25

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Panel A: By Case
All

Male

Female

Felony

Misdem.

Driving

Property

Violent

Drug

0.67

0.67

0.63

0.68

0.65

0.75

0.75

0.60

0.75

1673
(5373)

1931
(5789)

268
(1126)

2376
(6330)

105
(595)

451
(3158)

2251
(5495)

2772
(7440)

841
(1780)

P(sentenced ≥ 1 days)

0.42

0.45

0.27

0.50

0.26

0.34

0.54

0.43

0.50

P(sentenced ≥ 1 years)

0.27

0.30

0.09

0.37

0.04

0.10

0.40

0.31

0.35

P(sentenced ≥ 5 years)

0.16

0.19

0.04

0.23

0.01

0.04

0.25

0.23

0.13

0.16

0.00

1.00

0.13

0.21

0.19

0.17

0.13

0.14

Outcomes
Conviction Rate
Total days sentenced

Case Characteristics
Defendant female
Defendant white

0.48

0.47

0.56

0.43

0.59

0.68

0.43

0.41

0.38

Defendant age

36.86
(12.52)

37.13
(12.77)

35.36
(10.96)

36.55
(12.66)

37.55
(12.18)

37.76
(12.09)

36.40
(13.46)

35.94
(12.70)

37.41
(11.29)

Number of Charges

2.36
(2.14)

2.45
(2.26)

1.85
(1.09)

2.51
(2.26)

2.01
(1.78)

2.43
(1.93)

2.95
(2.94)

2.31
(1.93)

2.84
(2.67)

Violent charge in case

0.47

0.49

0.38

0.57

0.25

0.07

0.27

1.00

0.10

Felony charge in case

0.69

0.71

0.57

1.00

0.00

0.37

0.84

0.83

0.74

Judge female

0.33

0.32

0.38

0.37

0.25

0.29

0.30

0.38

0.35

Actual Prop Female

0.46
(0.24)

0.45
(0.24)

0.48
(0.24)

0.45
(0.25)

0.47
(0.23)

0.47
(0.23)

0.45
(0.24)

0.45
(0.24)

0.44
(0.26)

E(Proportion Female)

0.51
(0.10)

0.51
(0.10)

0.52
(0.11)

0.51
(0.10)

0.52
(0.10)

0.52
(0.10)

0.52
(0.09)

0.51
(0.10)

0.51
(0.11)

Predicted Average Juror Age

45.00
(3.49)

45.09
(3.50)

44.45
(3.42)

45.02
(3.56)

44.91
(3.22)

44.56
(3.38)

45.20
(3.22)

45.05
(3.55)

44.82
(3.59)

Observations

1542

1302

240

1063

479

414

377

711

249

Jury Characteristics

Panel B: By Charges
Outcomes
Conviction Rate

0.53

0.54

0.50

0.56

0.47

0.52

0.57

0.50

0.58

0.13

0.00

1.00

0.11

0.19

0.18

0.11

0.12

0.13

Case Characteristics
Defendant female
Defendant white

0.51

0.49

0.60

0.44

0.67

0.71

0.46

0.40

0.48

Defendant age

37.38
(13.36)

37.50
(13.70)

36.58
(10.83)

36.69
(13.53)

39.01
(12.80)

37.97
(12.31)

37.64
(15.13)

35.41
(12.26)

40.41
(13.75)

Number of Charges

4.22
(4.88)

4.49
(5.16)

2.45
(1.37)

4.47
(4.91)

3.62
(4.75)

3.26
(2.42)

5.78
(6.45)

3.30
(3.59)

5.34
(6.42)

Violent charge in case

0.43

0.43

0.37

0.54

0.16

0.09

0.18

1.00

0.09

Felony charge in case

0.70

0.72

0.57

1.00

0.00

0.29

0.90

0.87

0.72

Judge female

0.32

0.31

0.40

0.35

0.28

0.30

0.28

0.37

0.33

Actual Prop Female

0.46
(0.24)

0.46
(0.24)

0.45
(0.24)

0.45
(0.25)

0.48
(0.22)

0.47
(0.21)

0.48
(0.24)

0.44
(0.24)

0.45
(0.29)

E(Proportion Female)

0.52
(0.10)

0.52
(0.09)

0.52
(0.10)

0.52
(0.09)

0.52
(0.10)

0.52
(0.10)

0.53
(0.09)

0.51
(0.10)

0.50
(0.10)

Predicted Average Juror Age

44.85
(3.46)

44.92
(3.46)

44.42
(3.42)

44.86
(3.49)

44.81
(3.23)

44.55
(3.27)

44.69
(3.60)

45.05
(3.36)

44.78
(3.55)

Observations

3055

2647

408

2152

903

789

740

1056

479

Jury Characteristics

26

Table 2: Correlation between actual jury gender composition and expected gender composition

E(Proportion Female)
Observations
F stat

All

Felony

Misdemeanor

Driving

Property

Violent

Drug

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.949***
(0.058)

0.902***
(0.074)

1.042***
(0.085)

0.860***
(0.113)

0.863***
(0.141)

1.009***
(0.080)

0.918***
(0.154)

1542
33

1063
17

451
21

414
36

377
29

711
80

249
25

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Columns 2 - 4 restrict the sample to cases with at least
one charge in that category. All regressions include county fixed effects and columns 1-3 include county-by-crime
fixed effects. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
*p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01

27

Table 3: Exogeneity Tests
Panel A: Trial-Level

Case has at least one charge that is classified as:

female

white

age

avg juror age

panel size

judge female

number charges

felony

driving

property

violent

drug

E(Prop Fem)

0.083
(0.098)

0.178
(0.122)

-2.310
(3.232)

-1.112
(1.071)

-0.984
(3.406)

-0.044
(0.117)

-0.040
(0.382)

-0.020
(0.095)

-0.014
(0.113)

0.215**
(0.103)

-0.043
(0.127)

-0.086
(0.096)

Observations

1542

1542

1542

839

1542

1542

1542

1542

1542

1542

1542

1542

female

white

age

avg juror age

panel size

judge female

number charges

felony

driving

property

violent

drug

E(Prop Fem)

0.075
(0.099)

0.176
(0.123)

-2.075
(3.269)

-0.932
(1.079)

-1.484
(3.391)

-0.028
(0.118)

0.053
(0.408)

-0.052
(0.096)

-0.015
(0.106)

0.163*
(0.094)

-0.039
(0.124)

-0.093
(0.086)

Observations

3055

3055

3055

1497

3055

3055

3055

3055

3055

3055

3055

3055

Panel B: Charge-Level

28

Notes: Each column in each panel reports estimates from a separate regression in which we regress observable characteristics on the expected proportion of females on the
jury. Columns 1 - 7 include county-by-crime fixed effects, and columns 8 - 12 include county fixed effects. The first three columns show results for defendant characteristics.
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the defendant level.
*p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01

Table 4: Effect of own-gender juries on conviction rates, by severity

All Charges

Felony Charges

Misdemeanor Charges

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

-0.247
(0.306)

-0.256
(0.307)

-0.329
(0.309)

-0.321
(0.418)
[0.532]

-0.325
(0.419)
[0.657]

-0.468
(0.408)
[0.531]

-0.475
(0.410)
[0.532]

-0.485
(0.411)
[0.657]

-0.469
(0.421)
[0.531]

Observations

3055

3055

3055

1725

1725

1725

1330

1330

1330

Mean Dependent Variable

0.54

0.54

0.54

0.54

0.54

0.54

0.52

0.52

0.52

Def & Jury Gender Controls
County Fixed Effect
CountyXCrime Fixed Effects
Additional Controls
Interactions

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

E(Prop Fem)xDef Fem
FDR Adjusted Q-values

Notes:All specifications include controls for defendant gender and expected gender composition of the jury, as well
as county-by-crime fixed effects. Additional controls include defendant age, the number of charges in the case,
and indicators for defendant’s race, judge’s gender, and whether there was charge for a violent crime in the case.
Interactions include controls for each of those characteristics interacted with the expected proportion of female
jurors.
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the defendant level. False discovery rate (FDR) adjusted
Q-values adjust for multiple inference given the six subcategories of crime examined. They are constructed using
the method proposed by Anderson (2008) and are interpreted as two-sided p-values.
*p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01

29

Table 5: Effect of own-gender juries on conviction rates, by crime type
Driving Charges

Property Charges

Violent Charges

Drug Charges

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.154
(0.510)
[0.763]

0.104
(0.504)
[0.838]

0.071
(0.541)
[0.896]

0.616
(0.667)
[0.532]

0.555
(0.681)
[0.657]

0.544
(0.635)
[0.589]

-0.391
(0.499)
[0.532]

-0.293
(0.507)
[0.677]

-0.239
(0.505)
[0.764]

-2.205***
(0.597)
[0.002]

-2.192***
(0.598)
[0.002]

-1.815**
(0.724)
[0.078]

Observations
Mean Dependant Variable

789
0.55

789
0.55

789
0.55

740
0.53

740
0.53

740
0.53

1056
0.50

1056
0.50

1056
0.50

479
0.64

479
0.64

479
0.64

Def & Jury Gender Controls
County Fixed Effect
Controls
Interactions

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

E(Prop Fem)xDef Fem
FDR Adjusted Q-values

Notes: All specifications include controls for defendant gender and expected gender composition of the jury, as
well as county fixed effects. Additional controls include defendant age, the number of charges in the case, and
indicators for defendant’s race, judge’s gender, and whether there was charge for a violent crime in the case.
Interactions include controls for each of those characteristics interacted with the expected proportion of female
jurors.
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the defendant level. False discovery rate (FDR) adjusted
Q-values adjust for multiple inference given the six subcategories of crime examined. They are constructed using
the method proposed by Anderson (2008) and are interpreted as two-sided p-values.
*p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01

30

Table 6: Effect of own-gender juries on being sentenced to jail

All Charges

E(Prop Fem)xDef Fem
Observations
Mean Dependant Variable
Def & Jury Gender Controls
County Fixed Effect
Controls
Interactions

Drug Charges

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.296
(0.304)

-0.220
(0.296)

-0.286
(0.299)

-1.453**
(0.719)

-1.432*
(0.756)

-1.264*
(0.704)

1534
0.41

1534
0.41

1534
0.41

245
0.49

245
0.49

245
0.49

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: All specifications include controls for defendant gender and expected gender composition of the jury, as
well as county fixed effects. Additional controls include defendant age, the number of charges in the case, and
indicators for defendant’s race, judge’s gender, and whether there was charge for a violent crime in the case.
Interactions include controls for each of those characteristics interacted with the expected proportion of female
jurors and defendant’s gender.
Standard errors are in parentheses.
*p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01

31

Table 7: Robustness of estimates of own-gender juries on conviction rates - drug charges only
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

-1.815**
(0.724)

-2.092***
(0.772)

-2.296**
(0.889)

-1.659**
(0.743)

-1.614**
(0.639)

-1.844**
(0.757)

-1.749**
(0.698)

-1.681**
(0.718)

-1.887***
(0.723)

-1.698**
(0.693)

Observations
Mean Dependant Variable

479
0.64

479
0.64

295
0.64

479
0.64

479
0.64

479
0.64

479
0.64

479
0.64

479
0.64

479
0.64

Def & Jury Gender Controls
County Fixed Effect
Control Interactions
Drug type Interactions
Juror Age Control & Interaction
Adjudication Withheld=Not Guilty
Missing genders
Predicted genders
Pr(Seated)
Pr(Seated—panelsize)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
half
API
LL
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
half
API
LL
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
half
API
LL
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
half
API
LL
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
female
API
LL
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
male
API
LL
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
half
SS
LL
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
half
API
Raw
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
half
API
Probit
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
half
API
LL
No

E(Prop Fem)XDef Fem

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the defendant level.
*p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01

32

A

Appendix (For Online Publication)
Table A.1: Effect of own-gender juries on conviction rates
All

Felony

Misdemeanor

Drug

Driving

Property

Violent

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

E(Prop Fem)

-0.110
(0.114)

-0.131
(0.146)

-0.018
(0.159)

0.130
(0.195)

-0.425*
(0.243)

-0.049
(0.181)

0.002
(0.290)

Observations

3055

1725

1330

789

740

1056

479

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Columns 1 - 3 include county-by-crime fixed effects, and
columns 4 - 7 include county fixed effects. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the defendant
level.
*p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01

33

Table A.2: Exogeneity tests with actual proportion of female jurors
Panel A: Trial-Level

Actual Proportion Female
Observations

Case has at least one charge that is classified as:
female

white

age

avg juror age

panel size

judge female

number charges

felony

driving

property

violent

drug

0.090*
(0.050)

0.137**
(0.068)

-0.536
(1.865)

-1.089*
(0.606)

8.672
(6.585)

-0.007
(0.065)

0.081
(0.301)

-0.007
(0.051)

0.002
(0.060)

0.102*
(0.056)

-0.120*
(0.069)

0.010
(0.052)

1542

1542

1542

839

1542

1542

1542

1542

1542

1542

1542

1542

female

white

age

avg juror age

panel size

judge female

number charges

felony

driving

property

violent

drug

0.090*
(0.050)

0.138**
(0.068)

-0.265
(1.877)

-1.071*
(0.603)

8.530
(6.674)

-0.009
(0.065)

0.068
(0.302)

0.002
(0.051)

-0.003
(0.059)

0.113**
(0.050)

-0.100
(0.068)

-0.007
(0.047)

3055

3055

3055

1497

3055

3055

3055

3055

3055

3055

3055

3055

Panel B: Charge-Level

Actual Prop Female
Observations

34

Notes: Each column in each panel reports estimates from a separate regression in which we regress observable characteristics on the actual proportion of females on the
seated jury. Columns 1 - 7 include county-by-crime fixed effects, and columns 8 - 12 include county fixed effects. The first three columns show results for defendant
characteristics. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the defendant level. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the defendant level.
*p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01

Table A.3: Effect of own-gender juries on conviction rates, by jury trial status

Non-Trial

Jury Trial

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-2.419***
(0.663)

-2.522***
(0.717)

-2.960**
(1.393)

-5.760***
(1.309)

-6.416***
(1.314)

-5.637**
(2.491)

Observations
Mean Dependant Variable

177
0.64

177
0.64

177
0.64

165
0.64

165
0.64

165
0.64

Def & Jury Gender Controls
County Fixed Effect
Controls
Interactions

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

E(Prop Fem)xDef Fem

Notes: All specifications include controls for defendant gender and expected gender composition of the jury, as
well as county fixed effects. Additional controls include defendant age, the number of charges in the case, and
indicators for defendant’s race, judge’s gender, and whether there was charge for a violent crime in the case.
Interactions include controls for each of those characteristics interacted with the expected proportion of female
jurors.
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the defendant level.
*p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01

35

