NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTERTEMPORAL KEYNESIAN CROSS
Adrien Auclert
Matthew Rognlie
Ludwig Straub
Working Paper 25020
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25020

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

We thank Sushant Acharya, Luigi Bocola, Chris Carroll, John Cochrane, Martin Eichenbaum,
Mark Gertler, Dan Greenwald, Marcus Hagedorn, Greg Kaplan, Pete Klenow, Gisle Natvik,
Jorge Miranda-Pinto, Kurt Mitman, Ben Moll, Martin Schneider, Morten Ravn, Gianluca
Violante, Ivan Werning, and Christian Wolf for helpful comments and suggestions, as well as
Andreas Fagereng, Martin Holm and Gisle Natvik for generously providing us with empirical
estimates of iMPCs. Remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Adrien Auclert, Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig Straub. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Intertemporal Keynesian Cross
Adrien Auclert, Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig Straub
NBER Working Paper No. 25020
September 2018
JEL No. D1,E21,E22,E23,E32,E62
ABSTRACT
We demonstrate the importance of intertemporal marginal propensities to consume (iMPCs) in
disciplining general equilibrium models with heterogeneous agents and nominal rigidities. In a
benchmark case, the dynamic response of output to a change in the path of government spending
or taxes is given by an equation involving iMPCs, which we call the intertemporal Keynesian
cross. Fiscal multipliers depend only on the interaction between iMPCs and public deficits. We
provide empirical estimates of iMPCs and argue that they are inconsistent with representativeagent, two-agent and one-asset heterogeneous-agent models, but can be matched by models with
two assets. Quantitatively, models that match empirical iMPCs predict deficit-financed fiscal
multipliers that are larger than one, even if monetary policy is active, taxation is distortionary,
and investment is crowded out. These models also imply larger amplification of shocks that
involve private borrowing, as we illustrate in an application to deleveraging.
Adrien Auclert
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
aauclert@stanford.edu
Matthew Rognlie
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
matthew.rognlie@northwestern.edu

Ludwig Straub
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02138
ludwig.straub@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Within the last decade, quantitative macroeconomics has made significant advances in modeling
household behavior. Modelers can now contemplate a wealth of alternatives to the traditional
representative-agent framework. Popular options include simplified models with two agents,
and models with a full distribution of agents holding either one or several assets. This abundance
of options raises a number of key questions. Which model features are the most important in
determining the economy’s response to shocks and policies? What empirical evidence can we use
to discipline these features? In turn, how does this evidence inform our choice of models?
A partial answer is provided by a recent literature which has argued that marginal propensities to consume (MPCs) are important moments for partial equilibrium effects. This was shown,
for instance, by Kaplan and Violante (2014) in the context of fiscal policy, by Auclert (2017) for
monetary policy, and by Berger et al. (2018) for house price changes.
In this paper, we propose a new set of moments—intertemporal MPCs, or iMPCs—and argue
that they are essential for general equilibrium effects. We provide estimates of iMPCs in the data
and find that, among typical modeling choices, only heterogeneous-agent models with multiple
assets can match our estimates. We demonstrate that a model that matches iMPCs has distinct
predictions for deficit-financed fiscal policy (our main application) and household deleveraging
shocks.
We begin by setting up a benchmark framework in section 2 which nests a variety of common
models from the literature. In line with our focus on household behavior, we keep the supply side
simple at first and assume no capital, sticky wages, and a constant-real-rate monetary policy rule.
We study fiscal policy, which sets paths for government spending Gt and aggregate tax revenue
Tt , raised according to a progressive tax schedule.
In this framework, aggregate household behavior is entirely captured by an aggregate consumption function Ct ({Ys − Ts }). Ct depends only on the path {Ys − Ts } of after-tax income in
every time period s. Goods market clearing at each date then implies a fixed point equation in the
path for output, Yt = Ct ({Ys − Ts }) + Gt . Building on this fixed point, we show, to first order, that

the impulse response of output dY = (dYt ) to a change in fiscal policy dG = (dGt ), dT = (dTt )
solves a Keynesian-cross-like equation
dY = dG − MdT + MdY

(1)

Since this equation characterizes the entire dynamic path of output and stems from a microfounded model, we refer to it as the intertemporal Keynesian cross. The central object in the intertemporal Keynesian cross is the matrix M = ( Mt,s ) of partial derivatives Mt,s ≡ ∂Ct /∂Ys . For

given dates t and s, Mt,s captures the response of consumption at date t to an aggregate income

shock at date s. Since the Mt,s capture spending patterns over time, we refer to them as intertemporal MPCs.
Given their central role for fiscal policy, it is important to know what iMPCs are in the data
2

and in our models. For measurement, in section 3, we focus on Mt,0 —the dynamic response to
an unanticipated income shock—which is where we have the best data. Our evidence on Mt,0
comes from two independent sources: the dynamic response to lottery earnings from Norwegian
administrative data, as reported by Fagereng, Holm and Natvik (2018), and the distribution of selfreported marginal propensities to consume from the 2016 Italian Survey of Household Income and
Wealth (Jappelli and Pistaferri 2018). Both sources confirm the common finding in the literature
that the average impact MPC M0,0 is high—above 0.4 at an annual level. The key new fact we
uncover is that iMPCs in subsequent years are sizable as well, with M1,0 lying above 0.14 according
to both sources.
What models can match these patterns? Representative-agent (RA) and standard heterogeneous-agent models (HA-std) fail immediately on the grounds that they cannot match the high
impact MPC. This is not an issue for two-agent (TA) models, which are sufficiently flexible to
allow for arbitrary impact MPCs, by changing the share of hand-to-mouth agents. Yet, TA models
predict that M1,0 is around 0.02, almost an order of magnitude below our estimate.1 The model
with the best fit turns out to be a suitably calibrated heterogeneous-agent model with illiquid
assets (HA-illiq). It is able to match both the high impact MPC as well as sizable subsequent
iMPCs.2
iMPCs, therefore, are a useful device for distinguishing models. And from (1), we know that
they characterize the general equilibrium response to a fiscal shock. But do the distinct patterns
of iMPCs across models translate into equally distinct predictions for the impact of fiscal policy?
As we explain in section 4, the answer turns out to depend crucially on the degree of deficit
financing. When fiscal policy runs a balanced budget, iMPCs are in fact irrelevant: we derive
a fiscal multiplier of exactly one in our benchmark framework, irrespective of iMPCs. Our result
generalizes Gelting (1941) and Haavelmo (1945), who derived a balanced-budget multiplier of one
in a static IS-LM model. It also generalizes the unit multiplier obtained in Woodford (2011) for the
RA model, and thus provides a case where household heterogeneity is irrelevant—a fiscal policy
analogue to Werning (2015)’s landmark result on monetary policy.
In contrast, iMPCs play a pivotal role for deficit-financed fiscal shocks. We show that for any
fiscal policy that involves deficits, the fiscal multiplier is determined entirely by the interaction
between iMPCs and the path of primary deficits. When iMPCs are (approximately) flat (RA, HAstd) the fiscal multiplier is (approximately) equal to 1. When the impact MPC is matched, but
subsequent iMPCs are too low (TA), the impact fiscal multiplier dY0 /dG0 can now lie significantly
above 1; cumulative multipliers, however, are still equal to 1, pointing to a short-lived output
response. Only when both impact and subsequent iMPCs are matched, as in the illiquid-asset
model (HA-illiq), can impact and cumulative multipliers significantly exceed 1.
These findings suggest that matching iMPCs is important quantitatively. Our benchmark
framework, however, is restrictive in several dimensions. To explore the role of iMPCs more gen1 We

also consider models with bonds in the utility (BU) which, conditional on matching M0,0 , overpredict M1,0 .
model we find that fits the data is a two-agent version of a model with bonds in the utility (“TABU”).

2 Another

3

erally, we relax the benchmark’s main limitations in section 5 and introduce capital, sticky prices,
and active monetary policy. Since real rates now react to fiscal policy, important dampening forces
appear, such as the crowding out of investment and the disincentive effects of distortionary taxation. We simulate the model for various degrees of deficit financing and confirm the role of the
interaction between iMPCs and deficit financing. While all our models predict similar dynamics
in the case of balanced-budget policies, the TA and HA-illiq models predict sizable impact multipliers under deficit financing. As in our benchmark framework, only the HA-illiq model predicts
sizable cumulative multipliers that can lie above 1 for deficit-financed spending—now despite the
addition of dampening feedback from interest rates.
To demonstrate the generality of our methodology, we extend our analysis to other shocks
in section 6. We show that (1) also characterizes the transmission of these shocks. In that sense,
iMPCs continue to be central, and it is important for models to match them. As before, this is particularly relevant when shocks involve deficit-financed spending—but now, we show that private
deficits matter in addition to public deficits. We apply this general principle to two illustrative
cases: deleveraging shocks, and fiscal shocks with lump-sum rather than progressive taxation.
For the former, we find that the HA-illiq model predicts a $3 drop in output on impact for every
$1 of deleveraging, as well as a negative cumulative output response. In contrast, the HA-std
model barely amplifies the deleveraging shock, and the TA model features zero cumulative drop
in output. For the latter, we show that the adverse redistributive effects of lump-sum taxation tend
to reduce the multiplier, and that this can be understood as the result of smaller private deficits
incurred by more heavily constrained taxpayers.
There is a large literature studying fiscal multipliers (see Hall 2009, Ramey 2011, and Ramey
2018 for surveys). Early theoretical analyses used the framework of the IS–LM model (Haavelmo
1945, Blinder and Solow 1973). The development of macroeconomic models with microfoundations enabled a quantification of mechanisms in the context of representative-agent models, from
the role of the neoclassical wealth effect on labor supply (Aiyagari, Christiano and Eichenbaum
1992, Baxter and King 1993) to the role of monetary policy (Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo
2011, Woodford 2011). Our benchmark partials out this role of monetary policy to focus on other
factors likely to affect multipliers. Building on the Campbell and Mankiw (1989) “saver-spender”
metaphor, Galí, López-Salido and Vallés (2007) introduced two-agent models to explain positive
consumption multipliers in the data. As Coenen et al. (2012) documents, this class of models is
the dominant paradigm for the study of fiscal policy in central banks today.
A recent literature has analyzed fiscal policy with heterogeneous agents. Oh and Reis (2012)
was an early paper studying the effect of fiscal transfers. McKay and Reis (2016) focus instead on
the role of automatic stabilizers. Ferriere and Navarro (2017) stress heterogeneous labor supply
responses to changes in taxes in a model with flexible prices. Closest to our work is Hagedorn,
Manovskii and Mitman (2017), who also study the effect of government spending in a model with
nominal rigidities similar to ours. Their analysis is based on a different equilibrium selection
criterion that relies on a long-run nominal debt anchor, following Hagedorn (2016). In contrast to

4

our paper, which studies policy at the margin around the steady state, they focus on nonlinearities
and the state dependence of multipliers. Our work is different in that we show the importance
of iMPCs, provide analytical results in a benchmark case, and elicit why our model differs from
RA and TA models. Both our studies conclude that heterogeneous-agent models differ from twoagent models, that deficit-financed fiscal multipliers can be significantly larger than one, and that
balanced budget fiscal multipliers tend to be less than one, especially when taxes are raised lump
sum.
There is also a vast empirical literature on fiscal multipliers based on aggregate macroeconomic
evidence. As surveyed by Ramey (2018), this literature points to output multipliers in the range
of 0.6–0.8, though the data does not reject multipliers as high as 1.5 (Ramey 2011, ben Zeev and
Pappa 2017). The literature testing state dependence has mostly focused on the prediction from
the representative-agent literature that multipliers differ depending on the extent of the monetary
policy response (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2012, Ramey and Zubairy 2018). A robust prediction of our heterogeneous-agent model is that they also depend on the extent to which spending is
deficit-financed. While the empirical literature acknowledges the potential importance of deficits,
this prediction has not been subject to extensive testing.
Finally, our paper builds upon several lines of research that seek to discipline macroeconomic
models with heterogeneity. A rapidly emerging literature identifies sufficient statistics for partial
equilibrium effects (see, for instance, Kaplan and Violante 2014, Auclert 2017 and Berger et al.
2018). Auclert and Rognlie (2018) note that these partial equilibrium sufficient statistics can be
converted into general equilibrium effects using numerical multipliers, while Farhi and Werning
(2017) and Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018) decompose aggregate consumption outcomes between the underlying inputs to the consumption function. Our paper combines these insights to
show that the structure of general equilibrium itself can be reduced to a limited set of moments, intertemporal MPCs. To the best of our knowledge, these constitute the first set of sufficient statistics
informing the general equilibrium propagation of shocks and policies.3

2

The intertemporal Keynesian Cross

In this section, we introduce our benchmark framework for the study of fiscal policy. The framework nests most of the common New Keynesian models in use in the literature, including those
with heterogeneous agents. For this section, we make three simplifying assumptions that allow
us to derive analytical results showing the central role of intertemporal marginal propensities to
consume. As is standard in the New Keynesian literature, we abstract away from capital. We deviate a little from convention by assuming sticky wages, but flexible prices. Our main simplifying
assumption is a constant-real-rate rule for monetary policy. This assumption allows us to partial
out the effects of monetary policy so that we can focus on the potential effects of heterogeneity
3 In

recent contributions, Koby and Wolf (2018) use this methodology to study aggregate investment in models
with firm heterogeneity, while Guren, McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) apply it in reverse, to convert general
equilibrium estimates to partial equilibrium effects.

5

itself. We discuss the consequences of relaxing these assumptions at the end of this section, and
we show that our main conclusions are robust to introducing capital, sticky prices and alternative
monetary policy rules in section 5.

2.1

General framework

Time is discrete and runs from t = 0 to ∞. The economy is populated by a unit mass of agents,
or households, who face no aggregate uncertainty, but may face idiosyncratic uncertainty. Agents
vary in their idiosyncratic ability state e, which follows a Markov process with fixed transition
matrix Π. We assume that the mass of agents in idiosyncratic state e is always equal to π (e), the
probability of e in the stationary distribution of Π. The average ability level is normalized to be
one, so that ∑e π (e) e = 1. If agents are permanently different, Π is the identity matrix and π the
initial distribution over e.
Agents. In period t, agent i enjoys the consumption of a generic consumption good cit and gets
disutility from working nit hours, leading to a time-0 utility of
"
E

∑ βt {u (cit ) − v (nit )}

#
(2)

t ≥0

Pretax labor income is subject to a log-linear retention function as in Bénabou (2000) and Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2017).4 This retention function is indexed to real wages, so that if
Pt is the nominal price of consumption goods, Wt is the nominal wage per unit of ability, and eit is
the agent’s current ability, real after-tax income is
zit ≡ τt



Wt
eit nit
Pt

 1− λ

(3)

We nest standard models by allowing for various market structures. Agent i may trade in multiple
j

assets ai and face state- and asset-specific portfolio restrictions, so that the following constraints
apply each period:
j

j

cit + ∑ ait = zit + (1 + rt−1 ) ∑ ait−1
j

(4)

j

j

ait

j

∈ Aeit

(5)

j

Agent i maximizes (2) by choice of cit and ait , subject to (4) and (5). By contrast, due to frictions
in the labor market, all agents take their hours worked nit —and therefore total after-tax income
zit —as given.5 Hours are determined in general equilibrium.
4 Heathcote

et al. (2017) show that this provides a good approximation to the income tax schedule in practice.
advantage of this formulation is that it is consistent with weak wealth effects on labor supply in the short run,
in line with empirical evidence on marginal propensities to earn. See Auclert and Rognlie (2017).
5 One

6

Labor market.

Following standard practice in the New Keynesian sticky-wage literature, labor

hours nit are determined by union labor demand (Erceg, Henderson and Levin 2000, SchmittGrohé and Uribe 2005). Specifically, we assume that every worker i provides nikt hours of work to
each of a continuum of unions indexed by k ∈ [0, 1]. Total labor effort for person i is therefore
nit ≡

Z
k

nikt dk

Each union k aggregates efficient units of work into a union-specific task Nkt =

R

eit nikt di. A

competitive labor packer then packages these tasks into aggregate employment services using the
constant-elasticity-of-substitution technology
Nt =

Z

e −1
e

k

Nkt dk

 e−e 1

and sells these services to final goods firms at price Wt .
We assume that there are quadratic utility costs of adjusting the nominal wage Wkt set by union

2
ψ R
k, by allowing for an extra additive disutility term 2 k WWktkt−1 − 1 dk in household utility (2). In

every period t, union k sets a common wage Wkt per efficient unit for each of its members, and

calls upon its members to supply hours according to a uniform rule, so that nikt = Nkt . The union
sets Wkt to maximize the average utility of its members given this allocation rule.
In this setup, all unions choose to set the same wage Wkt = Wt at time t and all households
work the same number of hours, equal to
(6)

nit = Nt
so efficiency-weighted hours worked

R

eit nit di are also equal to aggregate labor demand Nt . Ob-

serve that the combination of (6) with the retention function (3) implies that changes in Nt affect
households’ after-tax incomes zit in proportion.
Appendix C.1 shows that the dynamics of aggregate nominal wage inflation 1 + πtw ≡

described by the following nonlinear6 New Keynesian Phillips Curve:
πtw

(1 + πtw )

e
=
ψ

Z

Nt




e − 1 ∂zit 0
v (nit ) −
u (cit ) di + βπtw+1 (1 + πtw+1 )
e ∂nit
0

Wt
Wt−1

are

(7)

According to (7), conditional on future wage inflation, unions set higher nominal wages when
an average of marginal rates of substitution between hours and consumption for households
v0 (nit ) /u0 (cit ) exceeds a marked-down average of marginal after-tax income from extra hours
∂zit 7
∂nit .
6
As

appendix
C.1, a linearized version of (7) takes a standard form πtw
=

dZt
dNt
1
1 dNt
w
w
κ
− Zt − Nt
+ βπt+1 involving only aggregate hours Nt , after-tax income Zt , and a “virφ N + ν
tual consumption aggregate” Ct∗ that captures all the effects of distributional changes on wage inflation.
7 This term includes the distortions from labor income taxes, which are important for fiscal multipliers (Uhlig 2010).
we

show  in

dCt∗
C∗

7

Final goods producers.

We assume a simple linear aggregate production technology
(8)

Yt = Nt
Due to perfect competition and flexible prices, the final goods price is given by

(9)

Pt = Wt

and profits are zero, justifying why dividends do not enter households’ budget constraints in (4).
The real wage per efficient hour is constant and equal to
wage inflation are equal at all times, πt ≡
Government.

Pt
Pt−1

−1 =

πtw .

Wt
Pt

= 1. Thus, goods price inflation and

The government sets an exogenous plan for spending Gt and tax revenue Tt . As-

suming initial government debt B−1 , the sequences { Gt , Tt } must satisfy the intertemporal budget

constraint8

∞

(1 + r−1 ) B−1 + ∑

t =0

t −1

1
∏ 1 + rs
s =0

!
Gt =

∞

∑

t =0

t −1

1
∏ 1 + rs
s =0

!
Tt

(10)

In each period t ≥ 0, the government implements this plan by issuing or retiring debt as needed.
Its outstanding debt at the end of period t is

Bt = (1 + rt−1 ) Bt−1 + Gt − Tt

(11)

To raise tax revenue Tt , the government adjusts the coefficient τt on the labor income retention
function according to
Z

(

Wt
eit nit − τt
Pt



Wt
eit nit
Pt

 1− λ )

di = Tt

(12)

Given the path for goods prices Pt and a rule for the nominal interest rate it , the real interest rate
on assets at t (the price of date-t + 1 goods in units of date-t goods) is equal to
1 + rt ≡

1 + it
1 + π t +1

(13)

In this section, monetary policy sets the nominal interest rate it by following a simple rule, according to which the real interest rate is a positive constant
rt = r > 0

(14)

equal to the flexible-price steady state interest rate r. This is a special case of a Taylor rule, with a
coefficient of 1 on expected inflation. Such a rule delivers a “neutral” monetary policy response to
8 Observe that government debt B is specified in real terms and any plan must respect the intertemporal budget
t
constraint, which rules out both the fiscal theory of the price level and equilibrium adjustment based on nominal bonds
as in Hagedorn (2016).

8

fiscal shocks, in the sense that nominal interest rates rise exactly enough to offset the expected inflation these shocks create.9 This allows us to focus our analysis on forces orthogonal to monetary
policy before we consider more general Taylor rules in section 5.
Definition 1. Given an initial nominal wage W−1 , initial government debt B−1 , an initial dis

tribution Ψ−1 a j , e over assets a j , idiosyncratic states e, and exogenous sequences for fiscal

policy { Gt , Tt } that satisfy the intertemporal budget constraint (10), a general equilibrium is a
w
path
{ Pt , Wt , πo
t , πt , rt , it }, aggregates {Yt , Nt , Ct , Bt , Gt , Tt }, individual allocation rules
n for prices






j
ct a j , e , at a j , e , and joint distributions over assets and productivity levels Ψt a j , e ,
such that households optimize, unions optimize, firms optimize, monetary and fiscal policy follow
their rules, and the goods and bond markets clear
Gt +

Z

ct

n o 
n o 
a j , e dΨt
aj , e
= Yt
Z
n o 
∑ a j dΨt a j , e = Bt

(15)
(16)

j

Note that all assets pay the same equilibrium rate of return and there exists a unique market
clearing condition for assets.

2.2

Nested models

Our formulation nests four major classes of models used to study fiscal policy.
Most of the models considered to date feature only one asset (J = 1). The standard representative-agent model (RA) is a model with a single productivity state e = 1 and without any portfolio
constraints. The two-agent model (TA) features two permanent productivity states {e1 , e2 } with
equal productivity, e1 = e2 = 1, but different portfolio constraints: a mass π (e1 ) = µ of fully

constrained agents, Ae1 = {0}, and a mass π (e2 ) = 1 − µ of unconstrained agents. The standard

heterogeneous-agent model (HA-std) works with many idiosyncratic states e, a unique stationary
distribution π and a borrowing constraint, A = [ a, ∞).
A recent literature has studied two-asset models (J = 2). In this paper, we consider a simplified
version of these models, which we call the illiquid-asset heterogeneous-agent model (HA-illiq). Agents
face idiosyncratic risk, trade in a liquid asset on which they face a borrowing constraint, A =

[ a, ∞), and also all hold an entirely illiquid asset A illiq = ailliq , whose returns accrue to their
liquid account.10 This formulation allows our model to simultaneously match high average MPCs
and a high level of aggregate wealth while retaining the tractability of a one-asset model. While
9 Woodford

(2011) uses a similar rule in a representative-agent model, as do McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016)
in a heterogeneous-agent model. One advantage of this rule is that the Phillips curve (7) only affects nominal quantities.
A drawback in representative-agent models is that it can lead to indeterminacy. It turns out that our heterogeneousagent model is locally determinate despite this rule (see Auclert, Rognlie and Straub 2018 for a determinacy result,
which was also included in earlier drafts of this paper).
10 Following (16), the aggregate combined holdings of liquid and illiquid assets in each period equal government debt
Bt . In section 5, when we introduce monopolistically competitive firms and capital, the illiquid household asset will
also include equity.

9

Kaplan et al. (2018) and Lütticke (2018) have shown that the possibility of trade between liquid
and illiquid assets can matter for monetary policy, we believe that keeping illiquid holdings fixed
represents a useful approximation for the study of fiscal policy.11

2.3

The aggregate consumption function

We now show that each of these models admits a simple representation of aggregate household
behavior in general equilibrium. Starting from (3) and the fact that, in equilibrium, (6) and (9)
hold, we can write aggregate after-tax income as
Zt ≡

Z

zit di =

τt Nt1−λ

Z

eit1−λ di

(17)

= Nt = Yt , we can also write Zt = Yt − Tt . From (17), we see that
individual after-tax income zit is just a fraction of the aggregate

Combining (12) and

R

e n di
i it it

zit = R

eit1−λ

e1ιt−λ dι

Zt

(18)

Substituting (18) into the household budget constraint (4), we see that the path of optimal policy

j 
rules {ct ( a j , e), at ( a j , e)} is entirely determined by the sequence of aggregate after-tax in
comes { Zt }. Thus, given the initial distribution Ψ−1 ( a j , e), which we assume to be the ergodic

steady-state distribution, aggregate consumption can be written entirely as a function of { Zt }, that
is,

Z
i

cit di = Ct ({ Zs }) = Ct ({Ys − Ts })

We call Ct the aggregate consumption function.12 Its existence relies only on the facts that in gen-

eral equilibrium, household incomes are determined by the paths of macroeconomic aggregates
through their effects on individual incomes, and that real interest rates are held constant by monetary policy. Ct encapsulates the potentially complex interactions between heterogeneity, macroe-

conomic aggregates, and the wealth distribution featured in our framework. Specifically, from
the point of view of aggregate equilibrium behavior, the entire difference between the four models
(RA, TA, HA-std and HA-illiq) is captured by differences in their aggregate consumption function.
We now build on this observation to derive a simple representation of equilibrium.

2.4

The intertemporal Keynesian cross

A key condition in definition 1 is goods market clearing. Using Walras’ law, it is simple to show
that, given any path { Gt , Tt } satisfying the government’s intertemporal budget constraint (10), a
11 See Fagereng et al. (2018) for evidence that households leave their illiquid asset positions almost entirely unchanged

in response to income shocks.
12 Similar aggregate consumption functions have been derived in Kaplan et al. (2018) and Farhi and Werning (2017),
among others.

10

path of output {Yt } is part of an equilibrium if, and only if, it satisfies the equation
(19)

Yt = Gt + Ct ({Ys − Ts })

at all time periods t (see appendix A.1 for a proof). This fixed point equation contains all the
complexity of general equilibrium.
Totally differentiating (19), we find that the first-order response of output {dYt } to a change in

fiscal policy {dGt , dTt } must satisfy

dYt = dGt +

∞

∑ Mt,s (dYs − dTs )

(20)

s =0

where we have defined the intertemporal marginal propensities to consume, or iMPCs for short, as
Mt,s ≡

∂Ct
∂Zs

(21)

We can collect the iMPCs in a matrix M ≡ ( Mt,s ) whose s-th column M·,s captures the dynamic

response of aggregate consumption to an additional unit of after-tax income Zs at date s. Since
budget constraints must hold, each such additional unit of income is eventually spent. In other
words, the present value of M·,s is always equal to one, ∑∞
t =0

Mt,s
(1+r ) t − s

= 1.

Equation (20) is readily expressed in vector form. Defining dY ≡ (dY0 , dY1 , . . .)0 , and similarly
dG ≡ (dG0 , dG1 , . . .)0 and dT ≡ (dT0 , dT1 , . . .)0 , we obtain the following proposition.

Proposition 1 (The intertemporal Keynesian cross). If the first-order response of output dY to a fiscal
policy shock {dG, dT} exists, it solves the intertemporal Keynesian cross
dY = dG − MdT + MdY

(22)

If M is a linear map (defined on the space of summable sequences) with (I − M) M = I and dG, dT are

summable, then a solution to (22) is dY = M (dG − MdT).

This proposition shows that our model gives rise to a Keynesian-cross-like relationship between output and government spending: dY is given by the sum of government spending dG
and the implied consumption response to the (endogenous) change in after-tax income dY − dT.

Unlike the traditional Keynesian cross, however, (22) is derived from a microfounded model, and
crucially is a vector-valued equation, which captures intertemporal spending responses by agents
through optimal borrowing and savings decisions.

Intertemporal MPCs as sufficient statistics. Note that the M matrix encapsulates the entire heterogeneity and micro structure of any model that matches the framework of section 2. Through its
place in (22), M governs the effects of fiscal policy on output. Up to multiplicity in M, knowledge

of the iMPCs is therefore sufficient to compute dY for any possible path {dG, dT}.
11

Our model may admit multiple equilibria. This is due to the presence of nominal

Determinacy.

rigidities, which are well known to lead to indeterminacy. The nature of indeterminacy is that
there might be several linear maps M satisfying (I − M) M = I. Below, we confine our attention to temporary and summable policies, implying that limt→∞ dGt = limt→∞ dTt = 0, and to
the unique map M ensuring that limt→∞ dYt = 0 for such policies. In fact, for the models with

heterogeneous agents, HA-std and HA-illiq, this map gives the unique bounded solution dY to

equation (22), corresponding to the locally determinate equilibrium.

2.5

Extensions

We now briefly discuss how extensions of the environment alter the intertemporal Keynesian cross
(22). Our approach turns out to be quite general. Across all of the following extensions, we obtain
a generalized version of (22),
where ∑∞
t =0

T
Mt,s
t−s

(1+r )

= ∑∞
t =0

Y
Mt,s
t−s

(1+r )

dY = dG − M T dT + MY dY

(23)

= 1 for all s. The sufficient statistics for the output response to

fiscal policy are now the two matrices M T and MY that reflect the response of aggregate demand
to changes in taxes and income, respectively.
Alternative tax incidence.

If the government finances its marginal expenses dG using alter-

native tax instruments that are not captured by (12), this requires a more general aggregate consumption function, Ct ({Ys ; Ts }), which separately depends on income and taxes. Thus, we obtain
T ≡ − ∂Ct and MY ≡
equation (23) by defining Mt,s
t,s
∂Ts

Durable goods.

∂Ct
∂Ys

= Mt,s (see appendix B.1).

Suppose households also purchase durable goods, produced by a similar linear

technology. In that case, the intertemporal Keynesian cross (23) holds with both M T and MY
now corresponding to intertemporal marginal propensities to spend, rather than to consume. We
formally develop a simple model with durables along these lines in appendix E.
Investment.

One can include investment by modifying the production technology to include

both capital and labor. Maintaining the monetary policy rule (14), there now also exists an equilibrium investment function It ({Ys }) that depends solely on the path for output. Intuitively, this

path affects employment and therefore the prospective path for its marginal product of capital,
determining investment decisions. The goods market clearing equation (19) is replaced by Yt =

Gt + Ct ({Ys ; Ts }) + It ({Ys }), where income and taxes no longer enter symmetrically into the con-

Y ≡
sumption function due to revaluation effects. We obtain (23) with M T = M and Mt,s

∂Ct
∂Ys

∂It
+ ∂Y
,
s
where the latter now contains the impulse responses of both consumption and investment to a
unit increase in output at date s. Details can be found in appendix B.2.

12

Sticky prices.

It is well known that sticky prices lead to countercyclical redistribution from

wages to profits. This is especially important in heterogeneous-agent models since, depending on
the distribution rule for profits, wage-earners and profit-earners do not necessarily coincide (see
e.g. Werning 2015, Broer, Hansen, Krusell and Öberg 2016, Debortoli and Galí 2017).13 However,
in the natural case where agents earn profits in proportion to their current productivity e, these
redistributive effects are neutralized and we obtain our benchmark equation (1) with M T = MY =
M. See appendix B.3 for details.
Limitations of our approach.

The commonality behind these extensions is that they can be

reduced to a fixed point equation in the path for output delivered by the goods market clearing
condition. We now briefly discuss when this approach fails to apply.
The main limitation of our approach is that it cannot easily handle the case of other monetary
policy rules, or sticky prices with a distribution rule different from above. In the former case,
the real interest rate responds to inflation; in the latter case, real earnings respond to inflation.
Both these outcomes affect consumption, but wage inflation (7) is itself affected by consumption,
leading to a fixed point problem that makes it more difficult to solve for M T and MY . In light of
this limitation, the approach we follow in this paper is first to study the constant-real-rate, stickywage benchmark as a way to identify the relevant micro moments for fiscal policy, then to compare
those moments to the data, and finally to demonstrate that the same moments are still relevant in
a full-fledged quantitative model with sticky prices and alternative monetary policy rules.

3

Intertemporal MPCs in the models and the data

The intertemporal Keynesian cross in the previous section highlighted the crucial importance of
iMPCs in determining the effects of fiscal policy. This raises an obvious question: how can we
measure iMPCs in the data, and which models can match the evidence?
To answer this question, we proceed in three steps. We first collect the best available evidence
on M. Due to data limitations, this is unfortunately restricted to the first column of M: the dynamic response to an unanticipated increase in income. This then allows us to distinguish between
models to find those that are most consistent with the evidence. Finally, since the intertemporal
Keynesian cross requires a complete matrix M, we use the models most consistent with the evidence to fill in the later columns of M.

3.1

Evidence on the response to unexpected income shocks

To estimate the first column of M, we observe that it can be expressed as an average of individual
responses to an unexpected income shock, ∂cit /∂zi0 , weighted by pretax income in the year of the
13 In

fact, this is one reason why we prefer to work with sticky wages in our benchmark model, since the interaction
of these distributional effects with the countercyclicality of profits in the sticky-price New Keynesian model can have
erratic consequences.

13

income shock,14
Mt,0 =

Z

R

∂c
zi0
· it di
zi0 di ∂zi0

(24)

We propose two sources of evidence for the path of individual responses ∂cit /∂zi0 .15
Norwegian lottery evidence.

Our first source of evidence comes from Norwegian administra-

tive data, as analyzed in Fagereng et al. (2018). The data includes comprehensive information
on consumption and uses the random winnings of lotteries to identify the dynamic consumption
responses to income shocks. The authors’ main estimating equation is
5

cit = αi + δt + ∑ γk lotteryi,t−k + θXit + eit

(25)

t =0

where cit is consumption of individual i in year t, αi an individual fixed effect, δt a time effect, Xit
are household characteristics, and lotteryi,t is the amount household i wins in year t. The authors
provided us with regression results weighted by after-tax incomes at the time of the lottery win.16

Since lottery wins are not forecastable and are disbursed at the time they are announced, the
estimated γbk precisely correspond to the weighted average in (24) and thus the first column of the
iMPC matrix M.

c0 through γ
c5 , together with 99%
The black dots in figure 1 represent the point estimates for γ

confidence intervals. Consistent with a large empirical literature, the annual MPC out of a one-

time transfer is large, at about 0.55. What the literature has not stressed as much, but clearly
appears in the Norwegian data, is that the iMPC in the year following the transfer is also fairly
large, at around 0.16. This data point will turn out to be crucial to discriminate between models.
After this point, the iMPCs slowly decay and become statistically insignificant around year 4.
A lower bound from Italian survey evidence.

Our second source of evidence is a lower bound

estimate for ∂cit /∂zi0 constructed from survey data on MPCs. We implement it using the latest
version of the Italian Survey of Household Income and Wealth (SHIW 2016), which asks survey
respondents to report their annual contemporaneous MPC, ∂ci0 /∂zi0 .
We obtain a point estimate for M0,0 by weighting MPCs by income. To inform the later elements Mt,0 for t > 0, we propose the following idea based on the assumption that the distribution
of MPCs remains the same over time.17 Consider M1,0 . How small could this year-1 iMPC possibly
14 For a proof, see appendix A.1. This approach also allows to measure MY and M T separately by choosing weighting
functions in line with the incidence of aggregate income and taxes.
15 The existing literature mostly focuses on estimating contemporaneous marginal propensities to consume (which is
helpful to inform M0,0 in our notation), e.g. Shapiro and Slemrod (2003), Johnson, Parker and Souleles (2006), Blundell,
Pistaferri and Preston (2008), Jappelli and Pistaferri (2014), and Fuster, Kaplan and Zafar (2018).
16 Our reference estimates are their weighted full sample estimates, including responses to all sizes of lottery winnings
up to $150,000. An alternative would have been to restrict the sample to only small winnings. However, MPC estimates
in this sample tend to be even larger than full sample estimates, do not sum to one over time, and are inherently
imprecisely estimated due to the large noise-signal ratio.
17 In appendix D.2 we validate this assumption by comparing the 2010 and 2016 distributions of MPCs.

14

Figure 1: iMPCs in the Norwegian and Italian data.

Data from Fagereng et al (2018)
Lower bound from SHIW 2016

0.6

iMPC Mt,0

0.4

0.2

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

Year (t)

be for a given distribution of MPCs? It is smallest precisely when those households that save the
most in year 0 are also the ones who save the most in year 1. In other words, a weighted average
of (1 − MPCi ) · MPCi delivers a lower bound on the true value of M1,0 . We extend this approach
in appendix D.2 to all future iMPCs Mt,0 for t > 0.

The red diamonds in figure 1 show the lower bound estimates. The results are remarkably
consistent with those obtained from the Norwegian administrative data. While the weighted contemporaneous MPC is slightly lower, at 0.42, the subsequent lower bound estimates are closely
aligned with those obtained from the Norwegian data. The year-1 lower bound, in particular, is
equal to 0.14 and thus close to the Norwegian estimate of 0.16. Recall that this point is a weighted
average of (1 − MPCi ) · MPCi , so it is entirely accounted for by individuals in the sample that

report intermediate MPCs, not too close to 0 or 1. Applying this logic in reverse suggests that
matching our iMPC estimates will require models that generate an entire distribution of MPCs,
including an important role for intermediately-constrained agents. This is what we confirm next.

3.2

Model discrimination

To assess the ability of the models described in section 2 to match the evidence reported in figure 1, it is necessary to calibrate them. Our calibration procedure follows literature standards and
maintains maximal comparability across models and across sections of this paper.
Table 1 summarizes parameter estimates across models. In all models we consider, we assume that the economy is initially at a steady state. Households have constant CES utility over
consumption u (c) =

−1

c 1− ν
1 − ν −1

with an EIS of ν =

15

1
2,

and a power disutility from labor v(n) =

Table 1: Calibrating the benchmark models.
Values

Parameters

Description

ν
φ
r
λ

Elasticity of intertemporal substitution
Frisch elasticity of labor supply
Real interest rate
Retention function curvature
Government spending to GDP
Wealth to after-tax income ratio
Discount factor
Liquid assets to after-tax income
Borrowing constraint
Share of hand-to-mouth households

G/Y
A/Z
β
B/Z
a
µ

HA-illiq
0.5
1
5%
0.181
0.2
8.2
0.80
0.26
0

RA

TA

HA-std

BU

TABU

(same across all models)
(same across all models)
(same across all models)
(same across all models)
(same across all models)
(same across all models)
0.95 0.95
0.92
0.90
0.90
8.2
8.2
8.2
8.2
8.2
0
52%
36%

−1

γn1+φ /(1 + φ−1 ) with Frisch elasticity φ = 1. We set the curvature parameter of the retention
function to λ = 0.181 as in Heathcote et al. (2017), assume that government spending is

G
Y

= 20%
of output, and set γ to normalize steady-state output. We assume that steady-state inflation is
π = 0 and that the steady state real interest rate is r = 5%. We set β to match a wealth to after-tax
(labor) income ratio of A
Z = 8.2 at that interest rate. While this number is larger than typically assumed for models without capital, it more accurately reflects the amount of effective liquidity in
quantitatively realistic models with capital, and allows us to continue using the same household
calibration once we introduce capital in section 5.
For the two models with idiosyncratic income risk and borrowing constraints, HA-std and
HA-illiq, we follow standard practice in the literature and assume that gross income follows an
AR(1) process. We use Floden and Lindé (2001)’s estimates of the persistence of the US wage
process, equal to 0.91 yearly, set the variance of innovations to match the standard deviation of
log gross earnings in the US of 0.92 as in Auclert and Rognlie (2018),18 and discretize this process
as an 11-point Markov chain. Following McKay et al. (2016), we also assume that households
cannot borrow, a = 0.
There has been recent interest in the ability of various tractable models to mimic properties of
heterogeneous-agent models (see e.g. Debortoli and Galí 2017). While the TA model is the poster
child for this approach, a recent promising alternative proposed by Kaplan and Violante (2018),
Michaillat and Saez (2018) and Hagedorn (2018) is to introduce bonds in the utility function of a
representative agent. To explore the consequences of such a model for iMPCs, we add this BU
model to the set of models we consider.19
Our calibration targets fully specify both the RA and the HA-std model, while leaving one
degree of freedom in the TA, the HA-illiq and the BU model. We use this extra degree of freedom to
18 This is the same value as in Kaplan et al. (2018), and somewhat higher than the value of 0.70 implied by Floden and

Lindé (2001), in order to capture the “new view” of household idiosyncratic risk.
19 See appendix A.5 for details on the BU model.

16

Figure 2: iMPCs in the Norwegian data and several models.
(a) Data and model fit

iMPC Mt,0

0.6

(b) Alternative models
0.6

Data
HA-illiq
TABU

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0
0

1

2
3
Year (t)

4

5

Data
RA
TA
HA-std
BU

0

1

2
3
Year (t)

4

5

target the contemporaneous MPC M0,0 of the Norwegian evidence in figure 1. The extra parameter
of the TA model is the share of hand-to-mouth households µ. The extra parameter for the BU
model is the curvature of the utility function over bonds. The extra parameter for the HA-illiq
B
Z

= 27% of steady
state after-tax income. This is somewhat lower than in Kaplan et al. (2018), who calibrate liquid
assets to 26% relative to GDP, mostly because our calibration goal is to match the contemporaneous
MPC estimate.
Figure 2 compares the model iMPCs to their counterparts in the Norwegian data. Panel (a)
shows that despite our single degree of freedom B, the HA-illiq calibration matches the entire
shape of estimated iMPCs relatively well. In particular, it is able to correctly reproduce the relatively high values of M1,0 and M2,0 suggested by both sources of evidence.
Panel (b) in figure 1 shows that the iMPCs implied by our alternative models all fail to match
at least one important dimension of the estimated iMPCs. The iMPCs of the RA model are flat at a
low level close to the real rate r, reflecting the permanent-income behavior of agents and entirely
inconsistent with the data. The iMPCs of the TA model are also flat, except for the high impact
MPC that the model is calibrated to match. Due to the absence of intermediately constrained
agents, the TA model cannot generate elevated iMPCs in year one and later, which are a key characteristic of the data. The iMPCs of the standard heterogeneous-agent model HA-std are much
closer to those of the RA model than to those of our HA-illiq model, echoing the approximate
aggregation result of Krusell and Smith (1998). Finally, the BU model tends to deliver iMPCs for
year 1 and 2 that are too large relative to the data, since its iMPCs decay exponentially over time.
Squinting at the iMPCs for the TA and the BU models suggests an alternative model that combines an agent with bonds in the utility with a fraction of hand-to-mouth agents. Such a TABU
model has two degrees of freedom that can be calibrated to match the contemporaneous MPC as
model is the amount of liquid bonds B. We find liquid bonds to be a fraction of

17

Figure 3: Columns of the iMPC matrix in the HA-illiq model: M·,s for s = 0, 5, 10, 15, 20.
0.6

s=0
s=5
s = 10
s = 15
s = 20
TABU

0.5

iMPC Mt,s

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

5

10

15
Year t

20

25

30

Note: The green lines show intertemporal MPCs implied by a two-asset heterogeneous-agent model (HA-illiq) that was
calibrated to match empirical estimates of the first column of intertemporal MPCs. The purple lines show intertemporal
MPCs of a two-agent bonds-in-the-utility model (TABU).

well as the subsequent iMPC M1,0 of the HA-illiq model. The purple line in panel (a) shows the
outcome of this procedure: the overall iMPC patterns are extremely similar.

3.3

The response to expected income shocks

With unlimited data, we would also estimate other columns of the iMPC matrix M directly. Unfortunately, there currently exists very limited information on consumption responses to anticipated
changes in income one year out or later. Thus, we have to content ourselves with matching the
first column and relying on models for extrapolation to other columns.
The green lines in figure 3 display the implications of our main model, HA-illiq, for the entire
iMPC matrix. Each tent-shaped graph in the figure represents a column of the iMPC matrix—the
response of aggregate consumption to an increase in aggregate after-tax income at some future
date. The tent shape is a common feature of heterogeneous-agent models. The peaks of the tents
decline for further-out income shocks, because income is spent partly in anticipation of its receipt.
However, the declines of the tents to the right of their peak mirror the empirically-confirmed
decline in first column iMPCs, which seems reasonable. Thus, our model is able to match the first
column of the iMPC matrix directly and has intuitively reasonable implications for responses to
future anticipated income shocks.

18

The limited evidence on consumption responses

Consistency with existing empirical evidence.

to anticipated income shocks generally confirms the pattern predicted by our model and visible
in figure 3. For example, in their survey, Fuster et al. (2018) find that a few households would cut
spending immediately in response to the news of a $500 loss one quarter ahead, indicative of some
anticipation effects. Agarwal and Qian (2014) find evidence of a spending response between the
announcement of a cash payout in Singapore and its disbursement two months afterward, and
Di Maggio et al. (2017) find some evidence of one-quarter-ahead new car spending in expectation
of a predictable reduction in mortgage payments.20 However, this evidence is typically quarterly,
not yearly as required by our model, and is too imprecise for us to confidently use as a model
input.
Alternative models: TABU and durable goods.

In the absence of direct empirical evidence,

one way to confirm the predictions of our model for the later columns of M is to consider what
alternative models with the same predictions for the first column would predict. We first consider
the TABU model, which matches well the first column of the HA-illiq M matrix. Figure 3 shows
that this model has almost identical predictions for later columns. This result makes us confident
that the information contained in the impulse response to unexpected income shocks is informative about the impulse response to expected income shocks, since two very different models, once
calibrated to match the former, also agree on the latter.
In appendix E, we also consider the predictions from a model with frictionless durables. This
is an important exercise since the spending response that we target in the data includes durable
spending, and agents have more scope for intertemporal substitution in durable spending. When
calibrating the model to match the response of durables in the Norwegian evidence, we find very
similar patterns for future iMPCs, except that spending is a little less elevated in the year after the
income receipt as households decumulate some of their durables.

4

Fiscal policy in the benchmark model

We now solve the intertemporal Keynesian Cross to elicit the relationship between iMPCs and the
impulse response to fiscal policy in our benchmark model. This relationship depends crucially on
the financing of fiscal policy. We first consider the case of balanced budget policy and then study
the general case.
It is standard in the literature to summarize the effects of fiscal policy on output using “multiplier” statistics. We follow the convention of reporting both the impact multiplier dY0 /dG0 and
∞
−t
−t
the cumulative multiplier ∑∞
t=0 (1 + r ) dYt / ∑t=0 (1 + r ) dGt (see Mountford and Uhlig 2009 and
Ramey 2018). The latter is sometimes considered a more useful measure of the overall impact of

policy, capturing propagation as well as amplification of fiscal shocks.21
20 By

contrast, Kueng (2018) finds limited evidence of anticipation effects from the Alaska Permanent Fund news.
literature also sometimes refers to intermediate objects such as ∑tT=0 (1 + r )−t dYt / ∑tT=0 (1 + r )−t dGt for some
T > 0. This number typically lies somewhere between our impact and cumulative multipliers.
21 The

19

4.1

Balanced-budget fiscal policy

Our first result is a sharp characterization of the effects of balanced-budget fiscal policy.
Proposition 2 (Balanced-budget policies, Haavelmo 1945). Assume the fiscal policy {dG, dT} has a
balanced budget, that is, dG = dT. Then, the fiscal multiplier is 1 at every date, dY = dG.

This result can easily be verified using (22) and our determinacy assumption. It is nevertheless
very striking. Economically, it reflects the cancellation of two forces. Holding pretax incomes
fixed, an increase in spending financed by a contemporaneous increase in taxes has an effect on
output, ( I − M) dG, that is less than one-for-one. This is because consumption falls in response
to the additional taxes. In equilibrium, however, pretax incomes rise, pushing up consumption.
Our assumptions imply that the increase in pretax income exactly offsets the increase in taxes
for every household at every date and state.22 Households’ consumption decisions are therefore
unchanged, implying an output multiplier of exactly one at every date, irrespective of the timing
of spending.
Proposition 2 provides a heterogeneous-agent counterpart to Woodford (2011)’s seminal representative-agent result under constant real interest rates. We view this result as the fiscal policy
equivalent of Werning (2015)’s powerful irrelevance result for monetary policy. As such, it can
serve as a useful benchmark as the literature on fiscal multipliers in heterogeneous-agent models
develops (see, e.g., Ferriere and Navarro 2017 and Hagedorn et al. 2017).

4.2

Deficit-financed fiscal policy

While iMPCs are irrelevant for balanced-budget fiscal policies, they are central with deficit financing, as the following proposition emphasizes.
Proposition 3 (Deficit-financed policies). The output response to a fiscal policy shock {dG, dT} is the

sum of the government spending policy dG and the effect on consumption dC,
dY = dG + M · M · (dG − dT) .
|
{z
}

(26)

dC

The consumption response dC only depends on the path of primary deficits dG − dT. In particular, holding
the deficit fixed, government spending has a greater effect on output than transfers.

Proposition 3 highlights that for non-balanced-budget policies, the consumption response is
entirely driven by the interaction between iMPCs—which determine MM—and primary deficits

dG − dT. One implication of this is a clear relationship between government spending and transfer

multipliers (see e.g. Giambattista and Pennings 2014 and Mehrotra 2014).

Consider a government spending plan that leads to a given path of primary deficits (or, equivalently, government debt). Under a constant-r rule, this has the same effect on aggregate con22 Gelting

(1941) and Haavelmo (1945) were the first to spell out this logic in the context of a static IS-LM model.

20

sumption as a transfer program that generates the same trajectory for government debt. Therefore, the government spending multiplier is equal to the sum of the transfer multiplier and the
direct effect of government spending. Ramey (2018) argues that empirically, transfer multipliers
as in Romer and Romer (2010) tend to be larger, in absolute value, than the output multiplier minus one. Our observation implies that this difference should be traceable to different monetary
responses and/or different tax rules.
Multipliers in the RA and TA models.

In two special cases, we can explicitly characterize the

consumption and output responses. The first special case is the RA model.
Proposition 4 (Fiscal policy in the benchmark RA model). In the benchmark RA model, dY = dG
irrespective of dT. In particular, impact and cumulative multipliers are equal to 1.
The reason for this stark result is that Ricardian equivalence holds in the RA model, so any
policy is equivalent to a balanced-budget policy (proposition 2) and thus carries a unit multiplier.
This result was first noted by Woodford (2011).
The second special case for which the solution of (26) is tractable is the TA model. This class
of models has been very influential for the study of fiscal policy (see Galí et al. 2007, Bilbiie and
Straub 2004, Coenen et al. 2012 and Bilbiie, Monacelli and Perotti 2013), yet to the best of our
knowledge the following simple result has not been noted before.
Proposition 5 (Fiscal policy in the benchmark TA model). In the benchmark TA model, dY = dG +
µ
1−µ ( dG

− dT). The impact multiplier is equal to

1
1− µ

−

µ dT0
1−µ dG0 ,

but the cumulative multiplier is 1.

This model is no longer Ricardian, and therefore generally produces non-unitary multipliers
when dG 6= dT. In particular, as proposition 5 illustrates, output each period is determined by
a static traditional Keynesian cross where µ, the share of constrained agents, plays the role of

the standard MPC. The outcome is an impact multiplier of 1/(1 − µ) for a spending policy that

is entirely deficit-financed, dT0 = 0. Interestingly, however, the model still generates unitary

cumulative multipliers, since consumption declines as soon as deficits are turned into surpluses.
In this sense, the iMPCs of the TA model have implications similar to those of the RA model.
What happens in models whose iMPCs are further away from the RA model, as suggested by
the micro evidence of section 3? This is what we study next.
Comparison across all models. To compare the output responses to fiscal policy outside of our
two special cases, we consider a specific fiscal policy shock. We assume that government spending
declines exponentially at rate ρG , dGt = ρtG . Taxes are chosen such that the path of public debt
is given by dBt = ρ B (dBt−1 + dGt ). In this formulation, ρ B is the degree of deficit financing: if

ρ B = 0, the policy keeps a balanced budget, while for greater ρ B , the policy leads to a greater

deficit. We simulate the responses to this shock for various degrees of deficit financing and for
the main models considered in figure 2, and compute the corresponding impact and cumulative
multipliers.
21

Figure 4: Multipliers across the benchmark models.
Impact multiplier
3

3

HA-illiq
HA-std
RA
TA
TABU

2

2.5
∑(1+r )−t dYt
∑(1+r )−t dGt

2.5
dY0 /dG0

Cumulative multiplier

1.5
1

2
1.5
1

0

0.2

0.6
0.4
Persistence of debt ρ B

0.8

0

0.2

0.6
0.4
Persistence of debt ρ B

0.8

Figure 4 displays these multipliers. As per proposition 2, both impact (left panel) and cumulative multipliers (right panel) are exactly equal to 1 when fiscal policy balances the budget, irrespective of iMPCs. As the degree of deficit financing ρ B rises, however, the models separate. The two
models that provide a good match to the iMPCs in the data—the two-asset heterogeneous-agent
model (HA-illiq) and the two-agent bonds-in-the-utility model (TABU)—lead to sizable impact
and cumulative multipliers.23 The models that imply approximately flat iMPCs—the RA model
and the standard HA model—predict multipliers close to or exactly equal to one, in line with
proposition 4. The TA model, as highlighted in proposition 5, lies somewhere in between: while it
generates large impact multipliers under deficit financing, it always predicts a unitary cumulative
multiplier.

4.3

Discussion

Role of distribution of tax policy.

In section 2.5, we described a straightforward extension of

the basic intertemporal Keynesian cross (22), which allows for fiscal policy with arbitrary tax incidence. What role does tax incidence play for the effects of fiscal policy on output? In section 6, we
consider a case where the tax burden to finance a government spending shock is raised entirely
with lump-sum taxes, as in Hagedorn et al. (2017). We show that this results in lower impact and
cumulative multipliers, and we trace this outcome to the tighter constraints faced by the average taxpayer, which prevent much borrowing to smooth the cost of taxation. These smaller private deficits reduce the multiplier, mirroring the close connection we have found between public
deficits and the multiplier.
23 Note

that these two models generate very similar multipliers for any ρ B , since they have very similar iMPCs.

22

Are these multipliers similar to regional multipliers?

The advent of well-identified cross-sec-

tional evidence on the regional effects of government spending has raised the question of the
relationship between regional “transfer” multipliers and closed-economy multipliers (see Nakamura and Steinsson 2014, Farhi and Werning 2016, and Chodorow-Reich 2017 for a recent survey).
More specifically, could cross-sectional evidence distinguish between the vastly different models
and closed-economy multipliers displayed in figure 4?
In a currency-union version of the models in this section, assuming that relative prices between
regions are perfectly rigid (a natural benchmark), it is possible to obtain a clear dichotomy: cumulative regional multipliers are always equal to 1/(1 − home bias), independent of the model’s

iMPCs and the degree of deficit financing. Cumulative closed-economy multipliers, however, are
independent of the home bias parameter and are entirely a function of the interaction of iMPCs
and the degree of deficit financing. This dichotomy underscores the general difficulty in using the
evidence on regional multipliers to inform the debate surrounding closed-economy multipliers.

5

Fiscal policy in the quantitative model

Figure 4 makes clear that models matching iMPCs imply large deficit-financed government spending multipliers. One reason is that we have thus far focused on a set of benchmark economies. We
kept the “supply side” of these economies intentionally simple to focus on the role of intertemporal MPCs in determining the effects of fiscal policies. We now enrich the supply side by adding
capital, sticky prices, and a Taylor rule for monetary policy. As expected, these modifications
bring down multipliers across the board. Nevertheless, we show that intertemporal MPCs remain
crucial in determining the overall effect of fiscal policy.

5.1

Extended model

Capital and sticky prices.

To accommodate sticky prices, we now assume a standard two-tier

production structure. Intermediate goods are produced by a mass one of identical monopolistically competitive firms, whose shares are traded and owned by households. All firms have
the same production technology, now assumed to be Cobb-Douglas in labor and capital, yt =
F (k t−1 , nt ) = kαt−1 n1t −α . Final goods firms aggregate intermediate goods with a constant elasticity

of substitution µ/(µ − 1) > 1. Capital is subject to quadratic capital adjustment costs,so that
 the
costs arising from choosing capital stocks k t−1 and k t in any period t are given by ζ

kt
k t −1

k t −1 ,

1
ζ ( x ) ≡ x − (1 − δ) + 2δe
( x − 1)2 , where δ > 0 denotes depreciation and e I > 0 is the sensitivity of
I

net investment to Tobin’s Q. Finally, any firm chooses a price pt in period t subject to Rotemberg

2
p −p
(1982) adjustment costs ξ ( pt , pt−1 ) ≡ 2κ p (1µ−1) t pt−t1−1 where κ p > 0.24 An intermediate goods
24 As

in section 2.4, the impulse responses we compute are linearized to first order in aggregates. Hence, Rotemberg
adjustment costs are equivalent to price setting à la Calvo (1983).

23

firm maximizes its value




kt
1
pt
Wt
k t−1 − ξ ( pt , pt−1 )Yt +
Jt (k t−1 ) = max
F ( k t −1 , n t ) −
nt − ζ
Jt+1 (k t )
Pt
Pt
k t −1
1 + rt
pt ,k t ,nt

(27)

subject to the requirement that it satisfies final goods firms’ demand in each period at its chosen
price,
F (k t−1 , nt ) = Yt



pt
Pt

−µ/(µ−1)

(28)

Since all these firms are identical, k t = Kt , nt = Nt , and pt = Pt in equilibrium. As we show in
appendix C.2, this setup generates a nonlinear Phillips curve for price inflation
πt (1 + πt ) = κ p mct +

1 Yt+1
π t +1 (1 + π t )
1 + rt Yt

(29)

/Pt
where mct ≡ µ WFtn,t
− 1 is the deviation between real marginal costs and their steady state value,

as well as a set of standard Q theory equations for capital demand and the dynamics of investment.
Agents.

Agents trade firms’ stocks in addition to bonds. We denote by xit agent i’s date t

total stock market position and allow for portfolio constraints Xe . Defining dividends by dt ≡
Jt (Kt−1 ) − Jt+1 (Kt )/(1 + rt ), households face the budget constraint
j

j

cit + ∑ ait + xit = zit + (1 + rt−1 ) ∑ ait−1 + xit−1 dt
j

j

j

j

as well as portfolio constraints ait ∈ Aeit and xit ∈ Xeit . The RA, TA, HA-std, and HA-illiq models

are then extended as follows. The agent in the RA model is as always unconstrained. In the TA
model, we assume the hand-to-mouth agent is also prevented from owning stocks, i.e. Xe1 = {0}.
In the HA-std model, we assume stocks cannot be used to borrow, X = [0, ∞).25 And in the
HA-illiq model, we assume stocks are held in illiquid accounts, X = {1}.
Monetary and fiscal policy.

The monetary authority now follows a Taylor rule,
it = r + φπt

(30)

where the coefficient on inflation φ ensures determinacy26 and r is the steady state interest rate.
As before, the government follows an exponentially decaying spending policy, dGt = ρtG , with
ρG ∈ (0, 1). Taxes are chosen such that the path of public debt is given by dBt = ρ B (dBt−1 + dGt ).

As our baseline, we choose ρG = 0.7, which is in the range of usual estimates of the persistence of
25 In the HA-std model, stocks and bonds are perfect substitutes and therefore the composition of agents’ portfolio is
indeterminate in steady state. Since it may nevertheless matter in response to shocks, we make the standard assumption
that stocks are held in proportion to an agent’s total asset position.
26 As we show in Auclert et al. (2018) and in a previous version of this paper, the determinacy threshold may be above
or below one. In our calibrated HA-illiq model, it is strictly below 1.

24

Table 2: Calibration of the quantitative supply side.
Parameter

Parameter

Value

Source

α

Capital share

0.33

Match K/Y = 2.5

B/Y

Debt-to-GDP

0.7

NIPA

K/Y

Capital-to-GDP

2.5

NIPA

µ

steady state markup

1.015

δ

Depreciation rate

0.08

Match total wealth = 3.5 × GDP

eI

NIPA

Investment elasticity to Q

4

Literature on investment

κp

Price flexibility

0.1

Standard value

κw

Wage flexibility

0.1

Standard value

φ

Taylor rule coefficient

1.5

Standard value

US government spending (see, e.g., Davig and Leeper 2011 and Nakamura and Steinsson 2014),
and ρ B = 0.7, which corresponds to approximately 2 years of deficits following a fiscal shock, in
line with typical responses of deficits in VAR evidence (see, e.g., Galí et al. 2007).
Equilibrium is defined similarly to section 2.

Equilibrium.

Definition 2. Given initial values for the nominal wage W−1 , price level P−1 , government debt


B−1 , capital K−1 , an initial distribution Ψ−1 a j , e over assets a j and idiosyncratic states e, as

well as exogenous sequences for fiscal policy { Gt , Tt } that satisfy the intertemporal budget constraint (10), a general equilibrium is a path
prices { Pt , Wt , πt , πotw , rt , it }, aggregates {Yt , Kt , Nt , Ct ,
n for
 j
 j 

Bt , Gt , Tt }, individual allocation rules ct a , e , at a j , e , and joint distributions over as


sets and productivity levels Ψt a j , e , such that households optimize, unions optimize, firms
optimize, monetary and fiscal policy follow their rules, and the goods market clears
Gt +

Z



n o 
n o 
Kt
j
j
Kt−1 + ξ ( Pt , Pt−1 )Yt = Yt
ct
a , e dΨt
a , e + It + ζ
K t −1

as do the asset market (16) and the stock market

R

xit di = 1.

Calibration. Our parameters and calibration targets are shown in Table 2. For each of our models, we maintain the same calibration of the steady-state household problem as the one we chose
in section 3 by matching the same wealth to after-tax income ratio of 8.2 at the same interest rate
r = 0.05. We stick to standard targets from the literature for the price flexibility (e.g. Schorfheide
2008, Kaplan et al. 2018), wage flexibility (Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Lindé 2011), and
investment elasticity parameters (Gilchrist and Himmelberg 1995), and show that our results are
robust to the calibration in these parameters in appendix F. The model is simulated numerically
using methods discussed in appendix G.

25

Figure 5: Response to a government spending shock in the quantitative HA-illiq model

Per cent of s.s. output

Output
ρB
ρB
ρB
ρB

1.5
1

Consumption

Investment
0

= 0.3
= 0.5
= 0.7
= 0.8

1

0.8

0.5

−0.2

0.6

0

−0.4

0.2

0.5
0
0

2

4

6

8

0

10

2

Hours (% of s.s.)

4

6

8

Inflation (bps)

2

80

1

40
20
0
2

4

6

8

10

2

6
4
Years

8

10

40

1

20

0.5

2

6
4
Years

8

10

0

2

4

6

8

10

0

0
0

0

Government bonds (% of Yss )

Real interest rate (bps)

60

60

0

0.4

0

10

100

0

Government spending
1

0

2

6
4
Years

8

10

0

2

6
4
Years

8

10

Note: The HA-illiq model is a two-asset heterogeneous-agent model which is calibrated to match
evidence on intertemporal MPCs. The government spending shock declines exponentially at rate
ρG = 0.7 and public debt follows dBt = ρ B (dBt−1 + dGt ) for various values of ρ B .

5.2

The quantitative effects of deficit-financed fiscal policy

What are the effects of fiscal policy with capital, a realistic monetary policy rule, and realistic
iMPCs? Figure 5 shows the response of the HA-illiq economy to the government spending shock,
for various degrees of deficit financing ρ B .
The path of government spending is the same across all lines, but those with greater ρ B lead to
more elevated levels of public debt. Greater ρ B is more stimulative and therefore leads to greater
inflation. Since our Taylor rule coefficient is larger than one, real rates now rise in response.
This crowds out investment, yet output still increases more than one for one vs. the spending
shock, even for smaller values of ρ B , as the consumption response is significantly positive. Thus,
the quantitative version of the HA-illiq model still predicts significant output and consumption
multipliers from deficit-financed government spending policies, despite rising real rates and the
crowding out of investment.
One may wonder whether this conclusion holds up with somewhat larger Taylor rule coefficients φ, with greater investment sensitivities e I , and with greater price and wage flexibility
parameters κ p and κ w . As we show in appendices 12–15, even as these parameters are modified,
in most cases the quantitative version of the HA-illiq model predicts a greater than one-for-one
output response and a positive consumption response.
Relative to the benchmark models in section 2, in this quantitative model consumption is no

26

Figure 6: Decomposing the consumption and investment responses
Consumption
1

r effect
Y effect

0.8

Per cent of s.s. output

Investment
0.5

0.6

0

0.4
0.2

−0.5

0

−0.2

0

2

6
4
Years

8

10

0

2

6
4
Years

8

10

longer just a function of net incomes, but also depends on interest rates and dividends. Similarly,
investment depends on aggregate incomes and interest rates. To isolate the contribution of iMPCs,
figure 6 decomposes the responses of consumption and investment for ρ B = 0.7 into two pieces: a
Y channel, capturing the response to additional income and dividends; and an r channel, capturing
the response to interest rates.27 Both channels sum to the total effect in figure 5. For investment
(right panel in figure 6), the two channels move in opposite directions. While the r channel leads to
the familiar crowding out of investment, the Y channel turns out to crowd investment in, as greater
demand for goods raises the marginal product of capital. This weakens the crowding-out effect
significantly, even if it still dominates on net. For consumption (left panel), the Y channel clearly
dominates the total response, hinting at the continued importance of iMPCs in the quantitative
model. We explore the role of iMPCs more systematically next.

5.3

The role of intertemporal MPCs

A more direct way of inspecting the role of iMPCs is to compare the effects of fiscal policy predicted by our battery of models. Figure 7 repeats the exercise of figure 4 in this richer model.
Observe first that all numbers are lower than their counterpart in the benchmark models. This is
expected, given the additional dampening forces generated by an active monetary policy response
and the attendant crowding out of investment.
Aside from this level shift, however, the results are closely in line with those of Section 3.
The RA and standard HA models still predict multipliers close to independent of deficit financing ρ B —in line with their almost flat iMPCs. The TA model still predicts impact multipliers that
increase significantly in ρ B , possibly above 1, yet its predicted effects are relatively short-lived,
27 For

similar decompositions, see Kaplan et al. (2018) and Kaplan and Violante (2018).

27

Figure 7: Multipliers in the quantitative models.
Impact multiplier

2

HA-illiq
HA-std
RA
TA

1.5
∑(1+r )−t dYt
∑(1+r )−t dGt

dY0 /dG0

1.5
1
0.5
0

Cumulative multiplier

2

1
0.5

0

0.2

0.6
0.4
Persistence of debt ρ B

0

0.8

0

0.2

0.6
0.4
Persistence of debt ρ B

0.8

leading cumulative multipliers to be independent of ρ B . This is in line with the TA model matching the high impact MPC but not any of subsequent intertemporal MPCs. Finally, the (two-asset)
HA-illiq model predicts both sizable impact and cumulative multipliers with deficit financing—in
line with it matching the high impact MPC and the high subsequent iMPCs.

5.4

Takeaway: Sizable multipliers with realistic iMPCs and deficit financing

Table 3 summarizes our main results for impact and cumulative multipliers, when computed using ρ B = 0.7. The tables emphasize the complementarity between iMPCs and deficit financing: the
combination of realistic iMPCs and deficit-financed fiscal policy predicts sizable multipliers above
1, both on impact and cumulatively.
The quantitative HA-illiq model’s multipliers presented in Table 3 lie between 1.4 and 1.6 depending on the horizon, and are therefore toward the high end of the range typically estimated in
aggregate data. The survey by Ramey (2018) concludes that the multiplier for temporary deficitfinanced spending is “probably between 0.8 and 1.5”, although reasonable people could argue that
the data do not reject 0.5 or 2. There are two caveats, however, which complicate the comparison
of our model-based conclusions with the data. First, in line with the theoretical literature, our
economy was assumed to be entirely closed; we believe that openness would reduce multipliers
somewhat. Second, the empirical literature typically characterizes a single type of “multiplier”;
according to our model, however, the degree of deficit financing matters greatly for multipliers.
This large dependence of cumulative multipliers on deficit financing constitutes a new testable
prediction for the empirical literature, which to date has not been uncovered by either the RA or
the TA literature. Third, we have confined our attention thus far to fiscal policies which adjust
income taxes to raise tax revenues, without altering tax progressivity. However, the precise tax
28

Table 3: Complementarity between iMPCs and deficit financing: Multipliers across models.

Impact multipliers
Fiscal rule
bal. budget
deficit-financed

Model

RA

HA-std

TA

HA-illiq

benchmark
quantitative
benchmark
quantitative

1.0
0.6
1.0
0.6

1.0
0.7
1.0
0.6

1.0
0.6
1.8
1.3

1.0
0.7
2.5
1.6

HA-std

TA

HA-illiq

1.0
0.5
1.1
0.4

1.0
0.5
1.0
0.8

1.0
0.6
2.6
1.4

Cumulative multipliers
Fiscal rule
bal. budget
deficit-financed

dY0
dG0

Model

RA

benchmark
quantitative
benchmark
quantitative

1.0
0.5
1.0
0.2

∑t (1+r )−t dYt
∑t (1+r )−t dGt

Note. Simulated multipliers across four models: RA is a representative-agent model, HA-std is a heterogeneous-agent
model with a standard calibration, TA is a two-agent model of whom one is hand-to-mouth, and HA-illiq is a two-asset
heterogeneous-agent model calibrated to match evidence on intertemporal MPCs. “Benchmark” refers to a stylized
model with linear technology and monetary policy implementing a constant real rate. “Quantitative” refers to a realistic
model with capital and a Taylor rule. The government spending shock is an AR(1) with (annual) persistence ρ G = 0.7
and an assumed persistence parameter of public debt of ρ B = 0.7, corresponding to approximately 2 years of deficits.

instruments used can be crucial to multipliers. We highlight this idea as an example in the next
section.

6

Other shocks

Up to now, our focus has remained firmly on the analysis of fiscal policy, where intertemporal
MPCs and the intertemporal Keynesian cross can be understood intuitively as generalizing conventional MPCs and the traditional Keynesian cross. As we demonstrate in this section, however,
both intertemporal MPCs and the intertemporal Keynesian cross also shape general equilibrium
responses for a large class of other shocks. To make this point most tractably, this section is based
on the benchmark model of section 2.
To include other kinds of shocks, allow the aggregate consumption function that we defined
in section 2.3 to explicitly depend on an additional variable θ,
Ct = Ct ({ Zs }, θ )

(31)

Changes in θ can correspond to shifts in the interest rate (i.e. a monetary policy shock), in preferences, in the borrowing constraint (i.e. a deleveraging shock), or in the distribution of income and

29

wealth across households.28 Linearizing the goods market clearing condition (19) with (31) makes
it clear how changes in θ can affect output:
dYt = dGt −

∞

∞

s =0

s =0

∑ Mt,s dTs + Ct,θ dθ + ∑ Mt,s dYs

(32)

Relative to (20), this adds an additional term Ct,θ dθ. This is the first-order effect of the shock dθ

on consumption at date t, assuming no changes in the path { Zs } of aggregate after-tax income.
In other words, it is the direct consumption effect of a shock to households, prior to any general
equilibrium feedbacks.
Stacking ∂C ≡ (Ct,θ dθ ) and moving to vector notation, this allows us to generalize the intertemporal Keynesian cross with a simple extension of proposition 1.
Proposition 6 (Generalized intertemporal Keynesian cross). The first-order response of output dY to
a shock to {dG, dT} and θ solves the (generalized) intertemporal Keynesian cross
dY = dG − MdT + ∂C + MdY

(33)

If M is a linear map (defined on the space of summable sequences) with ( I − M) M = I , and dG, dT, ∂C
are summable, then a solution to (33) is dY = M(dG − MdT + ∂C).

The generalized intertemporal Keynesian cross (33) is exactly the same as our earlier version
(22), but with an added ∂C term on the right. Similarly, the solution is the same as in proposition
1, but with M multiplying a new ∂C term.

An important lesson of proposition 6 is that both fiscal shocks and this much broader family of

shocks—to interest rates, preferences, borrowing constraints, and distribution—work through the
same general equilibrium mechanisms. Indeed, this allows us to make predictions about transmission from partial to general equilibrium. For instance, if a deleveraging shock has a direct
consumption effect of ∂C, then a fiscal shock that perturbs the path of government spending by
dG = ∂C while leaving taxes unaffected will have exactly the same general equilibrium output
effect, because dG and ∂C enter interchangeably in (33).29
We can gain additional insight by rewriting (6) as
dY = dG − dT + ( I − M)dT + ∂C +MdY
|
{z
}
| {z }
public deficits

(34)

PE private deficits

The novel feature here is ( I − M)dT + ∂C, which we call the partial equilibrium path of private deficits.

This combines net household spending ( I − M)dT from the change in taxes—the taxes themselves
28 Since an interest rate shock also perturbs the government budget constraint, it comes together with some perturbation dT to the path of tax revenue, reflecting the government’s plan to finance the marginal interest cost.
29 Note that the government spending shock dG = ∂C obeys the government budget constraint because the aggregated household budget constraint requires that ∂C have net present value zero. The equivalence between dG and
∂C is one reason we use fiscal shocks as our entry point to the intertemporal Keynesian cross: shocks to the path of
government spending are a natural reference case for many other shocks.

30

dT minus the implied consumption decline MdT—with the direct effect ∂C of the shock on household consumption. It is “partial equilibrium” because it excludes general equilibrium adjustments
in output. (34) tells us that the output effect of a shock is determined solely by the sum of public
deficits and partial equilibrium private deficits.
This is a useful complement to proposition 3, where we derived a special representation (26)
for fiscal shocks, relating consumption to public deficits. In contrast, in the more general representation (34), we relate output to combined public and partial equilibrium private deficits.
It is important to note that since we have a closed economy model, in general equilibrium
the combined public and private deficit must be zero in every period. This is a consequence of
goods market clearing. The sum in (34) is not zero because it captures only partial equilibrium
private deficits, prior to any market-clearing general equilibrium adjustments in output. Indeed,
the insight of (34) is that partial equilibrium deficits are what ultimately determine these general
equilibrium outcomes.
Interaction with iMPCs: both public and private deficits. In section 4.2, we saw that the output
effect of a fiscal shock was determined by the interaction between iMPCs and the path of public
deficits dG − dT. Since public and partial equilibrium private deficits enter interchangeably in

(34), this logic should apply equally to private deficits. Thus, any policy or shock that generates
greater partial equilibrium private deficits is more stimulative in exactly the same way that greater
public deficits are more stimulative.
We showcase this powerful logic in the following two examples.
Example 1: Deleveraging shock.

One of the most natural shocks that directly shapes the path

of private deficits is a deleveraging shock, in which a sudden tightening of borrowing constraints
forces households near the debt limit to delever—in other words, to run negative deficits.
Up until now, we have worked with a constant borrowing constraint a = 0 for the two HA
models (HA-illiq and HA-std) as well as for the hand-to-mouth household in the TA and TABU
models. We now model a deleveraging shock (as in e.g. Guerrieri and Lorenzoni 2017) such that
the borrowing constraint at between periods t and t + 1 tightens30 for some time at rate ρ but
eventually mean-reverts at rate ρ a ∈ [0, 1):
a t +1 = ρ a a t + ρ t e



Figure 8 shows the direct consumption effect ∂C and the general equilibrium response of output dY across models, for ρ = 0.7 and ρ a = 0.7. To focus on general equilibrium propagation, we
ensure that the direct effects are similar across models by choosing e to set ∂C0 = 1 in each model.
30 In order to use the same calibration as the rest of the paper, we retain

a = 0 as our steady state borrowing limit, and
therefore our “deleveraging” shock forces households to hold a strictly positive asset position. Results are qualitatively
and quantitatively similar if instead we start from a calibration with a < 0.

31

Figure 8: The effects of deleveraging shocks.

Per cent of s.s. output

PE private deficits ∂C

Output dY

0

0

−1

−1

−2

−2

HA-std
TA
HA-illiq

−3
0

2

6
4
Years

8

−3
0

10

2

6
4
Years

8

10

Note. To make responses comparable, e is chosen to equalize the initial direct effect ∂C0 across models. The persistence
parameters are ρ = 0.7 and ρ a = 0.7.

This does not imply, however, that dY is also similar across models—according to proposition 6,
it is the interaction of ∂C and iMPCs that determines general equilibrium output.
Indeed, general equilibrium outcomes in figure 8 are quite different across models with different iMPCs. With the standard heterogeneous-agent model (HA-std), the output response essentially equals the direct effect, with no further amplification or persistence. The TA model does
imply some amplification, but this amplification applies equally to the earlier negative and later
positive terms of ∂C—so that the net present value of dY is zero, just as with the consumption effect of fiscal shocks. The HA-illiq model, uniquely, predicts an amplified and persistent response.
Figure 8 thus highlights that the same interaction between iMPCs and deficits discussed in
section 4.2 also applies to entirely partial equilibrium private deficits—which, in this case, are just
∂C. Shocks that reduce private deficits have large and persistent negative effects on output if our
model matches the shape of iMPCs in the data, but not necessarily otherwise.
Example 2: Lump-sum financed government spending. Our second example is a government spending shock similar to those studied in section 4, with the exception that it is financed
entirely using lump-sum taxes.31 This is equivalent to our section 4 government spending shock
financed by progressive taxes, if it is combined with an additional redistribution shock from lowproductivity to high-productivity households in the periods of taxation. The effects of this redistribution shock are captured by our ∂C term in (33).
31 This change in financing is only at the margin. To make sure that steady states are comparable, we retain our
benchmark progressive fiscal rule otherwise. We could equivalently study this shock using the modified IKC from
appendix B.1.

32

Figure 9: Comparing two ways to finance government spending: progressive vs. lump-sum taxation.
PE private deficits (I − M)dT + ∂C

Per cent of s.s. output

1

Output dY
1

Progressive/bench.
Lump-sum

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0
0

2

6
4
Years

8

0

10

2

6
4
Years

8

10

Figure 9 plots the partial equilibrium private deficit response ( I − M)dT + ∂C and the total

output response dY to a balanced-budget spending shock (dG = dT), for both types of taxation.
The difference between the two paths for private deficits comes entirely from the redistribution

term ∂C. There are lower partial equilibrium private deficits on impact under lump-sum taxation,
because this taxation targets many constrained households who have little ability to smooth the
consumption effects of the tax by borrowing. By contrast, under our benchmark progressive tax,
taxpayers are richer and relatively less constrained, and in response to taxes they partly offset the
lack of public deficits by running substantial private deficits.
As figure 9 illustrates, these different implications for private deficits translate directly into different general equilibrium outcomes: as we move from large partial equilibrium private deficits
under our benchmark taxation to small ones under lump-sum taxation, the impact multiplier
falls from our benchmark of 1 to roughly 0.3. This decline is equal to the general equilibrium
effect of the implied redistribution shock from poor to rich, for which ∂C is negative on impact—translating to an (amplified) negative response in general equilibrium, just as in our deleveraging example.
Overall, these results suggest an addendum to our earlier finding regarding the importance of
deficits for fiscal shocks: it is not just public borrowing, but also private borrowing in response to
taxes, that matters for general equilibrium amplification. Incidence of taxes is important—with the
lump-sum case here being the most extreme example—but the role of distribution can be captured
entirely by the induced effect on private deficits.

33

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we introduce a new set of moments, intertemporal MPCs. We argue that they are
central to the general equilibrium transmission of shocks in models with heterogeneous agents
and nominal rigidities, operating through a simple fixed-point equation, the intertemporal Keynesian cross. We provide estimates of intertemporal MPCs in the data and find that, within a set
of commonly used models, only heterogeneous-agent models with multiple assets can match our
estimates. Our key application is fiscal policy, where we generalize Haavelmo (1945)’s result of a
unit multiplier for balanced-budget policies and argue that for deficit-financed policies, the shape
of intertemporal MPCs is crucial. In particular, we find that, with a reasonable degree of deficit
financing, a model matching intertemporal MPCs predicts impact and cumulative multipliers that
lie above one, despite active monetary policy, distortionary taxation, and investment crowd-out.
Our paper provides a new approach to studying models with heterogeneity. Moving beyond
the literature on sufficient statistics in partial equilibrium, we reduce the complexity of general
equilibrium to a matrix of sufficient statistics, intertemporal MPCs, that can be disciplined empirically. This approach might be fruitfully extended to many other areas in macroeconomics,
since the key insight—that agents interact in general equilibrium through a limited set of aggregates—applies to a wide variety of models.

References
Agarwal, Sumit and Wenlan Qian, “Consumption and Debt Response to Unanticipated Income
Shocks: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Singapore,” American Economic Review, December 2014, 104 (12), 4205–4230.
Aiyagari, S.Rao, Lawrence J. Christiano, and Martin Eichenbaum, “The Output, Employment,
and Interest Rate Effects of Government Consumption,” Journal of Monetary Economics, October
1992, 30 (1), 73–86.
Altig, David, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Lindé, “Firm-Specific
Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle,” Review of Economic Dynamics, April 2011,
14 (2), 225–247.
Auclert, Adrien, “Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel,” Manuscript, May 2017.
and Matthew Rognlie, “A Note on Multipliers in NK Models with GHH Preferences,”
Manuscript, August 2017.
and

, “Inequality and Aggregate Demand,” Working Paper 24280, National Bureau of Eco-

nomic Research February 2018.
,

, and Ludwig Straub, “A Note on Determinacy with Incomplete Markets,” Manuscript, 2018.
34

Auerbach, Alan J and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal Policy,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, May 2012, 4 (2), 1–27.
Baxter, Marianne and Robert G. King, “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium,” American Economic
Review, June 1993, 83 (3), 315–334.
ben Zeev, Nadav and Evi Pappa, “Chronicle of a War Foretold: The Macroeconomic Effects of
Anticipated Defence Spending Shocks,” The Economic Journal, August 2017, 127 (603), 1568–
1597.
Bénabou, Roland, “Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract,” The American
Economic Review, 2000, 90 (1), 96–129.
Berger, David, Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni, and Joseph Vavra, “House Prices and Consumer Spending,” The Review of Economic Studies, July 2018, 85 (3), 1502–1542.
Bilbiie, Florin O. and Roland Straub, “Fiscal Policy, Business Cycles and Labor-Market Fluctuations,” 2004.
, Tommaso Monacelli, and Roberto Perotti, “Public Debt and Redistribution with Borrowing
Constraints,” Economic Journal, 2013, 123 (566), F64–F98.
Blinder, Alan S. and Robert M. Solow, “Does Fiscal Policy Matter?,” Journal of Public Economics,
January 1973, 2 (4), 319–337.
Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston, “Consumption Inequality and Partial Insurance,” American Economic Review, December 2008, 98 (5), 1887–1921.
Broer, Tobias, Niels-Jakob H Hansen, Per Krusell, and Erik Öberg, “The New Keynesian Transmission Mechanism: A Heterogenous-Agent Perspective,” Working Paper 22418, National Bureau of Economic Research, July 2016.
Calvo, Guillermo A., “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, September 1983, 12 (3), 383–398.
Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw, “Consumption, Income, and Interest Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, January 1989, 4, 185–216.
Carroll, Christopher D., “The Method of Endogenous Gridpoints for Solving Dynamic Stochastic
Optimization Problems,” Economics Letters, 2006, 91 (3), 312–320.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, “Geographic Cross-Sectional Fiscal Spending Multipliers: What Have
We Learned?,” Working Paper 23577, National Bureau of Economic Research, July 2017.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “When Is the Government
Spending Multiplier Large?,” Journal of Political Economy, February 2011, 119 (1), 78–121.
35

Coenen, Günter, Christopher J Erceg, Charles Freedman, Davide Furceri, Michael Kumhof,
René Lalonde, Douglas Laxton, Jesper Lindé, Annabelle Mourougane, Dirk Muir, Susanna
Mursula, Carlos de Resende, John Roberts, Werner Roeger, Stephen Snudden, Mathias Trabandt, and Jan in’t Veld, “Effects of Fiscal Stimulus in Structural Models,” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics, January 2012, 3 (4), 22–68.
Davig, Troy and Eric M. Leeper, “Monetary–Fiscal Policy Interactions and Fiscal Stimulus,” European Economic Review, February 2011, 55 (2), 211–227.
Debortoli, Davide and Jordi Galí, “Monetary Policy with Heterogeneous Agents: Insights from
TANK models,” Manuscript, September 2017.
Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin, “Optimal Monetary Policy
with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, October 2000, 46 (2),
281–313.
Fagereng, Andreas, Martib B. Holm, and Gisle J. Natvik, “MPC Heterogeneity and Household
Balance Sheets,” Manuscript, May 2018.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Iván Werning, “Chapter 31 - Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and Currency Unions,” in Harald Uhlig and John B. Taylor, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 2,
Elsevier, 2016, pp. 2417–2492.
and

, “Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality, and Incomplete Markets,” Working Paper

23281, National Bureau of Economic Research, March 2017.
Ferriere, Axelle and Gaston Navarro, “The Heterogeneous Effects of Government Spending: It’s
All About Taxes,” Manuscript, November 2017.
Floden, Martin and Jesper Lindé, “Idiosyncratic Risk in the United States and Sweden: Is There
a Role for Government Insurance?,” Review of Economic Dynamics, April 2001, 4 (2), 406–437.
Fraumeni, Barbara, “The Measurement of Depreciation in the US National Income and Product
Accounts,” Survey of Current Business, 1997, 77, 7–23.
Fuster, Andreas, Greg Kaplan, and Basit Zafar, “What Would You Do With $500? Spending
Responses to Gains, Losses, News and Loans,” Working Paper 24386, National Bureau of Economic Research March 2018.
Galí, Jordi, J. David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés, “Understanding the Effects of Government
Spending on Consumption,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2007, 5 (1), 227–270.
Gelting, Jørgen, “Nogle Bemærkninger Om Finansieringen Af Offentlig Virksomhed,” Nationaløkonomisk Tidsskrift, January 1941, 3.

36

Giambattista, Eric and Steven Pennings, “When Is the Government Transfer Multiplier Large?,”
Technical Report, Manuscript, New York University April 2014.
Gilchrist, Simon and Charles P. Himmelberg, “Evidence on the Role of Cash Flow for Investment,” Journal of Monetary Economics, December 1995, 36 (3), 541–572.
Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni, “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the Liquidity Trap,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2017, 132 (3), 1427–1467.
Guren, Adam M., Alisdair McKay, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson, “Housing Wealth Effects:
The Long View,” Working Paper 24729, National Bureau of Economic Research June 2018.
Haavelmo, Trygve, “Multiplier Effects of a Balanced Budget,” Econometrica, 1945, 13 (4), 311–318.
Hagedorn, Marcus, “A Demand Theory of the Price Level,” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2804542,
Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY June 2016.
, “Prices and Inflation when Government Bonds are Net Wealth,” July 2018.
, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman, “The Fiscal Multiplier,” Manuscript, 2017.
Hall, Robert E., “By How Much Does GDP Rise If the Government Buys More Output?,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, October 2009, 2009, 183–231.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante, “Optimal Tax Progressivity:
An Analytical Framework,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1693–1754.
Jappelli, Tullio and Luigi Pistaferri, “Fiscal Policy and MPC Heterogeneity,” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics, October 2014, 6 (4), 107–136.
and

, “Reported MPC and Unobserved Heterogeneity,” Technical Report, Centre for Studies

in Economics and Finance (CSEF), University of Naples, Italy 2018.
Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles, “Household Expenditure and
the Income Tax Rebates of 2001,” American Economic Review, December 2006, 96 (5), 1589–1610.
Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L. Violante, “A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal Stimulus Payments,” Econometrica, July 2014, 82 (4), 1199–1239.
and

, “Microeconomic Heterogeneity and Macroeconomic Shocks,” Journal of Economic Per-

spectives, August 2018, 32 (3), 167–194.
, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante, “Monetary Policy According to HANK,” American
Economic Review, March 2018, 108 (3), 697–743.
Koby, Yann and Christian Wolf, “Understanding Investment Stimulus: From Micro Data to
Macro Outcomes,” Manuscript, August 2018.
37

Krusell, Per and Anthony A. Smith, “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,”
Journal of Political Economy, October 1998, 106 (5), 867–896.
Kueng, Lorenz, “Excess Sensitivity of High-Income Consumers,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, forthcoming.
Lütticke, Ralph, “Transmission of Monetary Policy and Heterogeneity in Household Portfolios,”
Manuscript, June 2018.
Maggio, Marco Di, Amir Kermani, Benjamin J. Keys, Tomasz Piskorski, Rodney Ramcharan,
Amit Seru, and Vincent Yao, “Interest Rate Pass-Through: Mortgage Rates, Household Consumption, and Voluntary Deleveraging,” American Economic Review, November 2017, 107 (11),
3550–3588.
McKay, Alisdair and Ricardo Reis, “The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the U.S. Business Cycle,”
Econometrica, January 2016, 84 (1), 141–194.
, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson, “The Power of Forward Guidance Revisited,” American
Economic Review, October 2016, 106 (10), 3133–3158.
Mehrotra, Neil, “Fiscal Policy Stabilization:

Purchases or Transfers?,” Technical Report,

Manuscript, Brown University June 2014.
Michaillat, Pascal and Emmanuel Saez, “A New Keynesian Model with Wealth in the Utility
Function,” Manuscript, February 2018, p. 34.
Mountford, Andrew and Harald Uhlig, “What Are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks?,” Journal
of Applied Econometrics, 2009, 24 (6), 960–992.
Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson, “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from US
Regions,” American Economic Review, March 2014, 104 (3), 753–792.
Oh, Hyunseung and Ricardo Reis, “Targeted Transfers and the Fiscal Response to the Great Recession,” Journal of Monetary Economics, December 2012, 59, Supplement, S50–S64.
Ramey, Valerie A., “Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy?,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 2011, 49 (3), 673–685.
, “Ten Years after the Financial Crisis: What Have We Learned from the Renaissance in Fiscal
Research?,” Manuscript prepared for the NBER Global Financial Crisis @10, July 2018.
and Sarah Zubairy, “Government Spending Multipliers in Good Times and in Bad: Evidence
from US Historical Data,” Journal of Political Economy, March 2018, 126 (2), 850–901.
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” American Economic Review, June 2010, 100 (3),
763–801.
38

Rotemberg, Julio J., “Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output,” Review of Economic
Studies, October 1982, 49 (4), 517–531.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martín Uribe, “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in a MediumScale Macroeconomic Model,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, January 2005, 20, 383–425.
Schorfheide, Frank, “DSGE Model-Based Estimation of the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 2008, 94 (4), 397–433.
Shapiro, Matthew D. and Joel Slemrod, “Did the 2001 Tax Rebate Stimulate Spending? Evidence
from Taxpayer Surveys,” in “Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 17,” MIT Press, 2003, pp. 83–
110.
Uhlig, Harald, “Some Fiscal Calculus,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May
2010, 100 (2), 30–34.
Werning, Iván, “Incomplete Markets and Aggregate Demand,” Working Paper 21448, National
Bureau of Economic Research, August 2015.
Woodford, Michael, “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2011, 3 (1), 1–35.

39

Appendix
A

Proofs of propositions and additional results

A.1

General properties of M matrices and proof of proposition 1

We prove the following three results in this section.
Lemma 1. A path for output {Yt } is part of an equilibrium if and only if
(35)

Yt = Gt + Ct ({Ys − Ts })
for all periods t.

Proof. Suppose {Yt } is part of an equilibrium. Clearly, it satisfies the goods market clearing
condition. Conversely, suppose that we are given a path for {Yt } that satisfies (35). Yt im-

mediately
pins down Zt oand Nt . Given Zt , we can find the individually optimal policy rules
n 


 j 


j
ct a , e , at a j , e and joint distributions over assets and productivity levels Ψt a j , e .
R
Since Ct = cit di = Ct ({Ys − Ts }), goods market clearing holds and by Walras’ law so does asset
market clearing. The paths for nominal prices { Pt , Wt } are determined by initial prices P−1 , W−1
and the Phillips curve (7).

Lemma 2. The columns of M sum to 1 in present values,
∞

Mt,s

∑ (1 + r ) t − s

=1

(36)

t =0

Proof. Aggregating individuals’ budget constraints (4) across agents i and over time t, we arrive
at

∞

∞

1

1

j

∑ (1 + r)t Ct ({Zs }) = ∑ (1 + r)t Zt + (1 + r) ∑ ai,−1

t =0

t =0

j

Taking derivatives with respect to Zs , we arrive at
∞

1

1

∑ (1 + r)t Mt,s = (1 + r)s

t =0

which is equivalent to (36).
Next, we prove proposition 1:
Proof of proposition 1. (22) follows directly from stacking (20). Note that M is non-negative and
bounded, thus the matrix product with a summable vector such as dT is well-defined and itself
summable. Existence of dY implies that MdY must be well-defined, too. Let M be a linear map

satisfying M = I + MM. One can easily verify that dG − MdT is summable and M (dG − MdT)

solves (22).

40

Finally, we characterize the first column of M as a weighted average of individual iMPCs.
Lemma 3. The first column of M can be written as
Mt,0 =

Z

R

zi0
∂c
· it di
zι0 dι ∂zi0

(37)


Proof. To prove this result, we note that the consumption function ct ( a j , eit ) is also the solution
to the following sequential problem
max E ∑ βt u(cit )
t ≥0

j

j

cit + ∑ ait = zit + ∆ · 1{t=0} + (1 + r ) ∑ ait−1
j

j

j
ait

∈

j
Aeit

where cit is measurable with respect to time t information on the idiosyncratic process for ability,

with ∆ = 0. More generally, the solution can be denoted by ct ( a j , eit , ∆) and we define individual
iMPCs as

∂cit
∂ct
≡
({ a j }, eit , ∆)|∆=0
∂zi0
∂∆

Observe that due to (18), a change in Z0 translates into changes in zi0 according to
zi0 = R

1− λ
ei0

e1ι0−λ dι

Z0

and therefore

e1−λ ∂cit
∂cit
z
∂cit
= R i0
= R i0
1
−
λ
∂Z0
zι0 dι ∂zi0
eι0 dι ∂zi0
R
which immediately implies (37) since Mt,0 = ∂Z∂ 0 cit di.

A.2

Proofs of propositions 2 and 3

Proof of proposition 2. If dG = dT, then dY = dG solves (22) since with that guess
dG − MdT + MdY = dG = dY

Proof of proposition 3. Rewriting (22) as
dY − dG = M (dG − dT) + M (dY − dG)
41

and applying proposition 1 implies that the solution for dY − dG is given by
dY − dG = MM (dG − dT)
which is equivalent to (26).

A.3

Results for the RA model and proof of proposition 4

The representative-agent (RA) model has a particularly simple consumption function,

Ct ({ Zs }) =

r
1+r

∞

1

∑ (1 + r)t Zt + ra−1

t =0

Linearizing around a steady state with β = 1/(1 + r ), this leads to the following matrix of iMPCs


1 − β (1 − β ) β (1 − β ) β2 · · ·





 1 − β (1 − β ) β (1 − β ) β2 · · · 


M=
2

 1 − β (1 − β ) β (1 − β ) β · · · 
..
..
..
..
.
.
.
.

(38)

Each column is constant in the RA model since the agent is a permanent-income consumer and
thus consumes the constant annuity value of any increase in after-tax income.
Now consider a fiscal policy experiment (dG, dT). In line with proposition 1, the effect on
output is described by the intertemporal Keynesian cross,
dY = dG − MdT + MdY

(39)

In this special case, the space of all solutions dY that satisfy this equation is simply given by
dY = dG + ηdV

(40)

for any real number η. Here, dV = (1, 1, . . .)0 is a constant vector. This is easily verified since,
first, dY = dG is a particular solution to (39) (using (38) and the fact that MdT = MdG due to the
government’s intertemporal budget constraint). Second, dV = MdV, and indeed dV is the unique
unit eigenvector of M by the Perron-Frobenius theorem.
Observe that our RA model is equivalent to a textbook New Keynesian model with a government sector and constant-r monetary policy. Thus, the degree of indeterminacy captured by
the constant vector dV is the exact same as the one that is present in the Euler equation, according to which constant shifts in consumption (or the output gap) leave the equation satisfied in all
periods.
Among all solutions satisfying (40), there is a unique one that ensures that limt→∞ dYt = 0,

namely η = 0 given our assumption that limt→∞ dGt = 0. This proves proposition 4.
42

We can also express the solution using the linear map M. Defining the map

MdX ≡ dX − lim dXt
t→∞

it is easy to see that the unique solution to (39) with limt→∞ dYt = 0 is given by
dY = M (dG − MdT) = dG

A.4

Results for the TA model and proof of proposition 5

The TA model combines a mass 1 − µ of permanent-income agents with a mass µ of hand-tomouth agents. The consumption function is thus a convex combination of both agents’ consumption functions

(

Ct ({ Zs }) = (1 − µ)

r
1+r

∞

1

∑ (1 + r)t Zt + ra−1

t =0

)

+ µZt

The iMPC matrix M similarly is a convex combination of M RA , which from now on denotes the
permanent-income iMPC matrix in (38), and the identity matrix, which captures the consumption
response of the hand-to-mouth agents. Thus
M = (1 − µ)M RA + µI

(41)

Consider again a fiscal policy experiment (dG, dT). With the iMPC matrix given in (41), the intertemporal Keynesian cross (39) can be rewritten as
dY =

µ
1
dG − M RA dT −
dT + M RA dY
1−µ
1−µ

This is identical to equation (39) in the previous section, except that dG is now replaced by
1
1−µ dG

is

−

µ
1−µ dT

= dG +

µ
1− µ

(dG − dT). Hence, the unique solution satisfying limt→∞ dYt = 0
dY = dG +

This proves proposition 5.

A.5

µ
(dG − dT)
1−µ

Definition and calibration of the BU model

The BU model is a version of the RA model in which the representative agent has utility over
bonds. The agent’s maximization problem is given by
max
s.t.

∑ βt {u (ct ) − v(nt ) + ν (at )}

ct + at = Zt + (1 + rt−1 ) at−1

43

(42)

ϕ 1− γ
.
1− γ a

We parametrize the utility over bonds as ν( a) =

We calibrate ϕ to match the wealth to

after-tax income ratio. We calibrate γ to match the impact MPC. Conditional on these targets, the
choice of β turns out not to be very important. We choose it to lie between the parameters for the
HA-std and the HA-illiq models. This yields: β = 0.90, ϕ = 0.22−γ , and γ = 220. (Observe that
this γ is rather extreme, suggesting that the BU model struggles to match our impact MPC.)

A.6

The generalized IKC and the proof of proposition 6

The derivation of the generalized IKC and the proof of proposition 6 follow in exactly the same
way as the derivation and proof in appendix A.1, except that we carry the additional term ∂C.

B
B.1

Generalizations of the intertemporal Keynesian cross
General tax incidence

To allow for fiscal policy experiments which are financed using taxes with a different incidence,
we introduce a new tax Tt , of which a fraction Tt (e) is paid for by agents with ability e in period t,

Tt = ∑e π (e)Tt (e). This changes the agents’ budget constraints (4) to
j

j

cit + ∑ ait = zit − Tt (eit ) + (1 + rt−1 ) ∑ ait−1
j

(43)

j

and the government’s intertemporal budget constraint (10) to
∞

(1 + r−1 ) B−1 + ∑

t =0

t −1

1
∏ 1 + rs
s =0

!
Gt =

∞

∑

t =0

t −1

1
∏ 1 + rs
s =0

!

( Tt + Tt )

Given (43), the consumption function now depends explicitly on the path of {Ts }
Ct = Ct ({ Zs ; Ts })
When a given fiscal policy is financed using the arbitrary new tax instrument Ts , output is determined by

dYt = dGt +

∞

∞

s =0

s =0

∑ Mt,s dYs − ∑ Mt,sT dTs

T ≡ ∂ C /∂ T . This equation is precisely of the form in (23).32
where Mt,s
t
s
32 Various

other fiscal rules, not used in this paper, endogenize tax revenue in each period as a function of the path of
output. To capture these rules in our framework, we must compose the matrix M T with the matrix that (locally) maps
the path of output to the path of endogenous tax revenue.

44

B.2

Investment

We first derive the existence of an investment function It ({Ys }) and then discuss the modified

household consumption function Ct ({Ys ; Ts }).
Investment function.

We introduce a standard supply side with investment in appendix C.2

below. Here, we focus on a special case in which prices are flexible, κ p = ∞ and there are no
markups µ = 1. In that case, the economy’s capital stock is determined as solution to the following
fixed point. Given a path for real wages {wt }, the economy’s capital stock Kt and labor supply Nt
solve



Jt (Kt−1 ) = max F (Kt−1 , Nt ) − wt Nt − ζ
Kt ,Nt



Kt
K t −1



1
K t −1 +
Jt+1 (Kt )
1+r



(44)

Equilibrium real wages are then pinned down to insure that
F (Kt−1 , Nt ) = Yt

(45)
1/(1−α)

where {Yt } is a given path of output. Given Kt−1 , denote by N (Kt−1 , Yt ) = Yt

−α/(1−α)

K t −1

the

solution to (45). We assume that there exists a unique equilibrium path of capital stocks {Kt−1 }.
We characterize this fixed point as follows.

Lemma 4. {Kt } is the equilibrium path of capital if and only if {Kt } solves the following problem


Jt (Kt−1 ) = max F (Kt−1 , Yt ) − ζ



Kt ,Nt

Kt
K t −1



1
K t −1 +
J t +1 ( K t )
1+r



(46)

where we defined

F (K, Y ) ≡ αY log K
Proof. The only difference between (44) and (46) are the terms F (Kt−1 , Nt ) − wt Nt and F (Kt−1 , Yt ).
The equilibrium marginal derivative of the former is given by

FK (Kt−1 , N (Kt−1 , Yt )) = αYt /Kt−1
which is precisely equal to FK (Kt−1 , Yt ). Thus, any equilibrium path satisfies the first order con-

ditions of (46), and any solution to (46) satisfies the first order conditions of (44). Since there is a
unique equilibrium path, this also implies that there can only be a single solution to (46).
Lemma 4 is helpful since it immediately implies that there is a direct mapping from {Ys } to the

equilibrium path of capital, and therefore also an investment function It ({Ys }).
Modified consumption function.

Now, in response to a shock, there is a revaluation of capital

at date 0. Household asset positions coming into period 0 will change depending on each household’s holdings of capital, which are indeterminate since there is no aggregate uncertainty and
45

capital and bonds have the same returns in steady state. We will generally resolve the indeterminacy by assuming that capital holdings are proportional to each household’s overall assets (or
the household’s illiquid assets, in the HA-illiq model, where capital is held only in the illiquid
account).
When the capital is revalued, it is worth J0 (K−1 ). From (44) and the fact that both Kt and Nt

can be written as functions of {Ys }, we can rewrite this (with some abuse of notation) as a function
of {Ys }, and then the aggregate consumption function as

Ct = Ct ({ Zs }, J ({Ys })) .
Thus, the consumption function needs to be slightly modified to a more general function of {Ys }

and { Ts }, which we abbreviate as Ct ({Ys ; Ts }).
The intertemporal Keynesian cross.

Having derived the investment function as well as the

modified consumption function, the goods market clearing condition now reads
Yt = Gt + Ct ({Ys ; Ts }) + It ({Ys })
T =
based on which the derivation of (23) with Mt,s

B.3

∂Ct
∂Ts

Y =
and Mt,s

∂Ct
∂Ys

+

∂It
∂Ys

is straightforward.

Sticky prices

To explore the role of sticky prices, suppose the union sets wages perfectly flexibly, that is κ w = ∞
in (7), and therefore
Z

Nt



v0 (nit ) −


e − 1 ∂zit 0
u (cit ) di = 0
e ∂nit

but prices follow a standard Phillips curve such as
πt = κ p wt +

1
π t +1
1+r

Faced with demand Yt , firms hire labor Nt = Yt and earn profits
Πt = Yt − wt Nt
Suppose that profits are distributed according to a rule: an agent with idiosyncratic ability e receives share χ(e) of profits, so that agent i’s date-t pretax income is now given by33
yit = wt Nt eit + χ(eit )Πt
33 The other common way to attribute profits to households is by allowing households to trade firms’ shares. This is
our assumption in the quantitative model of section 5.

46

Rewriting this, we see that
yit = Yt (wt eit + (1 − wt ) χ(eit ))
In the sticky-wage case, the real wage is always equal to 1 and aggregate income Yt is entirely
split according to ability eit , i.e. yit = Yt eit . In this model, the real wage fluctuates, affecting the
way in which income is distributed. In booms, when the real wage is large, income is split more
according to ability eit , while in busts the distribution of profits χ(eit ) matters more.
A natural benchmark case is the one where profits are distributed according to ability
(47)

χ(e) = e
In that case, pretax income is exactly the same as it was in the sticky wage model
yit = Yt eit

Thus, for the constant-r case, one may reinterpret our sticky wage model as a model with sticky
prices together with the distribution rule for profits in (47).

C

Model derivations and computation

C.1

Wage Phillips curve

In this section we derive the nonlinear wage Phillips curve. At any time t, union k sets its wage
Wkt to maximize, on behalf of all the workers it employs,

∑ βt+τ

Z

τ ≥0

ψ
{u (cit+τ ) − v (nit+τ )} dΨit+τ −
2



Wk,t+τ
−1
Wk,t+τ −1

2 !

taking as given the initial distribution of households over idiosyncratic states Ψit as well as the
demand curve for tasks emanating from the labor packers, which is
Nkt =
where Wt =

R

1− e
Wkt
dk

 1−1 e



Wkt
Wt

−e

Nt

is the price index for aggregate employment services.

Each union is infinitesimal and therefore only takes into account its marginal effect on every

47

household’s consumption and labor supply. By (3), household total real earnings are
zit = τt

= τt



Wt
eit nit
Pt



1
Pt

Z 1
0

Z
1 1

= τt

Pt

0

 1− λ

Wkt eit nikt dk
Wkt eit



 1− λ

Wkt
Wt

−e

Nt dk

!1− λ

The envelope theorem implies that we can evaluate indirect utility as if all income from the union
wage change is consumed. In that case

∂cit
∂Wkt

=

∂zit
∂Wkt ,

where

(
)
 −e
−λ
Wt
1
eit
− e −1
= (1 − λ) τt
Nkt − Wkt e
Nt Wkt
eit nit
Pt
Pt
Wt
e
= (1 − MTRit ) it Nkt (1 − e)
Pt


∂zit
∂Wkt

where MTRit ≡ 1 − (1 − λ) τt



Wt
Pt eit nit

−λ

is household i’s marginal tax rate at time t. On the

other hand, household i’s total hours worked are
nit ≡


Z 1
W −e
kt

0

Wt

Nt dk

which falls when Wkt increases according to
∂nit
N
= −e kt
∂Wkt
Wkt
The first-order condition of the union with respect to Wkt is therefore

eit 0
e 0
Nkt (1 − e) u (cit ) (1 − MTRit ) +
v (nit ) dΨit
Pt
Wkt





Wk,t
Wk,t+1
Wk,t+1
1
1
−ψ
−1
+ βψ
−1
=0
Wk,t−1
Wk,t−1
Wk,t
Wk,t
Wk,t
Z



(48)

In equilibrium all unions set the same wage, so Wkt = Wt and Nkt = Nt . Define wage inflation
πw ≡

Wt
Wt−1

− 1. After multiplying (48) by Wt , and noting that
∂zit
Wt
= (1 − MTRit ) eit
∂nit
Pt

48

we obtain the aggregate wage Phillips curve
πtw (1 + πtw )

e
=
ψ

Z

Nt




e − 1 ∂zit 0
v (nit ) −
u (cit ) dΨit + βπtw+1 (1 + πtw+1 )
e ∂nit
0

which is the formulation in (7).
Note that in equilibrium, enforcing nit = Nkt = Nt , we simply have
∂zit
= (1 − λ) τt eit1−λ
∂nit



Wt
Pt

 1− λ

Nt−λ = (1 − λ) R

eit1−λ

eit1−λ di

Zt
Nt

where Zt is average aftertax income. Hence equation (7) can be written in terms of aggregates πtw ,
Zt , Nt together with a ’virtual aggregate consumption’ term Ct∗
πtw (1 + πtw )

e
=
ψ




e−1
0
∗
Nt v ( Nt ) −
(1 − λ) Zt u (Ct ) + βπtw+1 (1 + πtw+1 )
e
0

where we have defined Ct∗ such
u

0

(Ct∗ )

=

Z
i

eit1−λ u0 (cit )
R 1− λ
dΨit
eit di

Distribution matters for inflation dynamics only through its effects on the dynamics of Ct∗ . Linearizing this expression around the zero inflation steady state yields a standard wage Phillips
Curve
πtw
where κ w =

e
,
ψNv0 ( N )

=κ

w



1 dNt
1 dCt∗
+
−
φ N
ν C∗

dNt
dZt
−
∗
Z
N



+ βπtw+1

φ is the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, and ν the elasticity of intertemporal

substitution in consumption. The term

C.2



dZt
Z∗

−

dNt
N

captures the distortionary effects of taxation.

Firm problem and all FOCs

We rewrite the firm problem (27) as
Jt (k t−1 ) = max

pt ,k t ,nt






pt
Wt
ιt
1
F ( k t −1 , n t ) −
nt − ζ 1 − δ +
k t−1 − ξ ( pt , pt−1 )Yt +
Jt+1 (k t )
Pt
Pt
k t −1
1 + rt

subject to


F ( K t −1 , L t )
Yt

 µ1 −1

Yt =

k t = (1 − δ ) k t −1 + ι t

49

pt
Yt
Pt

Let ηt be the multiplier on the first constraint and Qt be the multiplier on the second. Define
mct ≡ 1 + ηt

1
−1
µ





(49)

The FOC for price pt is then given by
1
1
(1 − ηt ) Yt = p
Yt
Pt
κ ( µ − 1)



p t − p t −1
p t −1



1
p t −1

1
1
+
p
1 + r t κ ( µ − 1)



p t +1 − p t
pt



p
− t+2 1
pt



Yt+1

p

Noting that all firms are symmetric and thus pt = Pt , defining price inflation as πt ≡ ( Pt −
Pt−1 )/Pt−1 and using (49), this becomes
p

p

πt (1 + πt ) = κ p (µ · mct − 1) +

1 Yt+1 p
p
π (1 + π t +1 )
1 + rt Yt t+1

proving (29).
Optimality of investment requires in equilibrium
Q t +1
= ζ0
1 + rt



Kt
K t −1



where the law of motion of Qt is given by
Qt = mct FK,t − ζ



Kt
K t −1

Optimality of labor requires
mct Fn,t =



+

K t Q t +1
K t −1 1 + r t

Wt
Pt

so in other words, mct is the date-t real marginal cost.

D

Background on empirical evidence

D.1

Evidence from Norwegian administrative data

Our estimates on Norwegian iMPCs were generously provided to us by Andreas Fagereng, Martin Holm and Gisle Natvik. In Fagereng et al. (2018), they combine individual-level administrative income data and household-level wealth data from the Norwegian population, and residually impute a household-level consumption measure using a budget constraint approach. This
is therefore a comprehensive measure of household expenditure, including durable and housing
expenditures. However, the authors drop from their sample all households who record a housing
market transaction, so that their iMPC estimates can be interpreted as including consumption and
non-housing durable expenditures only.
The paper provides convincing evidence that the sample of gamblers is not selected: 70 percent
50

of the population gambles, the population of winners is not significantly different from the rest of
the population on observable characteristics including their consumption-income covariance over
time, and gambling prizes are not predictable by prior household characteristics (Tables 1 and 2).
To further limit the concern that iMPC estimates reflect the behavior of serial gamblers, the sample
is limited to households who win only once.
The authors provided us with income-weighted estimates of regression (25). The regression
includes all lottery wins below $150,000, and most prizes are below $20,000. As we discuss in
footnote 16, their MPC estimates for a sample restricted to small gains are much larger than the
full sample estimates, imprecisely estimated, and do not sum to one, so we prefer to use these
full-sample estimates.

D.2

Evidence from the Italian Survey of Household Income and Wealth

The Italian Survey of Household Income and Wealth (SHIW) is a biannual survey, publicly available on the Bank of Italy website. In 2016, survey respondents were asked:
“Imagine you unexpectedly receive a refund equal to the household’s monthly income.
How much of the sum would you save and how much would you spend? Indicate the
percentage saved and the percentage spent.”
In 2010, the same question was asked, except that the survey mentioned a “reimbursement” rather
than a “refund”. Given that answers are similar to those in the the 2012 survey which specified
a timeframe “over the next 12 months” but had a slightly different wording, these answers are
typically interpreted as annual MPCs. (The 2014 survey instead included a retrospective question
about spending of the 2014 “Renzi bonus”.)
We drop observations with zero or negative income, and are left with 7936 observations in the
2010 survey and 7367 observations in the 2016 survey.
Distributions of MPCs.

Figure 10 displays the cumulative density functions of the distribution

of MPCs in the 2010 and 2016 SHIW. As is apparent, these distributions are extremely similar. The
largest distance between the two CDFs is 0.045, even though these distributions are measured six
years apart. This justifies our assumption below that the distribution is not changing from one
year to the next.
Construction of a lower bound.

From the 2016 survey, we have a distribution of self-reported
h
i

MPCs MPCi as well as income net of taxes zi . We can therefore construct M0,0 = E I
directly from the data.

zi
MPCi
E I [ zi ]

Next, consider aggregate cumulative savings after T periods, equal to
T

A T = (1 + r ) E I



zi
MPS0i · MPS1i · · · MPSTi
E I [ zi ]
51



(50)

Figure 10: MPC distribution in the 2010 and 2016 SHIW.

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Cumulative distributions of MPCs

0

20

40

60

80

100

MPC
SHIW 2010

SHIW 2016

where MPSti is the marginal propensity to save of individual i at time t. Given our stationarity
assumption, the distributions MPSt are the same as the distribution MPS0 . The rearrangement
inequality ensures that (50) is highest when the distributions have perfect correlation, so that individuals maintain the same MPS from year to year. This gives us an upper bound for cumulative
saving,
T

A T = (1 + r ) E I



zi
( MPSi )T
E I [ zi ]



and therefore a lower bound for cumulative spending CT = (1 + r )T − A T .
Figure 1 reports the differences CT − CT −1 , computed under our benchmark calibration for

r = 5%. For date T = 1 this is an exact lower bound for spending since C0 = M0,0 . Intuitively,

the worst case scenario for spending is the situation in which all individuals who saved in period
0 and therefore have the
still save in period 1, and this can simply be
h most remaining to spend
i
zi
computed as (1 + r ) E E [z ] (1 − MPCi ) MPCi . For T > 1, this difference in lower bounds for
I

i

savings is also a lower bound for spending in that period, unless a previous lower bound for
cumulative spending is exceeded.

Note that, using the panel component of the SHIW, in principle we can refine this lower bound
by seeing the extent to which individual MPCs change from year to year. Given that our lower
bound is sufficient to reject most standard models already, we do not pursue this here.

E

Durable goods

In this section, we amend our benchmark framework to include durable spending. We then show
that the model generates an intertemporal Keynesian cross provided the consumption function
52

now includes both nondurable and durable expenditure, as claimed in section 2.5. We explain
how we match the Mt,0 columns to the Norwegian data, and discuss how other elements of the M
matrix implied by this new calibration differ from that of our model without durables.
We introduce durables in the simplest possible way, by assuming

Model with durable goods.

homothetic durable demand and perfect collateralizability. Assuming that households can only
trade in one other asset (J = 1) for ease of notation, and anticipating a constant-r monetary policy
rule (14), the household problem is now
"
max E

∑ βt {u (cit ) + κu (dit )}

#

t ≥0

cit + dit − (1 − δD ) dit−1 + ait = zit + (1 + r ) ait−1
ait +

1 − δD
dit ∈ Aeit
1 + rt

where zit is still taken as given and determined by labor demand in general equilibrium.
Observe that households can borrow against the undepreciated component of the next period
durable stock. In particular, in this interpretation the TANK model is one in which constrained
agents (for which Aec = {0}) are perpetually up against a their collateral constraint. Redefining
the overall asset position as
1 − δD
dit
wit ≡ ait +
1+r
the problem rewrites as
"
max

E

∑ βt {u (cit ) + κu (dit )}

#

t ≥0

r + δD
dit + wit = zit + (1 + r ) wit−1
cit +
1+r
wit ∈ Aeit
where the user cost of durables

r + δD
1+r

appears. In this formulation, no matter whether the constraint

on wit is binding or not, there is a unique first order condition for the stock of durables dit relative
to consumption cit that applies to every consumer, namely
0

0

κu (dit ) = u (cit )



r + δD
1+r



(51)

Equation (51) implies that the durable stock is a constant fraction
ofnondurable consumption at all

times and for every consumer: dit = υcit where υ = (u0 )

−1

of wealth w−1 and a stochastic process for zit , if we let citND

r + δD 1
1+r κ

. Further, given an initial level

be the path for nondurable consumption

generated by our main model without durables, then the path for nondurable consumption in
the model with durables is given, in every state and date, by cit =
53

citND
δ .Total
1+ 1r+
+r υ

expenditures

Figure 11: Columns of the iMPC matrix in the HA-illiq model with and without durables.
0.6

s=0
s=5
s = 10
s = 15
s = 20
Durab.

0.5

iMPC Mt,s

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

5

10

15
Year t

20

25

30

Note: This plot shows intertemporal MPCs implied by our benchmark two-asset heterogeneous-agent, and those implied by an enlarged two-asset model with durable goods.

xit ≡ cit + dit − (1 − δD ) dit−1 in the enlarged model are therefore a simple lagged transformation

of nondurable expenditures in the baseline model:
xit =

1+υ
1+

citND
r + δD
υ
1+r

−

(1 − δD ) υ ND
cit−1
1 + r1++δrD υ

Following the argument in section 2.3, in the aggregate this behavior defines an expenditure function Xt ({ Zs }).
Intertemporal Keynesian Cross with durables.

On the production side, we maintain our as-

sumption that firms produce a unique good out of labor. The resource constraint for the economy
is now
Gt + Xt ({Ys − Ts }) = Yt

(52)

Y =
Totally differentiating (52), we obtain an intertemporal Keynesian Cross as in (33) where Mt,s
T ≡
Mt,s

∂Xt
∂Zs ,

as claimed in section 2.5.

iMPC matching and extrapolation to other columns of M.

We now interpret the Norwegian

data as coming from a model with durables. We calibrate the durables depreciation rate to δD =
20% (an average of durable depreciation rates from Fraumeni 1997). In Fagereng et al. (2018), the
ratio of the marginal propensity to spend on cars and boats to the overall marginal propensity
54

to spend is only 6%. We therefore conservatively set υ = 10%. We then recalibrate our HA-illiq
model by changing the level of liquid assets so as to match the marginal propensities to spend on
both durables and nondurables. This procedure yields

B
Z

= 36% of steady state after-tax income.
Figure 11 repeats figure 3, but now compares our benchmark model to this enlarged model
model with durables. The extrapolation to later columns of the M matrix implied by the model
with durables is still remarkably close to our benchmark. The tents have a similar peak. The main
difference is that spending is not as elevated in the year immediately after the income receipt, as
households decumulate some of their durables. We conjecture that the iMPCs of our durables
model would be even closer to those of our main model if we assume some frictions to selling
durables.

F

Additional model simulations

Figures 12–15 present model comparative statics with respect to φ, κ p , κ w and e I .
Figure 12: Varying the Taylor rule coefficient φ
Output
φ=1
φ = 1.5
φ=2

Per cent of s.s. output

2
1.5

Investment

0.5

0

1

−0.5

0.5

−1

0
0

2

6
4
Years

8

0

10

2

6
4
Years

8

10

Note. This figure shows the consumption and investment responses of the quantitative illiquid-asset heterogeneousagent model as the Taylor rule coefficient φ is varied. The calibration of the model can be found in section 5. Observe
that for φ close to 1, where the real rate is approximately constant, investment is not crowded out, but rather crowded
in, despite deficit financing. This is because investment responds positively to greater demand.

55

Figure 13: Varying the degree of price stickiness κ p
Output

Per cent of s.s. output

2.5

Investment
κp = 0
κ p = 0.1
κ p = 0.25

2

0.5
0

1.5
1

−0.5

0.5

−1

0
0

2

6
4
Years

8

−1.5

10

0

2

6
4
Years

8

10

Note. This figure shows the consumption and investment responses of the quantitative illiquid-asset heterogeneousagent model as the degree of price stickiness κ p is varied. The calibration of the model can be found in section 5.

Figure 14: Varying the degree of wage stickiness κ w
Output

Per cent of s.s. output

3

Investment
0.4

κw = 0
κ w = 0.1
κ w = 0.25

2

0.2
0

1

−0.2
0
0

2

6
4
Years

8

−0.4

10

0

2

6
4
Years

8

10

Note. This figure shows the consumption and investment responses of the quantitative illiquid-asset heterogeneousagent model as the degree of wage stickiness κ w is varied. The calibration of the model can be found in section 5.

56

Figure 15: Varying the investment-Q sensitivity e I
Investment

Per cent of s.s. output

Output
eI = 0
eI = 4
e I = 10

1.5

0

1

−0.2

0.5

−0.4
0
0

2

6
4
Years

8

0

10

2

6
4
Years

8

10

Note. This figure shows the consumption and investment responses of the quantitative illiquid-asset heterogeneousagent model as the investment-Q sensitivity e I is varied. The calibration of the model can be found in section 5.

G

Computational method

Our model is solved using tools we are currently developing to easily solve dynamic general
equilibrium in models that include heterogeneous households or other advanced features. The
basic idea is to represent equilibrium as a system of nonlinear equations in aggregate variables Xt ,
which in general terms can be written as

Ht ({Xs }) = 0

(53)

In the code, we write these equations as a sequence of functions, which when composed map
a set of unknown “inputs” to a set of “targets”. To solve for equilibrium, our engine solves for the
inputs such that the targets equal zero.
We use this approach to solve both for steady states and for the dynamic response to shocks.
For the steady state, computation is relatively straightforward: the implied system of aggregate equations is small, and after the user provides an initial guess we apply standard nonlinear
solvers. One nice feature of the design is that there is no built-in distinction between parameters
and equilibrium values, nor is there any distinction between equilibrium conditions and calibration targets: they are all simply part of the system of steady-state nonlinear equations that we
must solve.
For the computation of dynamics, we linearize and truncate (53) at some far-off horizon T. We
then solve the equations using a form of Newton’s method, but using interpolation and extrapolation to construct an approximate Jacobian for the heterogeneous-agent household side, since an
57

exact Jacobian is prohibitively costly.
To compute the household side of the model, which enters into the aggregate equations in (53),
we use the method of endogenous gridpoints of Carroll (2006), combined with customized code
for rapid interpolation and exact forward propagation of the distribution. Each of our heterogeneous household specifications can be solved as a variant of the canonical one-asset consumptionsavings problem: since they have the same return except for the date-0 shock, bonds and equity
can be combined into a single asset in the HA-std model (which is revalued at date 0 as equity
prices change in response to the shock), and the HA-illiq model can be implemented by altering
households’ exogenous income process.

58

