                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT POLICIES
                            IN HIGHLY INDEBTED COUNTRIES




                                  Sebastian Edwards




                               Working Paper No. 2502




                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 1988




Prepared for the National Bureau of Economic Research Conference on Developing Countries
Debt; Washington, DC, September 21—23, 1987. I have benefited from discussions with
Marcelo Selowsky. I am grateful to Alejandra Cox-Edwards, Edgardo Barandiaran, Pan
Kasliwal, Miguel Savastano, Jeff Sachs and the participants of the pre-conference
meeting held in Cambridge in May 1987 for helpful comments. Financial support from
UCLA's Academic Senate and from the National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Support from The Tinker Foundation Incorporated is gratefully
acknowledged.
                                                       NBER Working Paper #2502
                                                       February 1988




                     Structural Adjustment Policies
                      in Highly Indebted Countries




                                ABSTRACT




    This paper deals with structural adjustment in the highly indebted

countries. The origins of the debt crisis are first analyzed. Then the

nature of the adjustment followed by the debt ridden countries between 1982-

1987 is discussed. It is noted that for most nations the adjustment has

been highly recessive. Next, the potential role of trade reforms in

securing the resumption of sustained growth is analyzed.




Sebastian Edwards
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90024
                                     1




I.   Introductj&n

     Mexico's announcement, in August of       that it couldn't any longer

meet its international financial obligations took most   of   the world by

surprise, sending shivers down the spines of bankers, politicians, and

international bureaucrats. That fateful Friday the 13th of August 1982

marked the beginning of the worst international financial crisis since the

great depression. What initially was thought to be an isolated case of

temporary illiquidity soon spread out to most of the developing world,

placing the stability of the international financial system in serious

jeopardy.

     Five years after the eruption of the debt crisis most of the developing

world is still struggling to get back on its feet. Although the collapse of

the world financial system predicted by some overly pessimistic observers

has not materialized, the debt crisis is far from over. In fact, when

traditional creditworthiness indicators, such as debt-exports or debt-

service ratios are analyzed, the highly indebted countries are now in an

even weaker position than in 1982 (see Table 1). It has now become apparent

that a long term resolution of the debt problems will be a painful and pro-

tracted process, that will still require major additional adjustment efforts

by the indebted countries, as well as extensive negotiations between debtor

governments, creditor governments, the multilateral institutions and the

banks.

     The adjustment approaches followed until now by most of the highly

indebted countries can best be described as emergency stabilization programs

geared towards generating very large trade balance surpluses in very short

periods of time. Given the new circumstances and the sudden halt in

external financing after 1982, these countries had little choice but to use
                                    2




every possible tool at their disposal to achieve the needed turnaround in

their current accounts. As a consequence the adjustment process has been

quite costly, generating drastic declines in real income and important

increases in unemployment. In fact, as is reflected in Table 2, in a number

of Latin American countries in 1986 real per capita GD? was below its 1970

level!

     A long run solution to the debt crisis problem would entail: (a) the

regaining of creditworthiness by these countries, and thus the resumption of

voluntary lending by the international financial community; and (b) the

resumption of sustained growth.1 Much of the recent policy literature on

the debt crisis has focused on these issues, with some of the discussion

dealing with the type of long-run structural reforms the debt-troubled

countries should implement in order to attain the dual objective of improved

creditworthiness and growth. Most of this literature has recommended very

conventional measures, that economists had been advocating for a long time

prior to the debt crisis, including trade liberalization, financial reform,

major devaluations, and a reduced role for the government.2 For example,

this policy package is the core of the conditionality contemplated by the

Baker plan. Surprisingly, there have been very few attempts to evaluate

whether the design of these traditional policies, and in particular their

speed and sequencing, should be altered in the presence of a major debt

problem and, in some cases, still significant macroeconomic disequilibria.

     The purpose of this paper is to analyze a number of issues related to

structural adjustment in the highly indebted developing countries. The

paper starts with a brief discussion of the main features of the adjustment

process followed during 1982-87. It is noted that in spite of the major

involvement of the IMF in this first phase of the adjustment, the actual
                                           3




 policy packages implemented by most of the deH croubled countries diFfpred

 markedly from what we can describe as an orthodox IMF type stabilization

 program. It is argued that the "unorthodox" elements of the stabilization

 programs - -   such   as the imposition of exchange controls and trade restric-
 tions - -   responded to the emergency nature of these programs. The paper

 then discusses at a more analytical level some longer term aspects of

structural adjustment reforms, focusing on the relation between outward

orientation, export promotion and trade liberalization. Emphasis is placed

on the sequencing and speed of the structure reforms related to the external

sector. Lessons drawn from the recent Southern Cone experiments with trade

liberalization are incorporated into the analysis of the possible effects of

tariff reforms on employment, income and growth. In that section the role

of devaluations in structural adjustment processes is also discussed. Since

the paper focuses on the role of the adjustment programs implemented by the

countries themselves, relatively little emphasis is given to the role of

banks and the international financial community.


II. The Nature of the Adjustment. 1982-1987

      In this section we analyze the main features of the adjustment process

followed by the highly indebted countries during l982-87. Given the large

diversity of experiences across countries it is not possible to make sweep-

ing generalizations; in fact doing it would grossly oversimplify the

discussion. ben possible we point out the more important differences

across countries.


11.1 Origins of the Crisis

     During the second half of the l970s and the early l980s most of the

developing nations embarked on a foreign borrowing binge. Between 1975 and
1982 the developing world's long term foreign             t   more than tripled,

growinj' from $162.5 billion to $551.2 billion; in 1982 the total foreign

debt of the developing world       -
                                       including   short term debt and use of IMF

credit --   stood at $738.7 billions. Naturally, this huge increase in
indebtedness was made possible by the liberal way in which after the first

oil shock in 1973, the international financial community and in particular

the banks, provided funds to these countries. There is no doubt that the

pace at which the developing countries were accumulating debt in the late

1970s and early 1980s -   - at   a rate exceeding 20% per year - -     was not

sustainable in the medium to longer run; some type of adjustment was bound

to take place. The world, however, was shocked by the severity of the

crisis; instead of seeing an orderly and slow reduction of the flow of

borrowing a major crisis that brought capital flows to a virtual halt took

place.

     The causes behind the spectacular growth in borrowing during the 1974-

1982 period varied from country to country. In Brazil, for example, it-

responded to a deliberate development strategy adopted after the 1973 oil

shock. This policy was based on import substitution supplemented with a

heavy reliance on foreign borrowing to finance major investment projects.

In Turkey, the accumulation of foreign indebtedness responded mainly to the

rapid growth of the public sector, which used most of the funds for invest-

ment purposes. The situation was greatly aggravated by the existence of the

so-called "convertible Turkish lira deposits," which provided a de-facto

evergrowing subsidy to foreign borrowing. Contrary to most other countries

Turkey entered into a crisis in 1977, even before the second oil shock. In

Mexico, the populist policies of the Echeverria and Lopez Portillo aditiinis-

trations, with the spectacular growth in the public sector and in the fiscal
                                           D




deficit   lay behind the crisis. The discovery f           iditiona1   oil reserves

generated a wave of optimism that greatly influenced the magnitude of the

expenditure binge. It has been argued that approximately one half of the

Mexican debt accumulated during the Lopez-Portillo administration went to

finance capital flight (Buffie and Sangrines, 1987). In Chile, on the other

hand, fiscal policies played no role in the unleashing of the crisis; most

of the huge increase in Chile's foreign debt was contracted by the private

sector with no government guarantees. The opening up of the Chilean

economy, as part of the overall project of economic liberalization of the

Pinochet government, allowed the private sector to finance huge increases in

consumption - -   especially   of durables - -   with   borrowing from abroad.4 In

spite of their different experiences during the 1970s, in late 1982 all

these countries faced a severe cut in foreign financing; they had come to

share the harsh reality of the debt crisis. In the years to follow their

experiences would again differ, as they tended to follow somewhat different

adjustment programs.

     The behavior of the world economy during the early l980s, and in

particular the increase of interest rates, the decline in commodity prices

and the sluggish growth of the industrial countries, played an important

role in determining the magnitude and timing of the crisis.5 A recent study

by CEPAL has estimated that for the case of the Latin American nations the

deterioration of unit prices of non-oil exports and the hike in world

interest rates "explain" almost 50 percent of the increase in the region's

current account deficit during 1981 and 1982.6

     The magnitude of external shocks can be better understood by analyzing

the evolution of the real interest rate "relevant" for these countries,

computed as nominal LIBOR deflated by the rate of inflation of their
                                      6




exports. This concept of real interest rate coibines in one indicator the

effects of both the higher international nominal interest rates and of the

lower commodity export prices.   For the case of Latin America, this measure

of the real interest rate jumped from an average of -3.4% during 1970-1980

to 19.9% in 1981, 27.5% in 1982 and 17.4% in 1983. During the early l980s

even those countries with a large percentage of their debt contracted at

fixed concessionary terms experienced dramatic increases in their interest

bill. For example, as a result of the higher world interest rates, Cote

dIvoire's interest payments increased from 3.1 percent of CDP in 1980 to

more than 8 percent of CD? in 1983.

     The adoption of inadequate exchange rate policies constitute one of the

most important domestic causes of the crisis; most of the countries that

eventually experienced payments difficulties allowed their real exchange

rates to become highly overvalued during the late 1970s and early 1980.

The case of the countries of the Southern Cone of South America are a

primary example of inadequate exchange rate policies.   In Chile, for

example, after a period with a passive crawling peg, and as a way to bring

down a stubborn inflationary process, the currency was fixed to the U.S.

dollar in June of 1979, at the same time as wages were indexed to past

inflation and capital controls were relaxed. As a result, the real exchange

rate appreciated by more than 30 percent between 1979 and mid 1982, provok-

ing a major deprotection of the domestic tradables sector and a gigantic

current account deficit that exceeded 14 percent of CD? in 1981.8 Argentina

and Uruguay adopted a declining preannounced rate of devaluation, also as a

way to reduce inflation. However, contrary to the case of Chile, in

Argentina and Uruguay the predetermined rate of devaluation was clearly

inconsistent with the magnitude of their fiscal deficit. This resulted not
only in a substantial real appreciation, but also in a steady loss of

credibility in the sustainability of the stabilization and liberalization

programs, and in major capital flight.9

     In Mexico, as a result of a highly expansive fiscal policy, which was

coupled with a quasi-fixed nomir;al exchange rate, the effective real

exchange rate experienced a real appreciation that exceeded 40 percent

between 1976 and February of 1982. In 1976-77 in an effort to put an end to

an acute situation of real exchange rate overvaluation, the Mexican peso was

devalued by almost 80 percent relative to the U.S. dollar. By 1981,

however, the real value of the peso was already below its 1976 level; in

less than 5 years more than 100 percent of the real effect of the devalua-

tion had fully eroded. This case is particularly interesting since it

clearly illustrates the difficulties that developing nations have many times

faced when trying to engineer a real devaluation (see Edwards 1987).

     The mismanagement of exchange rate policy was by no means a monopoly of

the Latin American countries. For example, Cote d'Ivoire, the Philippines

and Nigeria, among the highly indebted countries, also experienced important

degrees of real exchange rate overvaluation during the period preceding the

crisis. In both Cote d'Ivoire and the Philippines real appreciation

exceeded 15% between 1978 and 1982, while in Nigeria it boarded 10% during

the same period.

     Not in every developing country, however, the exchange rate policy was

inadequate. In Colombia, Indonesia and Korea, for example, the adoption of

an active exchange rate management, including periodic devaluations, was an

important component in overall strategies aimed at reducing the effects of

world economic fluctuations. In that regard, Indonesia's exchange rate and

macro policies were quite successful as a means to combat the Dutch-Disease
                                     8



effects associated with the oil booms. Also, Colombia's pragmatic approach

towards exchange rate management allowed the country to avoid the deprotec-

tion effects of the coffee boom of 1975-79 and to maintain a reasonable
                             10
macroeconomic equilibrium.

     Perhaps one of the most devastating effects of the generalized tendency

towards overvaluation is that it fueled massive capital flight out of the

developing world. In country after country, as it became increasingly

apparent that the overvaluation was unsustainable in the longer run, the

public began to heavily speculate against the central bank by acquiring

foreign exchange and moving it abroad. Moreover, in some countries such as

Chile and Argentina, the overvaluation casted doubts on the continuity of

the overall development strategy based on liberalization and open markets.

In Chile the public started to expect a hike in import tariffs and tried to

anticipate it by acquiring imported durables in record quantities (Edwards

and Edwards 1987). Although by its own semi-illegal nature it is not easy

to find official data on capital flight, most available estimates coincide

in suggesting that in most of the Latin American countries there was a

significant increase in capital flight in the years surrounding the debt

crisis. In a recent empirical study Cuddington (1986) has found that there

is a significant relation between overvaluation and capital flight. Table 3

contains estimates on capital flight for six developing countries. There is

an interesting contrast between the Latin American and the Asian nations.

In particular notice that in Korea, a country that by and large avoided the

temptation of real exchange rate overvaluation, between 1979 and 1984

capital flight was, on average, negative.
                                         9




11.2 The Adjustment

       In August of 1982, immediately following Mexico's formal announcement

that   it   was facing serious financial difficulties, the international

financial community greatly reduced the amount of funds intermediated to the

developing world. Even some countries, such as Colombia, which in no way

faced payments problems, had serious macroeconomic disequilibria, or had

accumulated debt at a very fast pace, were affected by this reduction in

foreign lending. In fact, it is fair to say that the availability of

foreign funds was reduced in a brutal way. For the developing world as a

whole external financing was reduced by almost 40 percent between 1981 and

1983. Moreover, the major debtors were forced to fully close a current

account deficit, that in 1982 exceeded $50 billion in less than 3 years. By

1985 the aggregate current account had reached virtual equilibrium ($-0.l

billion). In order to achieve this significant adjustment these countries

had to engineer a major turnaround in their trade balance, which went from

an aggregate deficit of almost $7 billion in 1981 to a surplus of more than

$40 billion in 1984. Table 4 contains data on exports, imports, the trade

balance and the current account, that very vividly captures the magnitude of

the adjustment.

       As can be seen from Table 4 after reaching a record level in 1984

(almost $41 billion) the aggregate trade surplus of the major debtors has

experienced a steady decline and it is expected that in 1987 it will be less

than $20 billion. This rapid deterioration in the aggregate trade balance

is to a large part a reflection of the Brazilian and Mexican situations.

       Latin America was hit by the sudden drying up of loans in a particu-

larly severe way. Table 5 contains data on the net transfer of resources to

the region from 1973 to 1986. As can be seen, starting in 1982 the net
                                       10




transfer   of resources became significantly negative; between 1982 and 1986

the annual net transfer averaged -$26.4 billion, compared to a positive

yearly average net transfer of more than $12 billion between 1976 and 1971.

In real terms the net turnaround of resource transfers exceeded $70 billion

in the short period of 3 years between 1980 and 1983!

     These very rapid adjustments in the current account and trade balance

were achieved in more than 100 percent by reductions in imports and in

investment. As can be seen from Table 4 in the highly indebted countries

the nominal dollar value of exports was lower in 1986 than in 1980, with the

magnitude of this decline exceeding 15 percent. This drop was basically the

result of a decline in the prices of these countries exports of almost 25

percent between 1980 and 1986. In Latin America the deterioration of the

terms of trade was so severe (see Table 6), that in spite of an increase in

the quantum of exports of 30 percent between 1980 and 1986, more than 100

percent of the net adjustment of the trade balance improvement has also been

achieved via a reduction of imports.

     For the major debtors as a group investment declined from an average of

26 percent of CDP in 1973-77 to an average of 17.2 percent in 1983-86.

Table 7 contains data on investment ratios for a selected group of

countries. As can be seen with the exception of Chile, which started from

an exceedingly weak position, in all of these countries the gross investment

ratio declined significantly after the crisis, with the cases of Nigeria,

the Philippines and Venezuela being particularly dramatic. In most cases

public investment and investment in the construction sector were the

components more severely curtailed. In the case of public investment this

was a result of restrictive aggregate demand policies implemented irnmed-

iately after the crisis. Naturally, this decline in investment has serious
                                        11




 consequences for the prospects of renewed growth. t'ot only has the adjust-

 ment been costly in terms of current output and employment, but also in

 terms of future income.

      Most countries faced the need to reverse the direction of the net

 transfers by resorting to a combination of expenditure reducing and

expenditure switching policies, including devaluation, the imposition of

capital controls and import quotas. The adjustment required both a signifi-

cant increase in real interest rates as well as major relative price changes

or real devaluations. In most cases the selection of policy packages was

based on the perceived "effectiveness" of these policies in the short run,

rather than on efficiency, income distribution, or welfare considerations.

As a result of the efforts made to implement rapidly effective policies a

number of tradeoffs between different objectives - -   including   improvement in
the current account and inflation - - emerged during the process.

     In most countries the expenditure reducing policies have been centered

on efforts to cut public expenditure. In a number of cases the reduction of

real public expenditure has in fact very significant, with most of the cuts

concentrating on public investment and government employees wages. Accord-

ing to CEPAL in Argentina, Ecuador, Mexico, Uruguay and Venezuela government

expenditure was cut by more than 20% in real terms following the crisis.11

Similarly, in Morocco real expenditure of the central government declined by

18 percent between 1982 and 1984, while in the Philippines this reduction

exceeded 25% between 1982 and 1985.12

     In spite of the effort to reduce overall public expenditures, govern-

ment interest payments on the domestic and foreign debt increased quite

significantly during the first five years of the adjustment process. This

was a result of both the real devaluations engineered as part of the
                                          12




stabilization   programs and of the deliberate policy of raising domestic

interest rates in an effort to further curb aggregate expenditure. The

negative effects of the devaluations on the interest bills of different

governments are a good illustration of the tradeoffs involved in the adjust-

ment process. In the majority of the major debtors most of the foreign debt

is owed by the government - -    either   because the public sector originally

contracted it, or because it took over it when the local private banking

system collapsed, as in Chile.13 What real devaluations do is raise the

(real) domestic currency cost to the government of raising the required

funds to pay the interest bill. This effect has been significant in coun-

tries like Argentina, Mexico and Peru where interest payments on public

sector foreign debt are a high proportion (i.e., approximately 20%) of total
                          14
government expenditure.         In a number of countries -- most notably in

Argentina and Chile - -   the   exchange rate policies followed during this

period also became an important source of government expenditures. For

example, in Argentina, the need to cover the exchange rate guarantee after

the abandonment of the "tablita" generated staggering fiscal outlays.

Similarly the adoption of a preferential (lower) exchange rate for foreign

currency debtors in Chile resulted in an implicit subsidy that absorbed

large amounts of foreign resources.15

     In spite of the relatively successful efforts to reduce public expendi-

tures, fiscal deficits increased in relation to the pre-crisis period in the

major debtors as a group (see Table 8). This was mainly due to the fact

that in many of these countries total tax revenues were negatively affected

by the recessions that followed the crisis. The steep increase in interest

rates that took place in most countries also impacted negatively the fiscal

accounts, via its effect on the public sector domestic debt. Moreover, in
                                     L3




most cases the sources of fiscal deficit financing were affected by the

crisis. Up to 1982 in most instances the public sector deficits were

financed by foreign borrowing. The drying up of this source of funds forced

the local governments to turn to the inflationary tax and to issuing

additional domestic public debt.

     The need to use inflationary financing placed pressure on the monetary

and domestic credit policies which became significantly more expansive than

what the IMF, the World Bank and the private bank officials felt they should

have been. Table 8 contains summary data on monetary policy, the fiscal

deficit and the average rate of inflation in these countries. These data

quite clearly illustrate some of the most interesting features of the

emergency phase of the adjustment process. As is pointed out in more detail

below, contrary to the historical experience with IMF sponsored programs,

these have been stabilization programs with acceleration in monetary

expansion, persistent high fiscal deficits that largely exceed the levels

that prevailed before the crisis, and very high inflation.

     The restraint of wage increases was, in most countries, another major

component of the expenditure reducing package. Table 9 contains data on the

evolution of real wages in selected Latin American countries. As can be

seen, with the exception of Argentina, Brazil and Colombia, the decline in

real wages has been significant.

     In most countries the adjustment also relied on higher real interest

rates, which helped keep expenditure, and in particular investment, in

check. It should be noted, however, that in some cases the rise in real

interest rates began some time before the "official" unleashing of the debt

crisis in August of 1982. For example, in the countries of the Southern

Cone real interest rates began to quickly climb in mid-1981 as these
                                     14



economies were becoming clearly overheated; higher interest rates were in

fact an early sign that in these countries the need for adjustment was

quickly approaching. In Argentina the annual real lending rate already

reached 19.3% in 1981, significantly higher from the average of 1.5%

prevailing during 1978-1980. In 1982 and 1983, as the effects of the debt

crisis per se were being felt, the real lending interest rates remained high

(around 12% per annum) but not as high as the level attained in 1981. Chile

presents a similar case, as in 1981 the annual real interest rate reached

58.1%, much higher than the average of the previous two years (8.5%).

During 1982 and 1983 the real lending rate declined to the still remarkable

level of 16% per annum (Ramos, 1986).

     Although in the Southern Cone real interest rates began climbing almost

a whole year before August 1982, the debt crisis further shocked the already

weakened financial sector. In particular, in Chile the halt of capital

inflows was partially responsible for the timing and magnitude of the

financial debacle of late 1982 and 1983. By the end of 1982 the foreign

debt of the Chilean banking system exceeded US$6.6 billion, a remarkable

figure when compared to the mere US $0.6 billion of debt in 1978! These

funds had been obtained without any government guarantee and had mainly been

used to finance the operations of the large private conglomerates - -   the   so-

called groups. By mid-1982 a large proportion of these loans were in fact

bad-loans, since due to a number of factors including the real overvaluation

of the peso, the grupos were facing very difficult financial times. During

1982 the amount of foreign funds available to the Chilean banks was reduced

by more than 75 percent, generating a fatal blow to the troubled financial

sector. As a result of these difficultiss, in January 1983 the government

stepped in, liquidating two banks and nationalized others. Responding to
                                       15




pressures by the international banks the Chilean government decided to take

over these banks' foreign debt, guaranteeing now its payment. Paradoxi-

cal].y, at the end of 1983, the Chilean financial sector was in some way at

the same juncture as it had been ten years before, in the midst of the

Allende socialist government. It had been nationalized and was tightly

controlled by the state (see Diaz Alejandro, 1985 and Edwards and Edwards,

1987)

        After August of 1982 most countries also relied on expenditure

switching policies; these consisted in most cases of a combination of

nominal devaluations and, at least initially, of a major escalation in the

degree of trade restrictions.

        The extent of the devaluations varied from country to country being

particularly severe in Latin America. In an effort to assure that the

effects of the nominal devaluations on the real exchange rate didn't erode

via inflation, most countries adopted some kind of active exchange rate

management where the exchange rate continued to be adjusted after the

initial parity change. In fact, as of July of 1986 out of the 15 major

debtors 12 had some sort of crawling peg regime consisting of periodical

adjustments of the nominal rate somewhat related to the differential between

internal and external inflation.

     Another important feature of the exchange rate policy followed by many

countries was the adoption of multiple exchange rates. This basically

served three purposes. First, by implementing differential exchange rates

for capital and current account transactions --   as   in Venezuela - -   the
authorities hoped to separate real transactions from the supposedly volatil-

ity of capital movements. More importantly, howevt.r, by imposing a free

floating exchange rate on unregistered capital flows the Venezuelan
                                       16




authorities   tried to discourage capital flight without greatly affecting the

current account. Second, multiple rates were also applied as a way to

supplement the protective system. Indeed, when different exchange rates are

applied to different commercia]. transactions, the resulting outcome is

perfectly equivalent to a differentiated tariff schedule. This practice was

again used by Venezuela, as well as by Mexico. And third, in some

countries, such as Mexico, Chile and Venezuela a lower "preferential"

exchange rate has applied to the private sector repayment of foreign debt.

The rationale for this preferential rate was that in this way it would be

possible to avoid a the general bankruptcy of the private sector - -   which
had heavily borrowed from foreign banks at the previously fixed nominal

exchange rate.

     Most countries were able to generate important real devaluations, which

in some cases more than corrected the overvaluation that preceded the

crisis. In Turkey, for example, between 1982 and 1986 there was a 24% real

effective devaluation, while in the Philippines the real devaluation

amounted to more than 8%. It was however in the Latin American countries

that the more important turnarounds of real exchange rate behavior were

achieved. As can be seen in Table 10, in all of these countries the real

effective exchange rate index shows that there have been significant real

depreciations between 1982 and 1986.

     As a result of these large nominal devaluations most countries experi-

enced important increases in their price levels. As noted above, in an

effort to avoid the erosive effects of these price increases the Central

Bank authorities decided to resort to further devaluations as a means to

maintain a high real exchange rate. Naturally this practice added fuel to

the already accelerated rates of inflation (see Table 11).
                                     17




     Immediately following the crisis in many (but riot all) of the major
debtors the devaluation policies were supplemented by the imposition of

trade restrictions. Table 12, for example, presents data on some of the

policies implemented by four countries.

     An important question is whether the use of quantitative restrictions

(QRs) instead of tariffs or more substantial devaluations, during the

initial phases of the adjustment has introduced unduly high costs in terms

of growth and efficiency. A well known proposition in the theory of

commercial policy is that, in terms of welfare and income distribution,

tariffs are generally superior instruments than quotas as a means to

restrict trade.16 That type of analysis, however, is static and assumes

perfect information on behalf of the authorities; according to this simple

setting the relevant elasticities are known and thus it is possible to

compute the exact height of the desired tariff. In reality, however, things

are quite different, since elasticities magnitudes are only known in a very

imprecise way. This means that in order to achieve a certain volume of

imports with the use of tariffs, it is necessary to go through a trial and

error process. This type of procedure may be very ineffective in cases such

as the debt crisis where the foreign exchange value of imports has to be

reduced very quickly, and where there are high penalties associated with

surpassing that (much reduced) level of imports. For a small country that

faces given foreign currency prices of imports, the use of quotas is an

effective way of being sure that the value of imports (in foreign exchange)

will not exceed a certain level. As long as countries need to establish

credibility regarding their willingness to adjust, it is particularly

important not to surpass the preestablished level of imports.
                                         18




     Although there is some justification for the (very) short term use of

QRs in the very first phase of the adjustment, there are no good reasons for

maintaining their use for long periods of time. From efficiency, fiscal as

well as income distribution perspectives in the case of the recent debt

crisis the maintenance of QRs for a long time have well known undesirable

effects. For example, Buffie and Sanguines (1987) have argued that the

generalized use of QRs in Mexico in 1982-1984 resulted in an unnecessary

reduction of imports of intermediate inputs, greatly hurting the Mexican

economy.

     In some countries the extent to trade restrictions has recently been

somewhat relaxed, while others have announced some easing up in the near

future. In Chile, for example tariffs were reduced to a 20% uniform level.

Mexico has taken some steps towards reducing the coverage of licenses, while

in Bolivia as part of the stabilization program aimed at stopping hyper-

inflation quotas have been abolished and tariffs reduced. As is discussed

in more detail below, in many countries trade liberalization packages are

being discussed as a part of conditionality agreements with the multilateral

institutions.

     In spite of the significant efforts to adjust made by most of these

countries - -   and   of the costs incurred in the process -   - the   magnitude of

their trade surpluses has systematically fallen short of their interest

payments. In Latin America, for example, in 1986 the interest bill amounted

to 5.3% of CDP while the trade surplus reached 2.3 percent of GDP. In most

countries up to this point this financing gap has been closed, usually after

long and protracted negotiations, by packages of funds provided by the banks

and the multilateral institutions. It is important to notice, however, that

the banks have been able to significantly reduce their exposure to the major
                                     19




debtors in spite of the fact that they have made some contributions to
financing these funds shortfalls (see World Economic Outlic, April 1987).

     Up to now banks have relied on the policing activities of the multi-

lateral institutions, and in particular of the IMF, for determining whether

a particular country is making a "sufficient" effort to adjust. A question

that is still unresolved is whether the banks will make a serious commitment

to providing additional financing to the indebted countries in the next few

years.

     A number of studies have suggested that for the great majority of the

highly indebted countries it would not be possible to generate in the short

run trade surpluses of a sufficient magnitude as to cover interest payments

without further decreasing the level of real consumption.   Selowsky and van

der Tak (1986), for example, have estimated that a "typical" major debtor

would need additional financing for approximately 5 years in order to exper-

ience some recovery in real consumption (2% per year) and in real income (4%

per year). Under these assumptions, since the rate of growth of income

exceeds that of consumption, domestic savings rise continuously. According

to this simulation exercise after 5 years "the typical" major debtor would

start to amortize its debt. After 6 more years the debt would have been

reduced to "normal" levels, and the country would again be "creditworthy".

Cline (1987) has recently argued, along similar lines, that banks could and

should indeed increase the amount of funds being intermediated to those

countries that show progress in their adjustment efforts.

11.3 Crisis Adjustment and Traditional Stabilization Programs

     The above discussion shows that, in spite of the active involvement of

the International Monetary Fund, the programs followed by most of the major

debtors between 1982 and 1986 differed in a number of key respects from the
                                     20




typical IMF sponsored program of the pre-1982 era. These differences mainly

involve the selection of policy packages, as well as the availability of

additional financing. Also, the behavior of the exogenous variables,

including the international environment, have tended to differ from the

historical experiences.

     According to Khan and Knight (1985), in the typical IMF program we can

distinguish a macroeconomic and a structural adjustment component. The

macro or demand management package is mainly based on restrictive monetary,

fiscal and domestic credit policies, aimed at eliminating the disequilibrium

between aggregate demand and aggregate supply, improving the current account

and reducing inflation. Special emphasis is usually placed on the control

of fiscal deficits. The structural adjustment or resource reallocation

package, on the other hand, usually includes three main policy blocks: (1)

trade liberalization; (2) financial reform; and (3) major devaluation

including exchange rate unification in the case of multiple rates.17

     The objectives of the structural adjustment component of conventional

programs is to increase efficiency, raise investment, and enhance growth

opportunities. Historically, for most countries the implementation of IMF

sponsored programs has not taken place at the same time as a gigantic

foreign debt is being serviced. Quite on the contrary, it has usually been

assumed that while implementing the structural reforms, these countries can

command significant additional net funds from abroad (see Khan and Knight,

1985). Although this may have been the case in the past, it is very far

from today's reality, when the highly indebted countries have to generate a

significant net transfer of resources to the rest of the world.

     In terms of outcome a historically "successful" IMF program can be

described by a reduced fiscal deficit, lower inflation, more liberalized
                                         2

trade,      and an improvement in the current account and balance of payments.

In many ways the current (1982-86) adjustment looks very different from this

IMF blueprint. Generally speaking, and as is captured by Tables 8 and 11,

this has been an inflationary adjustment process with high and persistent

fiscal deficits. Additionally there has been an escalation in the degree of

distortions of the external sectors, with a profusion of QRs and multiple

exchange rates.

        The behavior of investment has also been very different during the

current crisis adjustment period when compared to the historical episodes.

In a detailed study of 39 historical episodes of structural adjustment

programs between 1962 and 1982 Edwards (forthcoming) found that for the

group as a whole the investment ratio didn't experience a significant

decline in any of the four years following the implementation of the

programs. Moreover, according to this study, on average, in these

historical episodes it is not possible to detect, as in the current case,

significant declines in real output.

       To a large extent the "unorthodoxy" of these new stabilization and

adjustment programs can be attributed to three main factors:         (a) the

magnitude of the adjustment required; (b) the urgency with which it had to

be implemented; and (c) the global nature of the crisis. In a way, when

faced with the tradeoffs between current account corrections, efficiency of

the adjustment and inflation these countries opted -     - or   were forced to opt

-   - for   the current account improvements placing, at least during the initial

phases of the process, little priority on inflation, efficiency, or costs of

the process. Implicitly the IMF endorsed or encouraged these adjustment

programs, in spite of the fact that they departed from its traditional view.

Now, however, as things are somewhat under control more emphasis is indeed
                                         22




being placed on efficiency, growth and other social costs. These issues are

discussed in more detail in Section III.


III. Trade Liberalization and Adjustment With Growth

     The emergency packages implemented until now have succeeded in averting

what some considered to be an almost sure collapse of the world financial

system. This has been achieved, however, at a significant cost for the

major debtors in terms of decline in employment, income, and standard of

living. The key question now is how to move from the current situation

towards what we can call phase 2 of the adjustment process --     a   phase

characterized by adjustment with growth. At a more concrete level, the

Baker and the Bradley plans, among other initiatives, clearly reflect the

preoccupation of politicians with this issue.

     A number of authors -. and indeed the supporters of the Baker plan, as

well as the IMF - -   believe   that a rapid trade liberalization, coupled with

devaluation, privatization, and financial reform, is the most reasonable

strategy to achieve these objectives.18 For example, Balassa et al. (1986,

p. 88) have recommended that, among other things, the developing nations

should eliminate all QRs and reduce, in a period of 5 years, imports tariffs

to a uniform 15 to 20 percent level; these tariff reforms should be coupled

with significant devaluations, in order not to "deprotect" the tradables

good sectors.19 To a large extent these recommendations are very similar to

what many economists have been advocating for many years for the developing

countries. However, these new proposals are more drastic, in the sense of

arguing for a bolder movement towards free trade. The current proposals on

significant trade liberalizations have not entered into a detailed discus-

sion of the important issues related to strategy, including the appropriate
                                          23




speed and sequencing of reform. Also, there has been little consideration

on the possible short run tradeoffs between these Liberalization reforms

aimed at improving efficiency and other objectives of the overall programs.

      Most of the traditional literature on trade liberalization has assumed

that these reforms take place in the absence of a foreign debt overhang

problem. Moreover, many writers have assumed that during the trade reform

process countries will be able to attract substantial voluntary lending.

McKinnon (1973, 1982), for example, has forcefully warned us of the dangers

related to excessive capital inflows during a trade liberalization episode.

However, it is clear that at the present time, in the vast majority of LDCs

there is very little danger of trade liberalization attracting excessive (or

indeed any) voluntary capital inflows. Today, the problem is quite the

opposite: countries have to generate a positive resource transfer             the

rest of the world.

      The purpose of this section is to analyze some specific issues related

to trade reforms. We first discuss the relation between outward

orientation, trade liberalization, and export promotion. We then analyze

issues related to the order and speed of reforms, focussing on the relation

between stabilization policies and trade reforms and on the unemployment

effects of liberalization. Finally we deal with the role of devaluation and

of credibility during a structural adjustment process.

111.1 Outward Orientation, Export Promotion and Trade Liberalization

     There is by now an impressive amount of empirical evidence suggesting

that countries that have adopted outward oriented development policies, that

emphasize export promotion, have outperformed those countries that have

followed inward oriented strategies based on import substitution. Even

CEPAL - -   not   exactly known for its endorsement of outward policies - -   has
                                       24




recently recognized that the excesses of import substitution have been very

costly for Latin America; some of its senior staff members have recommended

that in the future export promotion should play a more central role in that

region's development policies.20

        There seems to be relatively less agreement, however, on whether "trade

liberalization" packages have played an important role in the performance of

the outward oriented economies. For example, in a recent paper Sachs (1987)

questioned the idea that trade liberalizations are indeed a required

component of successful outward oriented strategies. Making reference to

the experiences of the East-Asian countries -- Japan, Korea, Singapore,

Taiwan, and Hong Kong - - Sachs argues that these countries' success was to a

large extent due to an active role of government in promoting exports in an

environment where imports had not yet been fully liberalized, and where

macroeconomic (and especially fiscal) equilibrium was fostered. Whether one

agrees with Sachs depends on how outward orientation, export promotion and
                                                                          -


trade liberalization are defined. Recently some confusion has emerged

regarding    these concepts, and it is not exactly clear what people mean by

them.

        In the more traditional policy literature of the l960s and 1970s trade

liberalization was defined in a very general way; what economists usually

meant was some relaxation of trade and exchange controls. In fact, in the

by now classical NBER study on trade regimes directed by Bhagwati and

Krueger a liberalization episode was defined as a more extensive use of the

price mechanism that would reduce the anti-export bias of the trade

regime.21 In her 1985 review article on the problems of liberalization

Krueger went as far as saying that even a (real) devaluation in the presence

of QRs constituted a liberalization episode. These are indeed very mild
                                    25




definitions of liberalization. In fact today very few people will raise art

eyebrow about them. Only recently has "trade liberalization" acquired a
more drastic connotation, meaning (for many people) an elimination of QRs

coupled with a severe reduction of import tariffs to a uniform level of

around 10 percent. Moreover, recently trade liberalization has, in many

ways, become synonymous of free market oriented policies with minimum or

government intervention at any ievei.2

     The difference between the old and new definitions of "trade

liberalization" is, to a large extent, one of degree or intensity. While a

devaluation in the presence of QRs, or the replacement of QRs by (quasi)

equivalent tariffs is a mild form of liberalization, the reduction of

tariffs (with no QRs) to a uniform 10% or, for that matter, the complete

elimination of tariffs is a very drastic liberalization. in order to

clearly understand the different issues involved in policy discussions it

is, then, crucial to specify the intensity of liberalization we are

referring to. Unfortunately this is not always done; the policy literature

on the subject is plagued with imprecisions and ambiguities.

     There is little doubt that a successful export promotion policy

requires some kind of trade liberalization. In fact, the historical

evidence clearly shows that those countries that have successfully embarked

on that kind of strategy have had a more "liberal" trade regime than those

countries following indiscriminatory import substitution. The successful

outward oriented countries have generally had lower coverage of prior

licenses systems, lower average tariffs, less dispersion in their tariffs

and less episodes of real exchange rate overvaluation.23

     In a recent major multi-country study by the World Bank it was found

that there was a clear relation between movements towards more liberal trade
                                           26




systems - -   although   most countries still retained a number of controls - -

and a higher performance (Michaely, Choksi and Papageorgiou, 1986). In that

regard, the case of Korea -. one of, if not the most successful of the

export-oriented countries -     - is   very educating. In 1985, for example, 90%

of Korean imports were subject to automatic approval (i.e. , were not subject

to any form of QRs) and the average tariff rate was only 26%. Moreover, the

tariff structure was characterized by higher tariffs concentrated on final

goods, with capital equipment and intermediate inputs having relatively low

degrees of protection.24 This extent of import protection was significantly

below that of most of the developing nations and also below the degree of

Korean protection in 1965, before the outward oriented policy was embraced.

The Korean experience of export promotion coupled with trade liberalization

can be contrasted with the Chilean case. Between 1975 and 1979 a drastic

trade liberalization that eliminated all QRs, and reduced tariffs to a

uniform 10% in four years was implemented in Chile; in addition, as part of

a massive move towards free market orientation, this period's policies

almost completely eliminated the government's role in defining external

sector strategies. By allowing the real exchange rate to slip by

approximately 30% between 1979 and 1982, the Chilean experience of that

period became one of ultra trade liberalization without export promotion

(see Edwards and Edwards, 1987).

     Within the Latin American context Colombia after 1967 provides another

educating example of successful export promotion-cum- some trade liberaliza-

tion. Until that year the Colombia external sector was highly distorted and

had been subject to deep and recurrent crisis; coffee exports provided most

foreign exchange, and the Colombian economy was subject to the vagaries of

the world coffee market. In 1967 three major measures were taken. First,
                                          27




any attempt to fix the exchange rate was abandoned, and a crawling peg

system aimed at avoiding real exchange rate overvaluation was adopted.

Second, an aggressive export promotion program was enacted. Here a

subsidies scheme -   - the   so-called CATs - -   and the government export

promotion office (Proexpo) played an important role. And third, imports

were greatly liberalized; in 1983 the average tariff in Colombia was only

29%, while the proportion of imports subject to QRs had greatly declined

since 1967. As a consequence of these policies the Colombian non-coffee

exports sector has performed in an efficient way, helping Colombia sustain a

vigorous growth rate during the last 20 years.25 In fact, today Colombia

stands alone among the Latin American nations as a country that escaped the

debt traumatic experience of the crisis while being able to maintain a

reasonable rate of growth.

     Although the evidence supporting the merits of outward orientation is

abundant, there is no well developed theoretical model - -       or   empirical

evidence for that matter - -    linking   very low (or zero) import tariffs to

higher growth.26 Nor is there evidence suggesting that a completely "hands-

off" policy on behalf of the government is the most desirable alternative.

In fact, the success of the East Asian countries with export led growth

suggests that some selectively determined degree of intervention -.

specially   aimed at supporting exports --     played a key role.27 In this
section no attempt will be made to solve the difficult and very important

question of the optimal degree of government intervention, or of the optimal

level and structure of import tariffs. This is indeed one of the most

difficult question of economic policy, whose answer (even at the pure

abstract and theoretical level) will depend on the existence of other dis-

tortions, the completeness of markets and the availability of other policy
                                     28




tools, among other things. Instead we will proceed under the assumption

that in most of the highly indebted countries the current structure of

imports protection is higher than the (unknown) optimal level and that, in

the long run, these countries will gain from engaging in some trade

liberalization aimed at reducing and uniforming import tariffs. Under these

(very plausible) assumptions, in the rest of this section we will discuss

specific issues dealing with the appropriate speed and sequencing of the

trade liberalization component of an outward oriented strategy.


111.2 Trade Liberalization With a Government Budget Constraint

     An important policy question is whether the trade liberalization

component of an outward oriented strategy should be attempted at the same

time as a country is embarked on a severe stabilization and anti-inflation-

ary program. Not surprisingly, the answer depends on the intensity of the

trade reform and of the ongoing inflation.

     Historically, there has been a close link between mild trade liberali-

zations and stabilization programs.28 Consider the following typical

scenario leading to a stabilization program coupled with a mild to medium

trade liberalization effort:29 at some point in time the authorities of a

particular country decide to pursue a fiscal policy that is inconsistent

with the chosen nominal exchange rate regime - -   usually   a pegged rate.

Given the underdeveloped nature of the domestic capital market, the fiscal

expansion is basically financed with domestic credit creation. As a result,

there will be a loss of international reserves; domestic inflation will

exceed world inflation, and the real exchange rate will become increasingly

overvalued. In an effort to stop the drainage of reserves the authorities

will usually respond by imposing exchange controls and by increasing the

degree of restrictiveness of the existing trade impediments -     - tariffs   will
                                          29




be hiked and QRs will be imposed. Naturally, as long as the ultimate causes

of the macroeconomic disequilibrium --         that   is, the inconsistent credit and

fiscal policies - -    are   not tackled, all the authorities will gain by impos-

ing new trade restrictions is delay the need for corrective macroeconomic

measures. The real exchange rate will become more overvalued, international

reserves will continue to decline, and a black market for foreign exchange

will emerge. At some point this disequilibrium situation will become

unsustainable, and a stabilization program - -         usually   under the aegis of the

IMF -   - will   be enacted. This program will usually consist of a significant

nominal devaluation geared at correcting the overvaluation developed in the

previous period, of a contractionary macroeconomic policy, and of a

liberalization of trade restrictions aimed at dismantling those controls

imposed during the expansionary phase of the process. These types of trade

liberalizations have historically been mild and have seldom consisted of

complete elimination of QRs and major tariff reductions of the kind now

recommended for the indebted countries.30

        Table 13 contains a summary on the evolution of trade exchange and

capital controls in the period immediately following the adoption of 14

major Latin American stabilization episodes. In determining the timing of

these programs, the implementation of the major nominal devaluation was

taken as defining the beginning of the program. As may be seen, in many

countries there were mild, and sometimes short lived, liberalizations; out

of these 14 episodes we don't find a single major liberalization attempt.

        Perhaps Chile during 1975-1981 constitutes the most notable case of a

major liberalization undertaken in conjunction with a major stabilization

effort. The trade liberalization that eventually eliminated all QRs and

reduced tariffs to a uniform 10% level was pursued at the same time as
                                         30




inflation was being reduced from 400% to lO%.31 The Chilean episode

illustrates very vividly one of the most serious trade-offs that emerges

when a major liberalization is undertaken at the same time as a major anti-

inflation program. As in most successful stabilization programs, in the

last phase of the Chilean stabilization effort - - when inflation was reduced

from 40% to 9% per annum -   - there   was a significant real exchange rate

appreciation that reduced the degree of competitiveness of the tradables

sector at a time when, due to the trade reform, among other factors, the

equilibrium real exchange rate had significantly depreciated. In the

Chilean case this real appreciation was partially the result of the active

use of exchange rate management to bring down inflation; in mid 1979 the

nominal exchange rate was fixed relative to the dollar. As is well known by

now this real appreciation played an important role in the disappointing

outcome of the Chilean episode; it seriously deprotected the tradables

sector, it generated perverse expectations of devaluation and, ultimately,

it conspired with the high real interest rates to provoke the worst

financial debacle of Chilean history (Edwards and Cox-Edwards, 1987).

     A crucial objective of any stabilization program      -
                                                               and, as pointed out
in Section II, indeed of those undertaken by the major debtors -      - is   to

reduce the magnitude of the fiscal deficit. Many times there will be an

important trade-off between a trade liberalization that reduces import

tariffs and the achievement of this fiscal objective. Surprisingly, the

policy and theoretical literatures on trade liberalization policies have

most times tended to ignore the fiscal role of tariffs in the developing

nations. Most theoretical and policy discussions on trade liberalization

assume, along the lines of traditional trade theory, that tariff proceeds

are handed back to the public. In reality, however, things are very
                                      31




different,   with governments using tariff proceeds to finance their

expenditure. This is particularly the case in many of the poorer developing

countries where for different institutional reasons taxes on international

trade represent a high percentage of government revenue. Table 14, for

example, contains data on the fiscal importance of taxes on international

trade for 8 countries. As maybe seen, taxes on trade are as high as 1/3 of

total revenue of the central government.

     As long as tariff rates are below the maximum revenue tariff, there

will be a trade-off between trade liberalization and the generation of the

government surplus required to finance debt servicing. While the reduction

of tariffs will generally reduce distortions, it will also have a negative

effect on government finances. What is required, then, is to replace trade

restrictions by less distortive taxes that can generate the same (or a

higher) amount of revenue. This, of course, means that major reforms of the

tax system would be required in most countries. As long as this tax reform

effort also focuses on efficiency aspects, it will tend to be concentrated

on the imposition of a value added tax (VAT), among other taxes. This s

not easy and takes time, as a number of efforts to implement sweeping tax

reforms have recently shown. Tax reforms are not only politically difficult

to have approved, but from an administrative perspective it is many times

very difficult to get them going. This is particularly the case in the

poorer countries where the pre-existing tax system is many times very rudi-

mentary. Indeed the recent Indonesian tax reform has very clearly shown the

difficulties involved in these types of efforts. (See Conrad and Gillis,

1984). However, in middle income countries where there is an operating tax

system of some sophistication a major tax reform can be implemented with

some speed. The Chilean tax reform of 1975 is, in that sense, a good
                                        32




example; in little over a year a major tax overhaul that introduced a VAT,

full indexation and unification of corporate and non-corporate tax rates was

successfully implemented (Corbo, 1985).

     Although in most cases the implementation of a major tax reform will

take a substantial amount of time, there are some policies conducive both

towards improved efficiency and higher revenues in the short run. The most

obvious one is the replacement of QRs, (i.e. ,   licenses,   prohibitions and so

on) by import tariffs. A well known feature of QRs is that unless they are

auctioned, the government misses the revenue associated with the trade

restriction. By replacing the QR by a tariff it is possible for the

government to recapture this revenue.

     The replacement of QRs by tariffs has two other potentially desireable

effects. First, there is a potential for a positive effect on income

distribution. This is because in most cases large (or even multinational)

firms or large established merchants get the import licenses and, thus, the

rents. By replacing the QRs by tariffs these rents are passed on to the

government, allowing it to reduce other taxes, or even increasing expendi-

ture on social programs. Second, the replacement of tariffs by QRs, will

generally increase the effectiveness of devaluations. The reason is that

the effects of devaluations are significantly different under quantity

rationing (i.e., import quotas or licenses) than under import tariffs. In

the latter case a (real) devaluation will result in a higher price of both

importables and exportables relative to nontradables. Under QRs, however,

while the domestic price of exportables will still increase, that of

importables will usually not be affected. All the devaluation will do is

reduce the rents received by the party that got the license.
                                       33




     A potential problem with the replacement of QRs by tariffs is that it

is not easy to decide on the tariff level that should be imposed instead of

the QR, since under a number of plausible conditions (domestic monopoly

being perhaps the most common) tariffs and quotas will not be equivalent.

In this case there is    tariff that will exactly replicate both the

domestic price and quantity resulting from the QR. One possible alternative

policy that has been used with some success in a few countries is to auction

the quotas rather than allocating them in an arbitrary way.32 Some of the

attractive features of this option are the fact that it is possible to

maintain the certainty on the volume imported, while at the same time the

government captures back the rent associated with the quota allocation.

     To sum up, in many countries -- and in particular in the poorer ones,

with rudimentary tax systems -   - taxes   on trade are a very important source

of government revenue. This introduces an important tradeoff between trade

liberalization reforms and the maintenance (or achievement) of fiscal

balance. In terms of the sequencing of reform, then, an important principle

is to make sure that tariff reduction reforms should only be undertaken once

the fiscal sector has been reformed and other sources of revenue have been

found.33 Replacing QR's by tariffs, or devising a QRs auctioning system are

measures that can be implemented without producing fiscal costs, while at

the same time they improve efficiency. Also, by solving the fiscal

imbalance first, the possibility of real exchange rate overvaluation is

reduced.


111.3 Tariff Reform and Unemployment

     The effects of trade reform on employment are a key consideration when

evaluating the short-run effects of these policies. This is particularly

the case under the current conditions, where countries are already
                                         34




experiencing very high levels of unemployment. Moreover, from a political.

economy perspective the unemployment effects of any policy are crucial;

democratic governments -   - and   even those not so democratic, but in a

weakened position -   - will   try not to generate massive unemployment: the

costs of unemployment are recognized in the short run, while the benefits of

the structural policies that provoked it usually are reaped in the medium

run, when a different government is in office.

     According to the simplest textbook approach, in a small developing

economy with capital intensive imports, fully mobile factors of production,

and flexible prices, the reduction of import tariffs will have no effect on

total employment even in the short run. In this simple set up the only

labor market effects of trade liberalization will be a reallocation of labor

out of irnportables and an increase in the real wage rate. However, in

reality there are a number of reasons why these textbook conditions don't

hold, and why tariff reforms can result in a decline of employment in the

short run.

     The Ricardo-Viner model with downward real wages inflexibility provides

the simplest model for illustrating the possible short run unemployment

effects of a tariff reform. In this model capital is, in the short run,

fixed to its sector of origin; only slowly through time (and possibly via

investment) can capital be reallocated. Contrary to the more traditional

textbook case with full flexibility of prices and resource movements, in

this more realistic model a tariff reduction can result in a reduction of

the equilibrium real wage rate required to maintain full employment.34
However, if for some reason such as government imposed minimum wages,

indexation or staggered contracts there is downward inflexibility of real

wages, the required reduction in the wage rate will not take place, and
                                     35




unemployment will result. (See Edwards 1987b for a formal exposition on how

this model works in a world with importables, exportables and nontradables.)

This unemployment, however, will only be of a short-run nature. As capital

moves out of the importables sector and into the exportables and nontradable

sectors, there will be forces working for the equilibrium real wage to

increase, and those workers previously laid off will be rehired. A require-

inent for real wages to increase and for unemployment to disappear in the

longer run is that capital is indeed reallocated. However, if -- as has

been the case very often with liberalization episodes - -   the   reform lacks

credibility, capital will not be reallocated and unemployment will persist

(Edwards 1986).

     A shortcoming of the version of the Ricardo-Viner model discussed above

is that it assumes economy-wide real wage inflexibility and no initial

unemployment. In fact, in most developing countries minimum or inflexible

wages don't cover all sectors, and usually apply to the urban sector only.

In that regard, a more satisfactory model can be built using a three goods

open economy version of the well known Harris-Todaro model with short run

sector specific capital. (Throughout we maintain the very realistic assump-

tion that importables are the most capital intensive, while nontradables are

the most labor intensive goods.) Assume that while the importables (i.e.,

manufacturing) sector is subject to a minimum wage (in real terms), in the

exportables and nontradables sectors there is wage flexibility. Initial

equilibrium will be characterized by a positive amount of unemployment, that

will generate an equalization between the real wage in the exportables and

norttradables sectors and the expected real wage in the importable (manufact-

uring) sector covered by the minimum wage. Under our assumptions the post

tariff reform short run equilibrium (with capital still fixed to its sector
                                    36




of origin) will be characterized by: (i) lower employment in the sector

covered by the minimum wage (importables); (ii) lower wages in the

uncovered sector, expressed in terms of exportables;   (iii) either higher

or lower equilibrium unemployment; (iv) either lower or higher employment

in nontradables; (v) higher employment and production of exportables.

(See Edwards l987b for a detailed analysis.)

     Not surprisingly this case of partial minimum wage coverage generates

very different results than the case of an economy wide minimum wage

discussed above. First, we now have an increase in production and

employment in exportables. Second it is possible that under our partial

coverage case employment in nontradables will also increase. Also, in this

case a tariff reduction reform may generate smaller unemployment in the

short run, whereas in the case of an economy wide minimum wage greater

unemployment always resulted in the short run as a consequence of a decline

in the tariff (see Edwards l987b for detailed discussion).

     These models suggest that, contrary to the most simplistic textbook

view, as long as it takes time to reallocate capital from one sector to the

other and (real) wages are inflexible, a tariff reduction reform may very

well result in unemployment. A first best solution to this problem is to

(fully) eliminate the sources of real wage rigidity; with complete flexibi-

lity wages will, in the short run, go down until all the labor force is

absorbed. However, if for political or other reasons real wages cannot fall

sufficiently, a second best solution is to proceed slowly with the trade

reform; tariffs should be reduced gradually in a preannounced fashion. In

theory, in this way capital owners will have time to reallocate capital,

avoiding the unemployment effects of the trade reform. (See the Edwards

1987b.) Once again, for this solution to work, capital allocation should,
                                         37




in   fact, respond to the announcement of reform; that is, the reform should

be credible.35 (See Section 111.5 below.)

      The NBER. multicountry study on trade regimes and employment directed by

Anne Krueger (1983) has provided ample evidence suggesting that countries

that have followed outward-oriented policies have generally had a better

employment record -   - both   in terms of employment creation and lower

unemployment rates over the long run -     - than   those nations that have adopted

import substitution industrialization strategies. This study, however,

refer to the long run characteristics and performance of the labor markets

and don't say much about the aggregate employment effects during the

transition immediately following a tariff reform.

      The limited existing evidence on the short run aggregate employment

consequences of trade liberalization indicates that in the case of mild

reforms there have not been significant aggregate unemployment effects.

This, indeed, would seem to be one of the preliminary conclusions of the

exhaustive cross country study undertaken at the World Bank and directed by

Michaely, Choksi and Papageorgiou (1986). It is, however, somewhat

difficult to interpret the evidence from this massive investigation. For

example, the episodes analyzed many times refer to exceedingly mild

liberalizations -   - for   example, the 1970 Turkish devaluation, included in

the study, would barely qualify as even a very timid liberalization. Also,

from these studies, it is not possible to know in a precise way whether

specific changes in aggregate employment respond to the trade reform, or if

they are the result of other policies. This is the case, for example, of

the slight increases in aggregate unemployment observed after a number of

trade reforms, including the Turkish liberalization of 1980; the Korean

reform of 1979-80; the Philippines' liberalization of 1981, and Israeli
                                       38




reform of 1972-1977.

     Once again the Chilean experience, with its textbook-type policies is

educational. As already mentioned, between 1974 and 1979 Chile underwent

one of the most, if not the most, ambitious trade liberalization of the

modern time: quantitative restrictions were fully eliminated, a multiple

exchange rate system consisting of up to 15 different exchange rates was

unified, and tariffs were slashed to a uniform 10%. During this same period

unemployment in Chile was very high, reaching more than 20% in 1975 and

never falling below 15%. A subject extensively debated in Chile's popular

media, as well as in the specialized press, is the extent to which the

process of tariff reduction "contributed" to the unemployment problem.

There is little doubt that as a result of the tariff reform a number of

contracting, and even disappearing manufacturing firms laid off large

numbers of workers. On the other hand, expanding firms from the exporting

sectors increased employment, partially offsetting the negative effect. The

net result, however, was an increase in unemployment generated by the trade

reform. This negative effect was particularly marked in manufacturing where

firms worked their way out of the difficult situation created by increased

foreign competition by trimming their payrolls and increasing productivity

(Edwards and Edwards, 1987).

     There were two main ways in which the tariff liberalization generated

short-run unemployment in Chile. First, there was a natural adjustment

period where laid off workers took time to start searching for work in a

different, expanding, sector. Second, the fact that in reality - -     contrary
to the simplest textbook case -   - physical   capital is fixed in its sector of

origin made the expansion of production in a number of the exporting sectors

somewhat sluggish at first. Only as additional investment took place
                                     39




through time was it possible to fully increase production and employment in

these expanding sectors. However, the existence of wage rigidity and in

particular of a minimum wage in real terms made the absorption of labor by

the expanding industries more difficult.36 It is argued in Edwards (1985)

that a slower reform would have resulted in a reduced unemployment effect.

The proportion of total unemployment that can be attributed to the tariff

reform is, however, relatively small when compared to the magnitude of the

overall unemployment problem. Edwards (1985), for example, calculated that

an upper bound for the unemployment effects of the trade reform was 3.5

percentage points of the labor force, or 129,000 people, with the bulk of

this unemployment located in the food, beverages, tobacco, textiles and

leather products subsectors (57,000 people). More recently, de la Cuadra

and Hacette (1986) have calculated that the trade reform generated a

reduction of employment in the manufacturing sector of approximately 50,000

workers. Even though these are not negligible numbers, they clear indicate

that an explanation for the bulk of the Chilean unemployment should be

sought elsewhere.

     The above discussion has concentrated on the possible beneficial

effects of a gradual trade reform on employment. However, there are other

channels, mainly via an intertemporal effect on expenditure, through which a

gradual tariff reform can have positive effects on the economy. For

example, a slow reduction of tariffs will generally have a positive impact

on the savings rate and on the current account. To the extent that the

gradual trade liberalization process is a credible proposition, it will have

a nontrivial effect towards reducing the consumption rate of interest. As

the public expects tariffs, and thus the domestic price of importables, to

be lower in the future it will postpone current consumption. Consequently
savings will increase and the current account will improve.

     In sum, a gradual lowering of tariffs offers a number of attractive

features for economies such as the debt ridden countries. First, this

strategy is likely to reduce the short-run unemployment consequences of the

trade reform. Second, there will likely be positive effects on savings,

helping growth prospects. Third, it will tend to improve the current

account. And finally, a gradual reduction of tariffs will have positive

effects on the government budget. On the negative side a gradual trade

reform may lack credibility, in which case it may even induce perverse

responses (see Section 111.5).

111.4. Structural Adjustment and Devaluation

     Nominal devaluations are an important component of most stabilization

programs, and as discussed in Section II they have played a central role in

the adjustment efforts following the debt crisis. The purpose of these

nominal devaluations is to generate a real, exchange rate adjustment, that

would revert the real appreciation that most times precedes the balance of

payments crisis. In turn, by improving the degree of domestic competitive-

ness and raising the domestic price of tradables the real devaluations are

supposed to improve the external sector accounts of the country in question.

Historically, however, when implementing stepwise discrete nominal

devaluations, many developing nations have found it difficult to sustain the

real devaluations for a long period; in a high number of cases after some

time - -   usually   ranging from one to two years -   - the   real exchange rate

effect of the nominal discrete devaluation has been fully eroded. In almost

every instance this erosion can be traced back to the failure to implement

consistent macroeconomic policies alongside the devaluations (see Edwards,

forthcoming).
                                         L




     Devaluations have also played a key role in the trade reform component

of structural adjustment programs. It is generally accepted in policy

circles that in order for a tariff reform to be successful, it has to be

accompanied -   - if not preceded - - by a real devaluation (see, however,
Edwards for a critical evaluation of this proposition). The argument

usually given is based on a partial equilibrium interpretation of the

elasticities approach to exchange rate determination, and runs along the

following lines: a lower tariff will reduce the domestic price of

importables, and consequently increase the demand for imports. This, in

turn, will generate an external imbalance (i.e. , a trade account deficit)

which assuming that the Marshall-Lerner condition holds, will require a

(real) devaluation to restore equilibrium. This view is clearly captured by

the following quote from Balassa (1982, p. 16): "[E]lirninating protective

measures would necessitate a devaluation in order to offset the resulting

deficit in the balance of payments." It is along these lines, then, that

the proponents of major liberalizations by the debt ridden countries have

insisted that these tariff reductions should be accompanied by significant

nominal devaluations (Balassa, et. al., 1986).

     The "required" amount of devaluation will depend on a number of

factors, including the initial conditions, the extent of the trade reform,

the magnitude of the disequilibrium gap to be closed and the accompanying

macroeconomic policies.37 In addition, and perhaps more importantly, the

required devaluation will also depend on the speed at which the trade reform

is implemented. Since, for a number of reasons including the short-run

fixity of capital, short run supply elasticities are much lower than long

run elasticities, under most circumstances a rapid trade reform will

necessitate a higher real devaluation to maintain external equilibrium,38
    Until quite recently most traditional structural adjustment programs in

the developing nations have contemplated discreet nominal devaluations where

the official nominal exchange rate is abruptly adjusted by a fairly large

percentage. Kore recently, however, more and more countries are opting for

the adop.ion of some sort of crawling peg after the devaluation. In a

recent study on 18 devaluation episodes in Latin America, Edwards (1987)

found that those countries that had adopted a crawling peg had been signi-

ficantly more successful in sustaining a real depreciation than the discrete

devaluers. This, of course, is not in itself surprising, since the crawlers

maintained their real devaluation targets by "fighting off" the real

exchange rate erosion with additional nominal devaluations in the following

years. Typically, under this type of regime, after the initial exchange

rate adjustment the authorities further devalue the currency in magnitudes

approximately equal to the domestic rate of inflation, Of course, a

potential problem with this policy is that it can lead to an explosive

(nonconvergent) process, where the devaluation generates inflation, which

partially erodes the real effect of the devaluation; this leads to a higher

devaluation and even higher inflation and so on, ad-infinitum. This

possible unstable path could happen in those countries where the structural

macroeconomic disequilibrium - -   and   in particular the fiscal deficit -   - have

not been corrected to a significant extent. An alternative scenario is one

where macroeconomic equilibrium is attained and the process is stabilized at

some mild rate of inflation, as in Chile in the recent period and in

Colombia since 1967. The cited study by Edwards indicates that among the

Latin American crawlers in Bolivia (1982), Peru (1975) and Mexico (1982) the

higher real exchange rate was sustained at the cost of substantial permanent

increase in the rate of inflation.
                                       43



      In   spite of the prominent role of devaluations in conventional

adjustment programs, very little work has investigated empirically the

effects of devaluations on the real level of economic activity or on income

distribution. A recently revived strand of literature has argued that

although devaluations may have a positive effect on the external accounts,

they will achieve this at the cost of significant reductions in ceal activ-

ity. This is the so-called contractionary devaluation hypothesis. Edwards

(forthcoming), has analyzed in detail the behavior of a large number of key

economic variables during 39 devaluation episodes in developing countries.

In this study the evolution of some key variables during the period going

from 3 years prior to the devaluation to 3 years after the devaluation was

analyzed and compared to the behavior of the same variables for a control

group of 24 nondevaluing countries. Table 15 provides a summary of the

distribution of the rate of growth of real GDP for the devaluing countries

and the control group. Notice that 3 years prior to the devaluation this

distribution is very similar to that of the control group. In fact, using a

Chi-square test for homogeneity we are unable to reject the null hypothesis

that these data come from the same distribution (x2(2) —    0.046).   Things,
however, are very different as we approach the devaluation. Already during

the two years prior to the devaluation we can see a significant difference

between the devaluing and control groups, with the former exhibiting

substantially lower levels of growth in every quartile. The Chi-square test

strongly rejects the null hypothesis of homogeneity for the year of the de-

valuation (X2(2) — 7.02) and all three years following devaluation. Notice,

however, that in the years following devaluation a fairly fast recovery in

the rate of growth of real GDP is detected. Although the information

presented in this table is quite revealing, it does not allow us to know
whether this behavior of real GD? growth is caused by devaluation or if it

is the result of some of the policies preceding the devaluation. This

problem can be partially avoided by using regression analysis. The

following result was obtained using instrumental variables on a variance

component model of 12 countries for 1965-1980:


       log y   m
                   — 0.102 (log M.log M'] ÷ 0.210 (log Mtl -          log M1]
                    (1.146)                 (2.331)

                   +   0.112 log(GE/Y) - 0.083 log et + 0.069 log ei
                        (3.023)              (2.103)       (2.086)

                   +   0.044 log r   -   0.008 log ttl                   — 0.998
                       (1.431)           (.0.265)                    SEE — 0.038


where y is real output,           [1log M-log M*] is the unexpected rate of

growth of money, (GE/?) is the ratio of government expenditure to CNP, e

is the real exchange rate and r            is the terms of trade. According to these

results then, in the short-run devaluation have led to a slight fall in

output: a ten percent depreciation leads to a once off loss of almost one

percent of GNP. In the second year, the economy returns to trend.39

     Income distribution data are very scarce in the developing countries.

This undoubtedly explains, at least partially, why there have practically

been no studies on the effects of devaluations on income distribution. How-

ever, there is little doubt that income and wealth distribution

considerations enter heavily in the decisions of what kind of policies to

implement. In Table 16 we present, as an illustration, some very

preliminary data on devaluation and income distribution in 23 developing

nations. This table contains the ratio of labor compensations to GD? for a

period that goes from 4 years prior to a major devaluation to 3 years after

the devaluations. The first column in the table provides information on the

year of the devaluation. Although the ratio of workers compensations is a
                                      '4)




very   rudimentary measure of income distribution, and this type of "before"

and "after" methodology has well known shortcomings, these data are quite

revealing. They confirm that in some instances devaluations have been

followed by major worsenings in income distribution (i.e., Peru 1975). This

trend, however, cannot be found in all cases, and not even in the majority

of episodes. In fact, in a number of them the ratio of labor compensation

increased following the devaluation. More than anything, however, these

data indicate that in order to have a full understanding of the income

distribution consequences of devaluations, it is necessary to look at more

detailed data and at alternative categories, including the effect of

devaluations on the rural-urban distribution of income.

       To sum up then, the discussion in this section reveals once again, the

existence of important trade-offs associated with the different goals of the

adjustment program. While devaluation will generally have a positive effect

on the external sector, helping generate the necessary excess supply for

tradables, and easing the transition following a trade liberalization, it

will have a negative impact on the cost of foreign exchange to the govern-

ment, and on real GDP growth. In addition, devaluation will usually have

important effects on income distribution and on inflation. Since the

magnitude of "required" (real) devaluations will be closely related to the

speed at which structural reforms are implemented, this discussion points

out, once more, towards the desirability of proceeding gradually both on the

debt payment and structural reforms format.


111.5 Credibility. Sustainability and Reversibility of Trade Reforms

       Credibility is a fundamental ingredient of successful structural

reforms. If the public attaches a nontrivial probability to policy revers-

al, it will try to anticipate this event, generally introducing strong
                                         46



destabilizing forces into the structural adjustment process.

     Latin America's history is replete with frustrated economic reforms

that have failed due to the lack of credibility. In that respect, the

frustrated Argentinian trade reform during the Martinez de Hoz period is

very educational. Due to the lack of credibility on the future of the

preannounced trade reform, firms used foreign funds in order to survive in

the short run. As Carios Rodriguez (1983: 28) has put it in his evaluation

of the Argentina experience of 1978-82,

     As a consequence of the lack of credibility on the continuity of the

     economic program, many firms -     - which   would have disappeared due to the

     tariff reductions - -   decided   to get into debt in order to remain

     operating while waiting for a change in the economic strategy (emphasis

     added).

     A fundamental aspect of establishing credibility is related to the

perception that the public has of the internal consistency of the policies

being pursued. In that respect, for example, the inconsistency of the

Argentinian fiscal policy - -   which   maintained a very large deficit - -   and
the preannounced exchange rate policy severely undermined the degree of

credibility of the reform process. In the case of Chile the markedly

overvalued currency in 1981 was seen by large segments of the public as

inconsistent with the long-run viability of the liberalized economy. In

general, if the real exchange rate experiences an unprecedented real

appreciation, the public will think that exports will not be able to develop

and that there is a nontrivial probability of the reform's being reversed in

the future. Under these circumstances it will be optimal for consumers to

get into debt today in order to acquire "cheap" importables.
     The inability to establish consistency between fiscal and exchange rate

policies has many times been at the heart of the trade reform credibility

crises in Latin America. For example, in most cases where (mild) trade

reforms have been reversed, the public early on perceived that the inflation

tax required to finance the fiscal deficit was inconsistcnt with maintaining

a predetermined nominal exchange rate. Under these circumstances expecta-

tions of overvaluation, speculative attacks, exchange controls and future

devaluations developed. In trying to anticipate these events the optimizing

private sector will usually take steps - -     such    as diversifying its portfolio

internationally (i.e. ,   "capital   flight") - -   that   will some times move the

economy in the opposite direction from that intended by the reform. Edwards

(1987) has found that in more than 80% of reversals of trade liberalizations

in Latin America can be traced to inconsistent fiscal policies.

     An important question is whether a gradual (i.e. ,          slow) trade reform
will be less or more credible than an abrupt one. Theoretical models of

credibility of economic policy are only now being developed, and have not

yet reached a level that enables us to answer this question with enough

precision.4° In principle, it is possible to argue that gradualism has

characteristics that work in both directions, at the same enhancing and

compromising credibility. On one hand by reducing the unemployment effect,

and by allowing for a firmer fiscal equilibrium, a gradual trade reform will

tend to be more credible; on the other hand a slow reform will allow those

groups negatively affected by it (i.e., the import substitution manufactur-

ing sector) to organize and lobby against the policies. At the end, as is

so often the case in economics, whether gradualism will enhance credibility

will depend on factors specific to each country. What is clear, however, is

that policymakers should always pay special attention on the establishment
                                           48



of    credibility when persuing important long term structural changes.

       Given our knowledge of the policymaking process and its interaction

with the private sector, it is not possible to derive a precise theorem at

this point. However, the arguments presented in this section --             including
unemployment, fiscal and other considerations -- suggest that, in general,

implementing the trade reform component of an outward orientation policy in

a gradual way is more likely to be successful than an abrupt. liberalization.


IV.     Concluding   Remarks and Summary

       The adjustment packages of 1982-87 sought "effectiveness". On some

grounds - -   and    especially in terms of the turnarounds of the current

accounts - -   the   results have been quite impressive. The costs, however,

have been high. Not only did real income decline, as illustrated in Table

2, but real wages declined in most countries, and unemployment soared.

There is little doubt that this is not a sustainable adjustment path. A

successful adjustment means that debtor countries will have to bring down

their debt to GDP ratios to a level consistent with the reestablishment of

creditworthiness, while recovering their growth of output and consumption.

The first objective means that the country has to transfer a given

discounted value of resources to the rest of the world. The second means

that the country has to increase its rate of capital formation and the

efficiency of resource use. The problem faced by the highly indebted nations

can be posed as follows: how to minimize the present value of foregone con-

sumption of making a transfer of a specific discounted value. The problem

has then two dimensions: how to minimize the cost of the transfer at each

moment of time - -     including   its distributive aspect - -   and   second an

intertemporal one, i.e., what should be the flow of transfers over time
                                           49




consistent with a given present value of the flow.

     The speed with which the transfer to the rest of the world is made will

affect the (discounted value) of the cost of achieving creditworthiness. A

very fast increase in the trade surplus can only be obtained at a very high

cost in terms of nontraded goods and losses in unemployment, both because it

takes time for factors to be retrained and to move, and because of wage

inflexibility in the short-run. It also takes time to implement efficient

fiscal instruments to generate the fiscal surplus, particularly if one wants

to eliminate the present reliance of taxes on trade and the inflationary

finance of the deficit. Finally, improving the allocation of investment and

promoting the return of capital flight may involve liberalizing financial

markets, which will increase the fiscal cost of servicing internal debt.

Thus, improved efficiency and capital accumulation will require important

increases in non-distortive taxes and cuts in public expenditures: but this

takes time. In sum, there are important trade-offs between the speed of

effecting the transfer and minimizing its cost at one moment of time.

Instruments that help generate quickly the trade surplus -        - like   quantita-

tive restrictions - -   increase   the resource cost of achieving the transfer.

Instruments that quickly solve the fiscal problem -      - like   using tariffs or

QRs instead of a devaluation - -    also   increase that cost.

     A slower speed of the adjustment can only be achieved if the magnitude

of the transfer countries have to make is reduced during the initial years.

One way of achieving this is by providing these countries with additional

lending during the transition. In principle this will allow the implemen-

tation of slower expenditure switching policies and the implementation of

more efficient fiscal instruments to raise public resources. Most import-

antly, it will allow the investment rates to be kept up without unduly
                                      50



sacrificing consumption. Thus there is a complementarity between extra

lending during the transition and the recovery of growth while transferring

abroad a given present value of resources.

       A longer run solution of the debt crisis will clearly require the

adoption of policies that rely more heavily than in the past on export

growth. Even ECLA/CEPAL, the former champion of import substitution

development, has recommended outward oriented policies. Export promotion

requires some kind of trade liberalization and tariff reduction --

especially   of imported inputs and capital goods. Indeed, the historical

evidence clearly shows that those countries that have pursued successfully

export promotion (i.e., the East Asian nations), have had a trade regime

substantially more liberal than those countries that have followed

indiscriniinatory import substitution based on protectionism. A crucial

question, however, is how much trade liberalization is needed. It is argued

in the paper that although outward orientation requires some trade

liberalization, there are no reasons - -   either   theoretical or empirical - -

that   suggest that the "optimal" degree of liberalization implies zero, or

even very low, tariffs coupled with no government intervention in any sphere

of the development process. The successful experiences with export led

growth in the East Asian countries support this view; although in these

countries the trade regime has been significantly liberal, government inter-

vention has been important and tariffs have never been anything close to

zero or a very low (i.e. , 10-15%) uniform level.

       An important policy question is whether the trade liberalization

component of an outward oriented strategy should be attempted at the same

time as a country is embarked on a severe stabilization program. The

experience of the Southern Cone suggests that undertaking substantial trade
                                    51




reforms at the same time as a major anti-inflationary program is unlikely to

be successful. This is both for fiscal and real exchange rate reasons.

However, there are some measures, such as the replacement of quotas for

tariffs, that can help both the anti-inflation drive as well as the quest

for improvement of efficiency.

     Under the most plausible circumstances a fast trade liberalization will

generate short-run unemployment effects. Indeed, the empirical evidence

from the Southern Cone tends to confirm this presumption. Trade liberaliza-

tion will be more successful if it is gradual and preannounced. This,

however, brings up serious credibility issues. Only if the announced

gradual trade reform is "credible" will economic agents react as expected by

the authorities. The analysis of devaluations presented in section III

clearly suggests that under many circumstances abrupt devaluations can

generate nontrivial short run costs in the form of output reductions and

unemployment. Gradual liberalizations will require smaller devaluations,

possibly reducing the associated costs.

     A sustained increase in the indebted countries exports --   which is, of
course, a prerequisite for a long term solution to the crisis -   - will   not

only require an efficient tradables sector and a "realistic" real exchange

rate but, more important, that the current protectionist trend in the

industrial countries and in particular in the. U.S. is reversed. Data pre-

sented in Edwards (l987a) indicate that at this time the extent of nontariff

barriers, as a form of protection in the industrial countries, is very

significant. Moreover, the data show that these trade impediments are

particularly important for goods originating in the developing nations, and

that their tariff equivalents are in many cases very significant. Asking

the highly indebted developing countries to pay their debts at the same time
                                    52



as impeding their exports to reach the industrialized markets is asking for

the impossible.
                                      53



                                   FOOTNOTES



*
     Presented at the National Bureau of Economic Research Conference on

Developing Countries Debt; Washington, DC, September 21-23, 1987.    I have

benefited from discussions with 1arcelo Selowsky. I am grateful to

Alejandra Cox-Edwards, Edgardo Barandiaran, Pan Kasliwal, Miguel Savastano,

Jeff Sachs and to the participants of the pre-conference meeting held in

Cambridge in May 1987 for helpful. comments. Financial support from UCLA's

Academic Senate and from the National Science Foundation is gratefully

acknowledged.

1.    It should be noticed, however, that most experts now agree that in some

of the poorer countries it will be highly implausible to reduce the debt-

export ratio to levels required to have access to new voluntary financing.

In these cases some innovative and less orthodox solutions, including debt

forgiveness, may be the most efficient way out.

2.    See, for example, Balassa et. al. (1986) and Krueger (1987).

3.    The IMF's 15 highly indebted countries are: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil,

Chile, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, Ecuador, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Peru,

Philippines, Uruguay, Venezuela and Yugoslavia.

4. On the Brazilian experience see Cardoso and Fishlow (1987); on Mexico

see Buffie and Sanguines (1987); Celasun and Rodrick (1987) deal with

Turkey; on Chile see Edwards and Edwards (1987).

S. See Dornbusch (this volume) for discussion of the role of the developed

countries' macropolicies on the development of the crisis.

6. See Bianchi, Devlin and Ramos (1986).

7. Notice, however, that it is not completely rigorous to talk about

overvalued real exchange rates without first analyzing the way in which the
equilibrium real exchange rate has evolved (see Edwards, forthcoming). In

the case of the debtor countries, however, the existing evidence clearly

suggests that significant overvaluations developed.

8. On the Chilean experience see Edwards (1985) and Edwards and Edwards

(1987)

9. On Argentina see Calvo (1986) and Corbo, de Melo and Tybout (1986).

10. On Colombia see Thomas (1986). See Collins and Park (1987) on Korea

and Woo and Nasution (1987) on Indonesia.

11. The exact time periods are Argentina 1982-85, Ecuador 1982-83, Mexico

1983-84, Uruguay 1982-84 and Venezuela 1982-83.

12. Computed from raw data published in Government Finance Statistics

Yearbook, 1986.

13. See Edwards and Edwards (1987).

14. Although real devaluations will increase the real domestic currency of

servicing the public debts, they can have some other positive effects on the

public sector's budget. This will be the case in those countries where the

main exporting firms are government owned.

15. On the Argentinian exchange rate guarantees scheme see Calvo (1986); on

Chile see Edwards (1985).

16. For a detailed analysis on the non-equivalence between quotas and

tariffs see Bhagwati (1978). See also Hiliman, Tower and Fishelson (1980).

17. Note, however, that in spite of Khan and Knight's description in the

past not every Fund sponsored program included exchange rate actions. It is

in fact important to recognize that historically the IMF has exhibited

significantly more flexibility than what its critics have given it credit

for. There has been, to some extent, a case-by-case approach. From the

record it seems, however, that the Fund staff considers that the vast
majority of the cases are quite similar.

18. Balassa et al. (1987) and Krueger (1987) are good representatives of

this view. See also Fischer (1987).

19. The other policies advocated by Balassa et al. (1986) include financial

reform, stable real exchange rates and a much reduced role for the

government.

20. On the evidence on the performance of outward- vs. inward-oriented

strategies see, for example, the World Bank 1987 World Development Report

and the literature cited therein. On CEPAL see, for example, Bianchi et.

al. (1987).

21. See Krueger (1978) and Bhagwati (1978). On earlier discussions on

liberalization see Little et. al. (1971). For a recent treatment of many of

these issues see the volume edited by Choksi and Papageorgiou (1986).

22. This was indeed the meaning given by some to the concept during the

Southern Cone experiences with market oriented policies in the late l970s

and early l980s. In a recent paper Bhagwati (1986) has made an effort to

define in a precise way export promotion, import substitution, and ultra

trade promoting trade policies. In the rest of this paper we will stick to

trade and commercial policies when referring to trade liberalization.

23. See, for example, Bhagwati's (1986) recent splendid paper on outward

orientation. To date the most impressive accumulation of empirical evidence

supporting the better performance of outward orientation has been compiled

in the 1987 World Development Report. See also Bhagwati and Srinivasan

(1978).

24. See, for example, World Bank (1986).

25. On Colombia see Thomas (1986).
                                         56




26. Naturally, the welfare effects of trade liberalizations fall within the

rest of second-best economics. Rigorously speaking if there are other

distortions - -   as   invariably there are in the real world -   - it   is not

possible to know a priori if a partial trade liberalization will be welfare

improving. If there are no other distortions, it is possible to establish a

positive relation between the level of tariffs and the level of income.

Still however, no traditional growth model will link no tariffs to higher

growth (see Lucas 1985).

27. Notice, however, that even the Koreans made mistakes when they pushed

the government role too far. In that respect, the fiasco of 1974-79 when

the government picked the wrong "winners" is well known. See World Bank

(1986).

28. See, for example, Krueger (1981) and Little (1981).

29. See, for example, Edwards (1987a) for a detailed analysis of 18

stabilization cum mild liberalizations episodes in Latin America.

30. Naturally, although very common, this is not the only scenario leading

to a stabilization-cuni-structural adjustment program. In an alternative

scenario, that fits some country's experiences during the period leading to

the debt crisis, the fiscal expansion is financed with foreign borrowing

instead of money creation. In this case the path leading to the need to

adjust in not necessarily characterized by a piling up of trade and exchange

controls.

31. The recent Bolivian experience is also characterized by a tremendous

trade liberalization. However, the fact that this was part of a package to

defeat hyverinflation sets the Bolivian case apart.

32. While a number of countries have successfully used foreign exchange

auctions -- Jamaica, Sierra Leone, Uganda --      only   a few have implemented
                                      57




generalized auctions for imports of goods. See Kruinm (1985) for a

discussion on different experiences with exchange auctions.

33. Notice, however, that from a welfare perspective this is by no means a

trivial proposition. Indeed, from a purely theoretical point of view it is

not clear that reducing tariffs and ncreasing other taxes will be welfare

improving. Moreover, at least at the theory level, it is not clear that

welfare will increase if as liberalization advocates have sometimes

proposed, consumption taxes are raised as tariffs are reduced. This, of

course, is a simple application of the second best theorem.

34. Whether this reduction in the equilibrium real wage will actually take

place will depend on the weight of exportables in the price level relevant

for determining real wages. If, as in a large number of developing

countries, exportables (i.e., foodstuffs) have a large weight in the

consumer price index the equilibrium real wage will indeed decline. (See

Edwards 1987b).

35. On theoretical models of labor market effects of trade reforms see

Edwards (1986, 1987) and the references cited therein.

36. See Chapter 6 of Edwards and Edwards (1987) for a detailed discussion

of the evolution of wages in Chile.

37. We are referring to the extent of real devaluation. However, since the

real exchange rate is not a policy tool, economic authorities face the

additional difficulty of deciding by how much to adjust the nominal exchange

rate in order to generate a given real devaluation.

38. This statement assumes that a tariff reduction will result in an

equilibrium real exchange rate depreciation. Although this is the more

plausible case, theoretically it is not the only possible result. See

Edwards (1987c).
                                    53




39. The countries included in this regression are: Brazil, Colombia, El

Salvador, Greece, India, Israel, Malaysia, Philippines, South Africa, Sri

Lanka, Thailand and Yugoslavia. For details, see Edwards (1986).

40. Guillermo Calvo, however, has recently made important contributions to

this key area of the theory of economic policy (see Calvo 1986, 1987).
                                       59




                                   REFERENCES



Balassa, B. 1982, Development Strategies in Semi-Industrial Countries

   (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

_________   Bueno, G.M., Kuczynski, P.P. and Simeonsen, MH., 1986 Toward

   Renewed Economic Growth in Latin America, (Washington, DC: Institute of

   International Economics).

Bhagwati, J. 1978, Anatomy and Consequences of Exchange Control Regimes

   (Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing Co.)

__________ 1986, "Export Promoting Trade Strategies: Issues and Evidence,"

   World Bank Discussion Paper UPERS7

_________ and Srinivasan, T.N. 1978, "Trade Policy and Development," in R.

   Dornbusch and J. Frenkel (eds.), International Economic Policy: Theory

   and Evidence (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press).

Bianchi, A., Devlin, R.., and Ramos, J. 1987, "The Adjustment Process in

   Latin America, 1981-1986," paper presented at World Bank-IMF Symposium on

   Growth Oriented Adjustment Programs, Washington; D.C.

Buffie, E., and Sauguines, A. 1987, "Economic Policy and Foreign Debt in

   Mexico," unpublished NBER ms.

Calvo, C. 1986a, "Fractured Liberalism: Argentina Under Martinez de Hoz,"

   Economic Develorment and Cultural Change, (April).

__________1986b, "Temporary Stabilization Predetermined Exchange Rates,"

   Journal of Political Economy (December): 1319-1329.

__________ 1987, "Reform, Distortions and credibility," Working Paper,

   University of Pennsylvania.

Cardoso, E., and Fishlow, A. 1987, "The Macroeconomics of the Brazilian

   External Debt," unpublished .TBER ms.
                                       60




Celasun, M. arid Rodrik, D. 1987, "Debt, Adjustment Growth: Turkey 1970-85,"

   unpublished NBER ms.

CEPAL 1986a, Panorama Econornico de America Latina 1986 (Santiago Chile).

__________ 1986b, Balance Preliminer de la Economia Latino Americana 1986

   (Santiago Chile).

Choski, A., and Papageorgiou, D. 1986 (eds.), Economic Liberalization itt

   Developing   Countries, (Oxford: Blackwell).

Collins, S. and Park, W.A. 1987, "External Debt, arid Macroeconomic

   Performance in Korea," unpublished NBER ms.

Conrad, R., and Gillis, M. 1984, "The Indonesian Tax Reform of 1983,"

   Harvard Institute for International Development, Discussion Paper #162.

Corbo, V., de Melo, J., and Tybout, J. 1986, "What Went Wrong in the

   Southern Cone," Economic Development and Cultural Change (April).

Cuddington, J. 1986, Capital Flight: Estimates. Issues and Explanations

   (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Studies in International Finance).

Cumby, R.., and Levich, R. 1987, "On the Definition arid Magnitude of Recent

   Capital Flight," NBER Working Paper #2275.

de la Cuadra, S., and Hachette, D. 1986, "The Timing and Sequencing of Trade

   Liberalization Policy: The Case of Chile," unpublished ms, Catholic

   University of Chile.

Diaz Alejandro, ?. 1963, Devaluation in a Semi-Industrial Country

   (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

_________ 1984, "Good Bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash,"

   Journal of Development Economics.

Dorrtbusch, R. 1987a, "Debt Problems and the World Macroeconomy," this

   volume.
        — 1987b,      Our LDC Debts," forthcoming in M. Feldstein (ed.), Ih.

  Us,   in the World Economy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Edwards, S. 1985, "Stabilization with Liberalization: An Evolution of the

  Years of Chile's Experience With Free Market Policies, 1973-1983,"

   Economic Development and Cultural Change (January).

__________ 1986, "Are Devaluations Contractionary?" Review of Economics and

   Statistics (August).

_________ l987a, Exchange Rate Misalignment in Developing Countries, NBER

  Working Paper.

__________ 1987b, "Terms of Trade, Exchange Rates and Labor Market Adjust-

   ments in Developing Countries," NBER Working Paper #2481 forthcoming in

   World Bank Economic Review.

__________ 1987c, "Tariffs, Terms of Trade and Real Exchange Rate in an

   Intertemporal Model of the Current Account," NBER Working Paper #2481.

_________ l987d, "The U.S. and Foreign Competition in Latin America," NBER
   Working Paper #2544 forthcoming in M. Feldstein (ed.), The U.S. in the

   World Economy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

__________   l987d,   "Exchange Controls, Devaluations and Real Exchange Rates:

   The Latin American Experience," paper presented at Conference on Exchange

   Controls, Bogota Colombia (June).

             forthcoming, Real Exchange Rates. Devaluations and Adjustment

   (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

_________ and Cox-Edwards, A. 1987, Monetarism and Liberalization: The

   Chilean Experiment (Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing Co.)

Fischer, S. 1986, "Issues in Medium Term Macroeconomic Adjustment," World

   Bank Research Observer (July).
                                    62




Hilimart A., Tower, E., and Fishelson, F. 1980, "On Water in the Quota,"

   Canadian Journal of Economic (May).

International Monetary Fund 1987, World Economic Outlook (April).

Khan, M., and Knight, H. 1985, Fund Supported Adjustment Programs and

   Economic Growth, (Washington, DC: IMF Occasional Paper No. 41).

Krueger, A.O. 1978, Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:

   Liberalization Attempts and Conseguences (Cambridge, MA: Ballinger

   Publishing Co.)

__________ 1981, "Interaction Between Inflation and Trade Regime Objectives

   in Stabilization Programs," in W. Cithe and S. Weintraub (eds.), Economic

   Stabilization in Developing Countries (Washington, DC: Brookings

   Institution).

__________ 1983, Trade and Employment in Developing Countries: Synthesis

   and Conclusions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

_________ 1986, "Problems of Liberalization," in A. Choksi and D.
   Papageorgious (eds.) Economic Liberalization in Developing Countries

   (Oxford: Blackwell).

_________ 1987, "The Problems of LDC Debt," paper presented at the NBER
   Conference on the U.S. in the World Economy, West Palm Beach.

Krumm, K. 1985, "Experiences with Foreign Exchange Rate Auctions," CPO

   Working Paper (Washington, DC: The World Bank).

Little, Ian M.D. 1982, Economic Development (New York: Basic Books).

            Scitovsky, T., and Scott, M. 1970, Industry and Trade in Some

   Developing Countries (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Lucas, R.E. 1985, "Economic Growth and Development," unpublished ms.

   University of Chicago.
                                            b3



McKinnort, J. (1973), Money and Capital in Economic Development (Washington,

    DC: Brookings Institution).

             1982, "The Order of Economic Liberalization: Lessons from Chile

   and Argentina," in K. Bruriner and A. Meltzer (eds.), Economic Policy in a

   World of Change (Amsterdam: North-Holland).

Michaely, M. ,   Papageorgiou,   D. ,   and Choksi, A. 19??, "The Phasing of a Trade

   Liberalization Policy: Preliminary Evidence," paper presented at AEA

   meeting, New Orleans.

Neary, P. 1978, "Dynamic Stability and the Theory of Factor-Market

   Distortions," American Economic Review, 671-682.

Ramos, J. 1986, Neoconservative Economics in the Southern Cone of South

   America (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press).

Rodriguez, C.A. 1983, "Politicas de Estabilizacion en la Economia Argentina

   1978-1982," Cuadernos de Economia (April).

Sachs, J. 1986, "Managing the LDC Debt Crisis," Brookings Papers on Economic

   Activity.

             1987, "Trade and Exchange Rate Policies in Growth Oriented

   Adjustment Programs," NBER Working Paper #2226.

Selowski, M. and van der Tak, H. 1986, "The Debt Problem and Growth," World

   Development (September).

Thomas, V. 1986, Linking Macroeconomic and Agricultural Policies for

   Adjustment with Growth (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press).

Woo, W.T. and Nasution, A. 1987, "Indonesia Economic Policies and Their

   Relation to External Debt Management," unpublished ms. NBER.

World Bank 1986, Korea: Managing the Industrial Transition (Washington, DC).

__________ 1976, World Development Report 1987 (Oxford: Oxford University

   Press).
                                                   TABLE   1.




                      Creditworthiness Indicators For Developing Countries:     1974-1988




                               1979    1980    1981      1982    1983    1984    1985       1986    1987    1988

A.   Ratio of External Debt to Exports of Goods and Services (percent)

All Developing Countries      90.8     81.6    94.6     120.1   133.3   133.7   147.8   167.5      168.6   160.7

15 Highly Indebteda           182.3   167.1   201.3     269.8   289.6   2/2.1   284.2   337.9      349.6   324.7

Western Hemisphere            197.7   183.5   210.3     273.8   290.3   277.1   295.5   354.7      367.6   342.2



B.   Debt Service Ratios to Exports of Goods and Services (percent)

All LDCs                       14.1    12.9    16.2      19.5    18.9    20.1    20.5       22.4    20.7    20.0

15 Highly Indebteda            34.7    29.6    39.0      49.4    42.5    41.1    38.7       43.9    40.7    39.5

Western Hemisphere             39.6    33.4    41.9      51.0    43.9    41.7    38.7       45.6    44.9    40.9




aArgentina   Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, Ecuador, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Peru,

 Philippines, Uruguay, Venezuela, and Yugoslavia.



Source:    IMF's World Economic Outlook, April, 1987.
                                       TABLE 2

             Index of Real Gross Domestic Product Per Capita In

                       Selected Latin American Countries

                                  (1970—100)



                1970     1975   1980      1981   1982 l91 1984        1985   1986

Argentina        100 105.9 107.5          99.2   92.6   93.9   94.3   88.7   92.2

Bolivia          100 117.3 120.6 118.3 107.6            95.7   89.7   85.8   80.4

Brazil           100 145.1 179.5 172.8 170.4 161.5 165.0 174.7 184.7

Colombia         100 118.2 137.9 138.0 136.4 134.7 136.1 136.6 140.7

Chile            100    81.8 109.1 113.4         95.8   93.6   98.1   98.8 101.9

Mexico           100 116.8 139.8 146.8 142.3 131.3 132.4 132.6 124.3
Peru             100 108.9 104.7 105.9 103.6            89.9   91.8   90.9   96.2

Venezuela        100 106.5 105.7 102.3 100.0            91.8   88.3   83.7   82.9




Source: CEPAL Anuarto Estadistico de America Latina y el Caribe. 1985 and

CEPAL Balance Prelirninar de la Economia Latinoamericana. 1986.
                                   TABLE 3
                                                                   *
      Estimates of Capital Flight in Selected Developing Countries
                               (Billions U.S. $)



                        1979     1980     1981     1982.   1983    1984


     Argentina           2.2      3.5        4.5    7.6     1.3      -3.4

     Brazil              1.3      2.0     -1.4      1.8     0.5        4.0

     Korea              -0.5     -0.7     -0.8      0.5    -0.7      -0.6

     Mexico             -1.1      2.2        2.6    4.7     9.3        2.6

                         0.0     -0.1        1.3    0.0    -1.5      -1.8
     Philippines

     Venezuela           3.0      4.8        5.4    3.2     3.1        4.0



*
 These estimates use Win. Clirie's definition of capital flight as computed

 by Cumby and Levich.

Source: Cumby and Levich (1987).
                                    TABLE 4

                     Current Account and Trade Balance For

                    15 Highly Indebted Countries: 1979-1988

                               (Billions U.S. $)



Year    Export (FOB)       Imports (FOB)      Trade Balance   Current Account

1979         94.2                96.1              -1.9            -24.6

1980        127.1               122.7               4.4            -29.5

1981        126.1               133.6              -7.5            -50.3

1982        111.5               108.3               3.2            -50.6

1983        111.1                82.8              28.3            -15.2

1984        123.4                80.2              43.2             -0.6

1985        119.2                78.4              40.8             -0.1

1986         98.6                75.7              22.9            -11.8

1987        101.5                83.3              18.8            -14.0

1988        112.2               90.3               22.3            -10.5



Source: IMF's World Economic Outlook (April 1987).
                                   TABLE 5

               Capital Inflows and Net Transfer of Resources

                        in Latin America: 1976-1986

                            (Billions of U.S. $)



Year   Net CaDital Inflows Net Interest Payments Net Transfer of Resources

1976           17.9                   6.8                11.1

1977           17.2                   8.2                 9.0

1978           26.2                  10.2                16.0
                                                                 — 12.3
1979           29.1                  13.6                15.5

1980           29.4                  17.9                11.5

1981           37.5                  27.1                10.4

1982           20.0                  38.7               -18.7

1983            3.2                  34.3               -31.2

1984            9.2                  36.2               -27.0    — -26.4

1985            2.4                  35.3               -32.9

1986            8.6                  30.7               -22.1




Source:   CEPAL, 1986, Table 14.
                                                             TABLE 6
                               Terms of Trade in Latin        America Between 1981 and 1986
                                                              -
                                                     (Index       1980—100)


                                                                                                              Cumulative
                                                                                                                 Rate
                                       Index                               Rate of Change (percent)           Of Change
                                                                                                              (percent)
                             1983   1984   1985       1986          1982       1983    1984    1985    1986    98I-J.986
Latin   America                87    92         88      80          -9.0        1.1     6.5    -5.0    -8.7      -20.0
Oil Exporters                  95    97         93      63         -10.3        5.0     2.0    -3.4   -32.2      -36.9
Bolivia                        97   112        110      86           4.0        2.7    16.4    -2.2   -21.5      -13.8
Ecuador                        82    96         85      58          -1.3      -17.7    17.0   -10.8   -31.9      -41.9
Mexico                         93    86         84      62         -13.9        6.7    -7.2    -2.3   -26.4      -38.1
Peru                           96    94         89      77          -9.5       19.7    -2.8    -5.1   -12.8      -22.6
Venezuela                     104   116        114      62          -7.9        8.9    12.1    -1.9    45.5      -38.0
Oil Importers                 82     89         83      94          -8.3       -0.1     9.4    -6.6    12.8       -6.0
Argentina                     82     99         87      75         -11.7       -4.6    21.0   -12.1   -13.3      -24.9
Brazil                        78     86         83     102          -6.0       -2.5    10.1    -3.4    22.6        1.6
Colombia                      94    101         97     114           2.2        8.3     6.9    -3.9    17.6       13.9
Costa Rica                    86     90         88     107          -2.0        2.8     5.2    -2.8    21.2        6.5
Chile                         84     78         72      79         -13.2        9.6    -6.3    -8.0     9.3      -21.3
El Salvador                   83     73         69      87           2.2      -11.8   -12.0    -5.0    26.6      -12.9
Guatemala                     85     88         83      95          -5.5        3.4     3.4    -6.0    14.3       -5.5
Haiti                         66     83         85    104            3.8      -10.7    26.1     2.7    22.5        4.4
Honduras                      93     96         76     95            3.6        0.9     3.2   -20.9    24.8      -5.4
Nicaragua                     83    105         97    119           -5.3       -3.3    26.9    -7.8   23.1       19.4
Panama                        91     95         97    105          -10.3        9.7     4.6    2.2     8.2        5.0
Paraguay                      90    134        110    102          -12.6       -3.9    49.8   -17.9   -7.2        2.3
Dominican Republic            77     85         72     83          -31.3       -5.5     9.7   -14.8   15.2      .16.9
Uruguay                       99     99         93     96            6.9        6.9     0.4    -5.6    2.6       -4.0
    •     I   LI,\I. I'18/
                              TABLE 7

             Gross Investment as Percentage of GDP

                    In Selected Debtor Countries

                             (Percent)



                             Average 1975-80       1984

          Argentina                25.2            17.8

          Bolivia                  29.5            28.5

          Brazil                   25.9            170a

          Chile                    13.2            13.7

          Cote d'Ivoire            26.5            221a
          Mexico                    24.4           203a

          Migeria                   25.3           14.4

          Peru                      16.6           16.0

          Philippines               30.1           17.1

          Venezuela                 34.3           16.0



a1983

Source: International Monetary Fund.
                                       TABLE 8

                          Monetary Policy, Fiscal Policy and

                    Inflation in Highly Indebted Countries



                                       Central Government

           Annual Percentage           Fiscal Deficits as      Average Percentage
Year                                                                              a
          Change of Broad Money        Percentage of GDP        Chanze of CPI

1979               51.8                          0.8                  40.8

1980               55.2                          0.8                  47.4

1981              64.0                           3.7                   53.2

1982              69.3                           5.4                  57.7

1983              86.7                           5.2                  90.8
1984             117.7                           3.1                 116.4
1985             125.4                           2.7                 126.9    -


1986              73.9                           4.5                  76.2
1987               n. a.                         3.6                  86.3

1988               n.a.                          n.a.                 87.2


a
 Ave rage annual inflation for 1969-78 was 28.5%.

Source:   International Monetary Fund.
                                    TABLE 9

          Evolution of Real Wages in Selected Latin American Countries

                             (Percentage Variation)



                  1981.    1982     1983      1984    1985     Present Crisisa

                  -10.6     .10.4    25.5      26.4   -15.2              7.8
Argentina

Brazil              8.5     12.1      -7.3     -6.7     7.1          12.6

Colombia            1.4      3.4      5.2       7.4    -2.9           13.4

Costa Rica        -11.7     -19.8    10.9       7.8     8.9              -7.8


Chile               9.1      -0.4    -10.6      0.3     ..45         -14.8

Ecuador           -13.8     -11.9    -16.2     -1.3    -3.2          -39.2

Mexico              3.6      0.8     -22.7     -6.2     1.2          -26.1

Peru                -1.7     2.3      16.8    -15.2    -15.3         -38.9

Uruguay             7.5      -0.3    -20.7     -9.2    14.1          -18.1




aSince the crisis did not begin simultaneously in all the countries

 included, cumulative variations have been calculated over different periods

 in order to reflect the impact of adjustment on real wages more accurately.

 Figures in this column thus show the variation registered between 1980 and

 1985 for Colombia, Chile, Mexico, Peru and Uruguay.


Source: CEPAL (1986).
                                   TABLE 10

              Real. Effective Exchange Rate Indices, 1980—100

                             (Trade Weight at 1980)




        Argentina   Bolivia     Brazil    Chile       Mexico    Peru    Venezuela

1980     100.00     100.00      100.00   100.00       100.00   100.00    100.00

1981      99.11      79.75       84.06    85.52        87.97    85.77     89.00

1982     177.98      58.21       77.60    92.00       112.34    81.15     80.66

1983     188.62      71.15       91.10   115.91       132.97    85.59     75.51

1984     139.35      28.42      102.65   118.12       114.66    87.91    105.67

1985     173.78       9.5       103.85   145.52       106.22   101.91    104.81

1986     203.71     103.93      111.68   162.39       135.61    84.98    100.81




Note: An increase of this index indicates real devaluation, while a

       decline is a real appreciation. These real effective exchange rate

       indexes have been computed as trade weighted geometric average of the

       bilateral exchange rates adjusted by the ratio of domestic consumer

       price index to the corresponding trade partner wholesale price index.
                                TABLE II

                Rate of Devaluation and Rate of Inflation

                       In Selected Debtor Countries



                     Averaze Annual Devaluation Average Annual Inflation

                             (percent)                      (percent)

Argentina                       301.2                         366.5

Brazil                          195.1                         175.5

Chile                            39.5                          24.2

Cote d'Ivoire                     1.3                          19.9

Mexico                           81.5                          76.9

Nigeria                          18.9                          219a
Peru                            111.4                         113.5

Philippines                      24.3                          19.6'


Venezuela                        17.1                          10.3




a19821985

Source: International Financial Statistics.
                                 TABLE 12

                Examples of Additional Trade Restrictions

                         During the 1982-86 Period



Mexico    1982: QRs were imposed on all imports (during the 1970-80 decade

          QRs only affected 60 percent of imports).



Argentine 1984: Decree 4070: All imports required a permit. All imports

          competing with local production are subject to authorization

          (with consultations to domestic producers' associations).

          1985: Tariff surcharge of 10 percent over imports and 9 percent

          for exports.



Venezuela 1983: Foreign exchange controls and a two tier official exchange

          rate system. QRs on 70 percent of final consumption goods.



Chile     1982: Import surcharges ranging from 4 to 28% imposed on more

          than 30 items. Alson, two tier exchange rate established.

          1983: Import tariffs raised from 10% to uniform 20%.

          1984: Import tariffs temporarily hiked to 35 percent.

          1985: The uniform import duty system is stabilized at 20% (from

          the earlier uniform level of 10%).



Source: The World Bank
                                    TABLE 13

               Summary of Evolution of Exchange Controls and

            Trade Restrictions After Enactment of Stabilization

               Programs in Selected Latin American Countries

                       Payments              Tariffs,          Restrictions
                   Restrictions on        Duties and Cost-      on Capital
Country     Year Current Transactions     Related Measures      Transactions

Argentina   1970 'Decreasing restric- •Short run liber-       •Increased
                  tions for one year.  alization; abrupt       restrictiveness.
                  Then highly           increase in
                  restrictive,          tariffs 6 mths.
                                       after dev.

Bolivia     1972 •No significant         •No change for 1     •No change.
                  changes.                yr. Rapid in-
                                          crease in tariffs
                                          1 yr. after.

Bolivia     1979 •No significant         'Mild liberaliza-    .Slight liberal-
                  changes.                tion.                ization of
                                                               capital movement
                                                               ceilings.

Colombia    1962 .Decreasing.            •Liberalization of •No change.
                                          advanced deposits.                   -


Colombia    1965 'Short-lived            'Short-lived lib-    'After 14 mths.
                  liberalization.         eralization of       restrictions
                                          advanced deposits. greatly hiked.

Costa Rica 1974 'Very short run          •Short run liber-   •Restrictions on
                  liberalization.         alization tariffs   capital flows
                                          were later raised, introduced.

Ecuador     1961 •No clear pattern.      •No change in        'No change.
                                          tariffs; increase
                                          in advanced
                                          deposits rates.

Ecuador     1970 .Slight liberal-        •Mild reduction in •Mild liberal-
                  ization.                tariffs; important ization of
                                          liberalization of  capital movement
                                          advanced deposits. restrictions.

Nicaragua   1979 'Very slight            •No changes.         'Very sharp
                  libera1ization.                              increase in
                                                               degree of
                                                               restrictions.
Table 13 (cant)

                         Payments            Tariffs,          Restrictions
                     Restrictions on      Duties and Cost-      on Capital
Country       Y1 Current Transactions     Related Measures      Transactions

Peru          1967 •Increased restrict- •Tariffs raised.     .Sharp increase
                    iveness.                                  in restrictions.

Venezuela     1964 •Slight increase in   •No change.         •No change.
                    restrictiveness.

Chile         1982 •No changes for 2     •Slight increase    .Slight reduction
                    years.                in tariffs; no      and then
                                          advanced            increase in
                                          deposits.           restrictions.

Colombia      1967 •Slow liberaliza-     •Slow liberaliza-   •Mild liberal-
                    tion.                tion.                ization.

Peru          1975 •No significant       •Increase in        .Slight
                    change.               tariffs levels,     liberalization.



Source: Constructed from information obtained from various issues of the

           IMF's Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange

           Restrictions and from various issues of Picks Yearbook and World

           Currencies Yearbook.
                                    TABLE 14

                Taxes on International Trade as a Percentage of

            Government Revenue: Selected Developing Countries, 1984




                              Import Tariffs            Taxes on Trade r
                             Total Tax Revenue J       I TotalRevenue )


                                    4.9%                         13.3%
Argentina

Bolivia                             25.6%                        30.0%

Chile                               13.4%                        10.8%

Indonesia                            3.5%                         3.3%

Korea                               16.1%                        14.0%

                                    22.1%                        23.7%
Philippines

Peru                                10.2%                         n.a.

Mexico                               3.0%                         2.7%




aRefers to central government.

Source: Constructed from raw data from the International Monetary Fund's

            Government Finances Statistics Yearbook.
                                    TABLE 15

         Growth of Real GD? in Devaluing and on Devaluing Countries

                                    (Percent)

                          First                  Median          Third

                         Quartile                               quartile

A. 39 Devaluation Countries

3 Years Before                7.4                  6.0                4.7

2 Years Before                8.4                  6.1                3.6

1 Year   Before               7.3                  5.4                2.3

Year of Deval.                6.1                  4.2                1.2

1 Year   After                6.4                  4.7                3.1

2 Years After                 6.4                  4.7                3.1

3 Years After                 9.2                  5.8                3.2



B. Control Crouo of 29 Non Devaluing Countries

                              7.4                  6.4                4.5




Source: Edwards (forthcoming).
                                    TABLE 16

                       Devaluations and Income Distribution

          (percentage of compensation to employees with respect to GDP)

              Year of
              Devalua-                            Dev. Yr.
               tion    -4     -3     -2     -1       0         +1     +2     +3

Argentina       1970   40     41     40     40        41       42     39     43

Bolivia         1971   37     37     34     36        35       32     30     33
                1979   33     34     35     35        36       36    n.a.   na.
                1982   35     36     36    n.a       n.a.     n.a.   n.a.   n.a.

Chile           1982   39     36     38     40       n.a.     na.    n.a.   n.a.

Colombia       1962 n.a.     n.a.    34     36        38       38     36     37
               1964    34     36     38     38        36       37     36     37
               1965    36     38     38     36        37       36     37     36
               1967    38     36     37     36        37       36     38     38

Costa Rica     1974    47     48     48     45        45       46     47     45

Cyprus1        1067    87     87     88     87        88       88     88     88

Ecuador        1961 n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    28        29       29     29     28
               1970    27     27     28     28        29       30     28     26
               1982    28     28     32     30        29      n.a.   n.a.   n.a.

Egypt2         1962 n.a.     n.a.    39     41        42       42     40     41
               1979    46     39     38     37        33       34    n.a.   n.a.

Guyana         1967    47     47     48     49        49       49     48     49

India          1966    73     72     74     72        74       77     75     74

Indonesia1     1978    89     89     89     89        89       89     90     90

Israel         1962 n.a.     n.a.    44     44        44       44     45     48
               1967  44       45     48     50        50       46     44     47
               1971    50     46     44     47        46       43     45     43

Jamaica        1967    50     50     50     46        47       48     49     50
               1978    54     56     57     56        52       51     51     53

Kenya          1981    32     34     35     35       n.a.     n.a.   n.a.   n.a.

Korea          1980    32     33     37     36        37       35     38

Malta          1967    49     50     49     47        47       47     47     50
Table 16 (cont.)

                                                      Dev. Yr.
                Year   -4     -3        -2       -l      0        ÷1     ÷2     +3

Kexico          1976   37     36       37        38        40     39     38     38
                1982   38     38       36        37        36    n.a.   n.a.   n.a.


nicaragua       1979   54     55        54       56       n.a.   n.a.   n.a.   n.a.

Pakistan1       1972   87     81       84        85        85     86     88     86
                1982   86     84       83        84        84    n.a.   n.a.   n.a.

Peru            1975   36     38        39       37        37     37     37     32

Philippines1 1962 n.a.       n.a.       88       87        87     86     86     86
                1970   86     86        86       86        84     83     83     82

Sri Lanka       1967   45     41       43        42        41     41     39     36


Venezuela       1964   45     45       42        43        43     43     44




1(Compensation to employees +       operating   surplus)/CDP.
2
    Year beginning July 1.

Source: United Nations, Yearbook of National Accounts Statistics.
