                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE EFFECTS OF CONVENTIONAL AND UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY
                       POLICY ON EXCHANGE RATES

                                        Atsushi Inoue
                                        Barbara Rossi

                                     Working Paper 25021
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25021


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




Supported by the Fundacion BBVA scientific research grant (PR16 DAT 0043) on Analysis of
Big Data in Economics and Empirical Applications and the Cerca Programme/Generalitat de
Catalunya. We thank Jordi Galí, Refet Gürkaynak, James Morley, Giovanni Ricco, Jonathan
Wright, seminar participants at the 2018 ISoM conference, 2018 ASSA, UCL, Tor Vergata, Bank
of Russia, the 2018 Royal Economic Society conference as well as Lukas Hoesch for excellent
research assistance and Silvia Miranda-Agrippino for help with the UK data. The Barcelona GSE
acknowledges financial support from the Spanish ministry of the Economy and Competitiveness
through the Severo Ochoa Programme for Centers of Excellence in R&D (SEV-2015-0563). The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Atsushi Inoue and Barbara Rossi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates
Atsushi Inoue and Barbara Rossi
NBER Working Paper No. 25021
September 2018
JEL No. C22,C53,F31,F37

                                          ABSTRACT

What are the effects of monetary policy on exchange rates? And have unconventional monetary
policies changed the way monetary policy is transmitted to international financial markets?
According to conventional wisdom, expansionary monetary policy shocks in a country lead to
that country's currency depreciation. We revisit the conventional wisdom during both
conventional and unconventional monetary policy periods in the US by using a novel
identification procedure that defines monetary policy shocks as changes in the whole yield curve
due to unanticipated monetary policy moves and allows monetary policy shocks to differ
depending on how they affect agents' expectations about the future path of interest rates as well as
their perceived effects on the riskiness/uncertainty in the economy. Our empirical results show
that: (i) a monetary policy easing leads to a depreciation of the country's spot nominal exchange
rate in both conventional and unconventional periods; (ii) however, there is substantial
heterogeneity in monetary policy shocks over time and their effects depend on the way they affect
agents' expectations;(iii) we find favorable evidence to Dornbusch's (1976) overshooting
hypothesis.


Atsushi Inoue
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 37235
atsushi.inoue@vanderbilt.edu

Barbara Rossi
CREI
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Carrer Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27
08005 Barcelona, Spain
Spain
barbara.rossi@upf.edu
1     Introduction
Central banks have recently been forced to rely on unconventional monetary policies due
to the ine¤ectiveness of conventional policies at the zero lower bound. The unconventional
policies include altering the size and composition of Central banks’balance sheets (i.e. Large
Scale Asset Purchases programs, or LSAP) and/or issuing announcements about the future
path of short-term interest rates (i.e. forward guidance). Have these new policies a¤ected the
way monetary policy shocks are transmitted to international …nancial markets, in particular
exchange rates? And do the e¤ects di¤er depending on how monetary policy a¤ects agents’
expectations regarding the future path of interest rates? Regarding the …rst question, several
studies have found that conventional, expansionary monetary policies typically depreciate
the exchange rate of the country implementing such policies (see e.g. Clarida and Galí, 1994,
Eichenbaum and Evans, 1996, among others). However, during the recent decade, the imple-
mentation of unconventional monetary policy has become more and more frequent: whether
the way monetary policy a¤ects international …nancial markets has changed as well is an
open question. Furthermore, regarding the second question, monetary policy shocks are typ-
ically identi…ed in the literature as unexpected changes in short-term interest rates that are
exogenous to the state of the economy (cfr. Eichenbaum and Evans, 1996). However, mone-
tary policy may have other dimensions, both in the conventional and in the unconventional
period, as its e¤ects may depend on how it a¤ects agents’ perception of future expected
monetary policy, riskiness and uncertainty in the economy. For example, Gürkaynak, Sack
and Swanson (2005a) …nd that monetary policy announcements have important e¤ects on
the term structure of interest rates even if the short-term interest rate did not change.
    To answer these questions, we use a new approach to the identi…cation of monetary
policy shocks, where shocks are de…ned as shifts in the entire term structure of interest rates
on a day of a monetary policy announcement. Our framework di¤ers from the traditional
literature since it naturally captures alternative dimensions of monetary policy (such as
forward guidance and asset purchases programs announcements) embedded in shifts of the
whole term structure triggered by unexpected monetary policy moves. The approach is
inspired by Inoue and Rossi’s (2017) Functional VARs, although we considerably depart


                                              3
from it by using a non-parametric approach without taking a stand on the speci…cation of
term structure models. Relative to using factor models to parameterize the term structure,
using a selection of raw yields allows us to be robust to the possibility that the number of
factors that are relevant to explain exchange rate ‡uctuations may change over time, or that
additional factors might be important in speci…c episodes.
   By examining the exchange rates of the UK, Europe, Canada and Japan vis-a’-vis the US
dollar, we …nd that a country’s monetary policy tightening in the conventional period gener-
ally leads to an appreciation of that country’s nominal spot exchange rate, a result consistent
with Clarida and Galí (1994), Eichenbaum and Evans (1996) and Faust and Rogers (2003).
However, interestingly, the e¤ects on exchange rates di¤er depending on how monetary pol-
icy a¤ects agents’expectations as well as its perceived e¤ects on the riskiness/uncertainty in
the economy in speci…c episodes. In particular, on average across episodes, the appreciation
(depreciation) that follows a contractionary (expansionary) monetary policy shock is mostly
due to changes in expectations in the short-run, although changes in medium to long-term
expectations turn out to be important in selected episodes. The possibility that monetary
policy might be multi-dimensional was …rst discussed and empirically investigated in the
seminal work by Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005a). In this paper we take their analysis
a step further: in fact, our approach can be viewed as a way to systematically capture all
the various dimensions in which monetary policy a¤ects international …nancial markets via
changes in agents’expectations and perception of risk/uncertainty in the economy, and their
time variation.
   At our daily frequency, we also …nd empirical evidence in favor of Dornbusch’s (1976)
overshooting hypothesis. This result is considerably di¤erent from similar analyses, based on
monthly or quarterly data, that typically …nd that the US dollar continues to appreciate for a
substantial period of time after a US contractionary monetary policy shock (e.g. Eichenbaum
and Evans, 1995).
   Since the de…nition of the monetary policy shock is the same no matter whether monetary
policy is conventional or unconventional, we can consistently compare the e¤ects of monetary
policy in the two regimes. The e¤ects of unconventional monetary policy on spot exchange



                                              4
rates are qualitatively similar to those in conventional times; hence, monetary policy did
not lose its e¤ectiveness in unconventional times. However, the exchange rate depreciation
following an unconventional monetary policy easing is mostly due to changes in expectations
in the medium- to long-run.
   Our work is related to the vast literature that studies the e¤ects of monetary policy on
exchange rates. It is well-known that expansionary shocks typically lead to a depreciation of
the currency –see Clarida and Galí, 1994; Eichenbaum and Evans, 1996; Faust and Rogers,
2003; Scholl and Uhlig, 2008; Bouakez and Normandin, 2010, among others. However,
the latter papers focus on the conventional monetary policy period, where monetary policy
shocks can be identi…ed as exogenous changes in short-term interest rates; the e¤ects of
unconventional monetary policy shocks, instead, are relatively less studied. Recent papers
that focus on the unconventional period are Rogers, Scotti and Wright (2014, 2016) and
Glick and Leduc (2015). As unconventional monetary policies are a combination of asset
purchases and forward guidance, they estimate monetary policy surprises in a short window
of time around monetary policy announcements. Rogers, Scotti and Wright (2014) study the
e¤ects of monetary policy shocks identi…ed in two principal components extracted from a
cross-section of yields on bond yields, stock prices and exchange rates for the US, UK, Euro-
area and Japan. Rogers, Scotti and Wright (2016) estimate the e¤ects of unconventional
monetary policy surprises on both excess returns on carry trade portfolios as well as a
variety of macroeconomic variables (bond yields, exchange rates, employment, in‡ation and
interest rate spreads) and foreign risk premia in a VAR with external instruments. Glick and
Leduc (2015) distinguish between changes in the Fed Funds Rate (FFR) around monetary
policy announcements; changes in the one-year ahead euro-dollar future rate (short-run path
surprises); and changes in the …rst principal component from several long-term Treasury
rate futures (long-run path surprises). They …nd that monetary policy is e¤ective in both
conventional and unconventional periods. Also, in the conventional period, the U.S. dollar
depreciates in response to a short-term easing but not to a long-term one; on the contrary,
in the unconventional period, the U.S. dollar depreciates in response to both short-term and
long-term path surprises. Our paper di¤ers from these contributions in several ways. A …rst



                                             5
di¤erence is that, in the latter papers, the shock is the exogenous change in the principal
component(s) extracted from a cross section of interest rates, while in our work the shock is
the shift in the entire term structure due to an exogenous monetary policy move. It is the
analysis of how the whole yield curve shifts over time that allows us to crucially di¤erentiate
our results from those existing in the literature. In fact, we use an alternative measure
of monetary policy shocks that allows shocks to potentially di¤er in each monetary policy
episode depending on how the shock is perceived by the agents at di¤erent horizons. A
second, important di¤erence is that Rogers, Scotti and Wright (2014) and Glick and Leduc
(2015) use an event study approach which allows them to estimate the contemporaneous
correlation between changes in the term structure due to monetary policy on speci…c dates
and the exchange rate, but is otherwise silent on the dynamic e¤ects; in contrast, our paper
estimates the whole dynamic impulse response. Rogers, Scotti and Wright (2014, 2016) also
complement their analyses with VARs using either heteroskedasticity-based identi…cation (as
in Rogers, Scotti and Wright, 2014, and Wright, 2012), or external instruments (as in Rogers,
Scotti and Wright, 2016) to trace out the e¤ects of monetary policy shocks over time. Our
approach instead relies on the Functional VAR approach (Inoue and Rossi, 2017a), which
provides the dynamic response to the shift in the whole term structure. Finally, our analysis
naturally leads to time-varying responses of exchange rates that fundamentally depend on
the ways in which monetary policy a¤ects agents’expectations of current and future interest
rates as well as the risk and uncertainty in the economy. Our results that the e¤ects of
monetary policy on exchange rates are similar in the conventional and unconventional periods
are consistent with Neely (2015).
   In a related paper, Galí (2018) analyzes the e¤ectiveness of forward guidance in open
economies. According to economic theory, under standard economic assumptions, the im-
pact of an announcement of a future adjustment in interest rates on the current exchange
rate either does not depend on the timing of the adjustment or it is larger the longer the
horizon of implementation, depending on whether prices are assumed to be …xed or ‡exible.
Empirically, however, Galí (2018) …nds instead that expectations of interest rate di¤eren-
tials in the near (distant) future have larger (smaller) e¤ects than implied by theory. Since



                                              6
the theory is inconsistent with the empirical results, he concludes that there is a forward
guidance exchange rate puzzle. In this paper, instead, we focus on the overall response of
exchange rates to a monetary policy "event", which is de…ned as the shift in the entire term
structure around monetary policy announcement dates, as opposed to interest rate changes
at selected maturities.1
       Our paper is also related to the literature that measures the e¤ects of unconventional
monetary policy on the yield curve, and more broadly the literature on the e¤ects of mon-
etary policy announcements using high-frequency identi…cation, such as Kuttner (2001),
Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005a, 2005b, 2007), Wright (2012) and Altavilla and Gi-
annone (2017). While our work builds on these contributions, it substantially di¤ers from
them: unlike these papers, which focus only on the e¤ects of monetary policy on yields at
speci…c maturities, we use instead shifts in the whole yield curve to identify unconventional
monetary policy shocks; furthermore, we study their e¤ects on exchange rates by measuring
the response of exchange rates to the whole shift in the term structure due to the policy
itself.
       The paper is structured as follows. Sections 2 and 3 describe the data and the empirical
approach, respectively. Section 4 presents the empirical results on the e¤ects of monetary
policy shocks on exchange rates in conventional times, while Section 5 discusses the results
for the unconventional period. Section 6 provides an economic analysis of speci…c episodes
and Section 7 discusses the robustness of the results to the presence of informational e¤ects.
Section 8 discusses the implications for Uncovered Interest Rate Parity and Section 9 inves-
tigates which expectations matter the most in di¤erent monetary policy regimes. Section 10
concludes.
   1
       There are several other di¤erences between our work and Galí (2018). One such di¤erence is that Galí’s
(2018) results are unconditional, i.e. independent on which shocks a¤ect agents’ expectations of interest
rates, whereas we condition on monetary policy announcements. Another di¤erence is that our data are
nominal, rather than real, although nominal and real exchange rates are highly correlated.




                                                       7
2         The Data
The term structure data are daily zero-coupon yields (mnemonics "SVENY") from Gürkay-
nak, Sack and Wright (2007) and include yields at 1 to 30 years maturities. The daily
frequency is dictated by the availability of the data. The 3- and 6-month daily zero-coupon
yields are from the Federal Reserve Board (Fed) H-15 release. The data are from Janu-
ary 1995 to June 2016. The sample starts in 1995 due to the fact that the Fed did not
release statements of monetary policy decisions after its Federal Open Market Committee
meetings before 1994. Note that the frequency of the data is daily. While one might be
interested in investigating the identi…cation at a higher frequency, Gürkaynak, Sack and
Swanson (2007a) show that daily data are su¢ cient for extracting monetary policy shocks
using a high-frequency identi…cation if the sample is limited to post-1995 data, which is our
case.
        The nominal bilateral exchange rate data for the Euro, British pound, Canadian dollar
and the Yen vis-a’-vis the U.S. dollar (respectively denoted by EURUS, GBPUS, CADUS
and YENUS) are from Bloomberg. We calculate the daily exchange rate change (measured
as foreign currency units for one US dollar) as the (log of the) value at the end of the day
minus that at the end of the previous day.2 The exchange rate data are in units of foreign
currency for one US dollar (USD); thus, in this paper, an increase in the exchange rate
denotes an appreciation of the US dollar relative to the foreign currency.
        The dates of US conventional monetary policy announcements are from Nakamura and
Steinsson (2018) and include Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings. The un-
conventional monetary policy announcement dates are instead from Wright (2012), although
we updated them to the end of our sample. In particular, the unconventional monetary pol-
icy dates include the announcements of the start of LSAP-I on November 25, 2008; LSAP-II
on August 10, 2010; and LSAP-III on September 13, 2012; as well as announcements of
additional Treasury and bond purchases, among others.3
    2
        The EUR/USD series starts on 1/1/2000.
    3
        See Inoue and Rossi (2017a) and its Not-for-Publication Appendix (Inoue and Rossi, 2017b) for details
on the announcement dates.



                                                       8
3       The Empirical Approach
Our goal is to measure the e¤ects of monetary policy on exchange rates using a more com-
prehensive measure of monetary policy shocks. Our measure of monetary policy shocks is
an exogenous shift in the entire term structure of interest rates. The idea is that the term
structure contains important information on the expected path of future interest rates as well
as any changes perceived by …nancial markets, associated with their perception of riskiness
and uncertainty in the economy. In what follows, we …rst describe our approach to shock
identi…cation; then, we discuss how we estimate the exchange rate responses.


3.1      Shock Identi…cation

Let Y   ;t   denote the yield to maturity at time t, where                  is the maturity. We assume that, on
days of a monetary policy announcement, the change in the yield curve is mainly caused by
monetary policy actions. The monetary policy shock is thus the change in the term structure
on the day of the announcement:

                                                   "mp
                                                    t ( ) =     Y   ;t   dt ;

where        Y   ;t   Y   ;t   Y   ;t 1   is the change in the yield curve as a function of maturity    on any
day t; dt is a dummy variable equal to unity on a day of a monetary policy announcement,
and zero otherwise. Each monetary policy shock can be potentially di¤erent: for example,
it could be a parallel shift in the term structure; or it could a¤ect its slope by a¤ecting more
(less) short-term interest rates relative to long-term ones; or it could a¤ect the curvature
by a¤ecting the medium-term rates more than the rest of the maturities – or, it could be
a combination of all these. These di¤erent dimensions of monetary policy are embedded in
changes in the yield curve associated with monetary policy moves, which we estimate by
"mp
 t ( ) (see Inoue and Rossi, 2017a). Note that the monetary policy shock depends on the

maturity, .
    Figure 1 illustrates the approach. Panel A in the …gure plots a speci…c monetary policy
shock in the unconventional period. The solid line in the top graph in Figure 1, Panel A,
depicts the term structure before the announcement (made on 16/12/2008) that the Fed

                                                            9
Funds Rate reached the zero lower bound while the dotted line with asterisks depicts the
term structure right after the announcement. Clearly, the monetary policy event is associated
with a downward shift in the whole yield curve, especially at medium-term maturities. The
di¤erence between the term structure before and after the announcement is the monetary
policy shock that we use in this paper. The shock itself, "mp
                                                           t ( ), is plotted in the bottom

graph in Figure 1, Panel A: clearly the di¤erence between the yield curve before and after
the announcement is negative, indicating an expansionary shock, and larger at medium to
long maturities, indicating that the shock is mainly perceived in the medium run.
   Panel B in Figure 1 plots the shocks for several important monetary policy announce-
ments in the unconventional period, including announcements of LSAP-I, II and III (on
25/11/2008, 10/8/2010 and 13/9/2012, respectively), additional Treasury Purchases (3/11/2010)
and the maturity extension program (21/9/2011 and 20/6/2012). As it is clear from the pic-
tures, the monetary policy shocks appear to have di¤erent shapes depending on the type
of announcement. Our goal in the following sections is exactly to study how the di¤erent
shapes a¤ect exchange rates’responses.


                                INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE


   On the one hand, our approach to measuring monetary policy shocks is quite di¤erent
from that in the traditional exchange rate literature. In the traditional literature, such as
Clarida and Galí, 1994, and Eichenbaum and Evans, 1996), the monetary policy shock is
identi…ed as the exogenous change in the short-term interest rate (e.g. the Fed Funds rate
in the US). By considering changes in the whole term structure, we can comprehensively
measure the overall stance of an exogenous monetary policy action, whether it is just an
unexpected change in the short-term interest rate or the shift in …nancial market expectations
of future interest rates associated to, e.g., quantitative easing (QE) announcements. On the
other hand, our "high-frequency" identi…cation approach builds on Gürkaynak, Sack and
Swanson (2005a,b, 2007), although it di¤ers from them as we focus on the change in both
the shape and the magnitude of the whole yield curve.


                                             10
   Measuring monetary policy shocks as shifts in the term structure in a short window of
time around a monetary policy announcement allows us to identify the exogenous variation
in monetary policy under the assumption that any other shocks during the same period of
time have only minor e¤ects. This assumption is credible in our context since the window
we rely upon is one day. The approach is convenient since it captures only monetary policy
changes that are fully unexpected by …nancial markets. At the same time, one might worry
that the change in expectations may be due to an informational e¤ect, rather than monetary
policy, if the Central bank conveys new information about the state of the economy during
its announcements; we verify below that this is not the case. Also, note that monetary
policy shocks that are intended by the policymaker to be expansionary may actually be
contractionary if they are not as expansionary as …nancial markets expect. Similarly to the
traditional high frequency identi…cation approach, such shocks will be contractionary in our
framework.
   We measure the monetary policy shock as the change in the US term structure in a
short window of time around the announcement date, as opposed to the change in the US
term structure relative to the foreign term structure: under the realistic assumption that the
foreign monetary policy authority does not react to a US shock within the same window of
time, we capture a genuine US monetary policy shock. On the other hand, the movements
in the US term structure may include changes in markets’ expectations of future foreign
yields; we incorporate this into our notion of a US monetary policy shock. The reason is
that we aim at constructing an overall, comprehensive shock measure. Hence, the same US
monetary policy shock may a¤ect di¤erent exchange rates in a di¤erent manner. In a later
section we consider term structure di¤erentials and the UIRP channel.


3.2    The Estimation of Exchange Rates’Responses

Let si;t denote the (log of the) nominal bilateral exchange rate of country i vis-a’-vis the US
dollar (USD) at time t, that is the units of that country’s currency for one US dollar. Thus,
an increase in si;t denotes an appreciation of the US dollar relative to the foreign country.
At each point in time, we estimate the response of the rate of growth of the exchange rate


                                              11
( si;t      si;t     si;t 1 ) to the monetary policy shock ("mp
                                                             t ( )) using Inoue and Rossi’s (2017)

Functional VAR approach as follows. Recall that the monetary policy shock is the shift in
the term structure on monetary policy announcement dates. We proxy the monetary policy
shock as a combination of the changes in the yields at di¤erent maturities on the day of
the announcement. We then separately estimate the e¤ect that each of these changes has
on the exchange rate using a VAR that includes the exchange rate and the changes in the
raw yields. Afterwards, we combine the changes in each of the yields at maturity                             on the
announcement day,                   Y ;t ; to obtain the overall e¤ect of the monetary policy event as the
linear combination of the changes in the term structure yields using as weights the derivative
of the exchange rate with respect to the respective yield. More formally:


                                              @ si;t+h   X
                                                         M

                                                mp     =    c(h) Y             ;t                                (1)
                                              @"t ( )    =1
                                                            X
                                                            M

                                                                    ;t                                           (2)
                                                               =1

where       Y   ;t   =     Y   ;t    dt is the change in the yield curve on a day of a monetary policy
                                                                         (h)            @ si;t+h
announcement (indicated by the dummy variable dt );4 c                          = Et     @ Y ;t
                                                                                                   are the (impulse)
response coe¢ cients to a shock in the yield curve at maturity                         (expressed in years) after h
periods, and are estimated from the following VAR:

                                                  A (L) Xt =    + ut ;                                           (3)

                                                                         0
where Xt =               si;t ; Y1=4;t ; Y1;t ; Y5;t ; Y10;t ; Y20;t ;5 h = 1; 2; :::; 15 is the horizon of
the response and the lag length is two.6 Note that the VAR does not include in‡ation or
output, di¤erently from e.g. Eichenbaum and Evans (1995). The reason is that the VAR is
   4
       The dummy variable dt equals one if there is a monetary policy announcement on date t and zero
otherwise.
   5
     An alternative approach is to use the entire yield curve …tted using a parametric model following Nelson
and Siegel (1987) and Diebold and Li (2006) – see Inoue and Rossi (2017) for the alternative parametric
approach.
   6
     That is, in practice, in the estimation we use the term structure at the following maturities: three
months, and 1, 5, 10 and 20 years.


                                                          12
estimated at the daily frequency, and the broader set of variables considered by Eichenbaum
and Evans are pre-determined at that frequency and will not respond within the horizon
of our responses (which is a few days). Thus, ignoring them will not bias inference. The
Appendix provides details on the VAR estimation.7
        To allow for changes in the transmission mechanism in di¤erent monetary policy periods,
we estimate eq. (3) in two sub-samples: the conventional monetary policy period (1995:1-
2008:10) and the unconventional period (2008:11-2016:6). Note that the start of the second
sub-sample is marked by the start of the …rst large scale asset purchasing program (LSAP-I),
dated November 25, 2008.
        In what follows, we separately analyze the e¤ects of conventional and unconventional
monetary policy. The next section focuses on monetary policy in conventional times, while
the following section focuses on unconventional times. We also decompose the response in
each component            ;t   separately and discuss the results in Section 9.



4         Measuring the E¤ects of Monetary Policy on Ex-
          change Rates in Conventional Times
In this section we study the e¤ects of monetary policy shocks on exchange rates in the
conventional monetary policy period. By conventional monetary policy we mean situations
where the monetary authority’s instrument is the short-term interest rate. In our data, the
conventional period lasts from the beginning of our sample until the end of October 2008
(included).
        Our results are depicted in Figure 2. Each of the …gures 2A-D corresponds to a di¤erent
exchange rate: the US dollar vis-a’-vis the UK pound (depicted in Figure 2A), the Euro
(Figure 2B), the Canadian dollar (Figure 2C) and the Yen (Figure 2D). In each …gure, we
separately consider contractionary and expansionary monetary policy moves as well as their
impact at the short- and medium-end of the term structure, depicted in four panels: Panels
    7
        The VAR is estimated using Bayesian methods to control for parameter proliferation –see the Appendix
for more details.



                                                      13
I and III focus on events traditionally referred to as contractionary monetary policy, as they
increase the short-term interest rate, while Panels II and IV focus on expansionary monetary
policy.


                                     INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE


      In particular, Panel I focuses on fully contractionary monetary policy shocks; that is,
shocks that are contractionary at both very short- and medium-term maturities,8 and where
the e¤ect at the medium-end of the term structure is even more contractionary than that
on short-term rates (that is,         Y1=4;t > 0 and      Y5;t      Y1=4;t > 0). The graph on the
right in Panel I depicts the monetary policy shock as a function of the maturity (in years).
Thus, the events depicted in Panel I correspond to monetary policy announcements where
the term structure increased at the selected maturities; in fact, the di¤erence between the
interest rates after and before the announcement ("mp
                                                   t ( )) is positive. Since the shock is

contractionary, agents revise their expectations of current and future interest rates upwards,
and even more so for future interest rates.
      Panel II, instead, considers fully expansionary shocks, that is shocks that decrease both
the short- and the medium-end of the term structure, and are such that the e¤ects are
perceived to be even more expansionary in the medium-run than in the short-run. We also
separately consider cases in which monetary policy is more contractionary at short than at
long maturities (Panel III), and cases in which monetary policy is less expansionary at long
than at short maturities (Panel IV). That is, Panel III focuses on cases in which agents expect
interest rates to increase in the short-run but not to increase as much (or even decrease) in
the long-run. On the contrary, Panel IV considers cases in which the reaction at the short
end of the yield curve is expansionary while medium-term yields do not decrease as much as
short-term ones (or may even increase).
      Each panel has two graphs: as we mentioned, the graph on the right-hand side depicts
the monetary policy shocks; on the left hand side, instead, we depict the exchange rate
  8
      The very short-term maturity is 3 months and the medium-term maturity is 5 years.



                                                   14
response to each of the shocks depicted on the right hand side. Note that each monetary
policy shock is potentially di¤erent in both magnitude and shape across maturities, as it can
potentially move the yield curve in a di¤erent way. Thus, we depict several exchange rate
responses, one for each of the monetary policy shocks. Note that the responses are in the
same units as the exchange rate (in growth rates).
       Our results show that, on average, for all the bilateral exchange rates that we consider, a
monetary policy tightening (easing) during the conventional monetary policy period generally
leads to an appreciation (depreciation) of the US dollar, consistently with the results in
Clarida and Galí (1994), Eichenbaum and Evans (1996) and Faust and Rogers (2003). This
result can be appreciated by looking at the two graphs in the top panels in Figures 1A-1D
that distinguish between shocks that are fully contractionary and fully expansionary (Panels
I and II). For all countries except Canada, a US monetary policy tightening typically results
in an appreciation of the US dollar. Similarly, a US monetary easing typically results in a
depreciation, as shown in Panel II, where the magnitude again depends on the speci…c shape
of the variation in the yield curve.
       Importantly, in most cases the exchange rate response is consistent with Dornbusch’s
(1976) overshooting model, which predicts that contractionary monetary policy shocks gen-
erate a large initial appreciation followed by subsequent depreciations. In fact, at the daily
frequency we do not observe the puzzling persistent appreciations typically seen in monthly
data studies such as Eichenbaum and Evans (1996).9
       However, note that the e¤ects of monetary policy depend on how it a¤ects agents’ ex-
pectations and their perception of risk in the short- versus the medium- and long-run. The
exchange rate response, in fact, depends on how the yield curve shifts as a result of monetary
policy moves. In the conventional identi…cation approach, shocks of di¤erent magnitude re-
sult in parallel shifts in the responses, as they only depend on the e¤ect of monetary policy
on interest rates at the short-term maturity; in our approach, shocks of di¤erent shape may
   9
       The responses we depict are for the change in the exchange rate. To obtain the responses of the level
of the exchange rate one needs to cumulate them. When the response changes sign after the initial impact,
the cumulative response will not be hump-shaped and, hence, it is consistent with Dornbusch’s (1976)
overshooting hypothesis.


                                                      15
result in exchange rate responses with more complex shapes.
   For example, notice how, in the UK pound-US dollar exchange rate, responses with very
similar short-run magnitude end up having very di¤erent e¤ects on exchange rates. For
example, in Panel III in Figure 2A, consider the two shocks associated with the highest
decrease in interest rates. Both shocks are characterized by an increase in the 3-month
maturity rate as well the same change of the (approximately) 13-year maturity rate, but a
very di¤erent change in medium-term rates. The shock that leads to an increase in medium-
term interest rates ends up causing an appreciation of the dollar, while the opposite is true
for the shock that leads to a decrease in medium-term rates. This example clearly illustrates
the di¤erences between the approach to identi…cation that we use in this paper and the
conventional identi…cation: in the conventional Cholesky identi…cation approach, these two
shocks would be indistinguishable since they are characterized by a similar increase in the
3-month interest rate, and would thus end up having a similar e¤ect on exchange rates.
However, it is clear that they do not have the same e¤ect in our approach. Furthermore,
this example clari…es how our approach is di¤erent from a VAR where researchers focus on
a few interest rates on selected maturities: by selecting only the 3-month and the 13-year
maturities, the researcher would be unable to distinguish the two shocks, as they are the
same at these maturities –thus leading to incorrect empirical conclusions, as the shocks are
very di¤erent at other maturities.
   Our results point to several di¤erences in the international transmission mechanism of
US monetary policy shocks. In fact, note how di¤erent the responses of the exchange rate
are to the same US monetary policy shock. For example, the e¤ects of a US monetary policy
easing are larger in Japan than in any of the other countries.
   Panel III in Figures 2A-D focuses on the case where the monetary policy shock is con-
tractionary at short maturities but is perceived not quite as contractionary at medium-term
maturities, that is, the 5-year interest rate is expected to be lower than the 3-month one.
Such shocks typically lead to a short-run appreciation of the US dollar or, only in the case
of Canada, to a short-run depreciation. On the contrary, Panel IV depicts results for the
case where the shock is perceived to be expansionary in the short-run but not as much



                                             16
in the medium run; in such cases, the exchange rate may either appreciate or depreciate.
Again, one can immediately appreciate how di¤erent this result would be in the conventional
identi…cation approach, which only focuses on changes in short-term rates.


                                  INSERT FIGURE 3 HERE


   We now turn to discussing in detail the di¤erences between our results and the traditional
approach. Note that the information in the raw yield curve data at the shortest maturities
is described by the 3-month maturity rate, Y1=4;t . Thus, one can replicate the traditional
approach typically adopted in the literature (maintaining the high frequency identi…cation)
as the special case where the VAR includes only the exchange rate and Y1=4;t . In that case,
the response of the exchange rate to the monetary policy shock is:

                                   @ si;t+h    (h)
                                            = c1=4   Y1=4;t ;                            (4)
                                    @"trad
                                      t
       (h)        @ si;t+h
where c1=4 = Et   @ Y1=4;t
                             . Note that the magnitude of the responses in our framework is
di¤erent from that in the traditional approach, however. In our approach, the magnitude
of the response is the actual change in the rate of growth of the exchange rate due to the
monetary policy shock, and it is not normalized in standard deviation units. Hence, our
responses cannot be directly compared to those in the literature. Furthermore, most of
the previous literature estimates VARs with exchange rates in levels rather than in …rst
di¤erences.
   Figure 3 revisits the empirical evidence based on the traditional approach, eq. (4). We
distinguish between expansionary and contractionary monetary policy, depending on whether
the change in the 3-month rate is positive or negative. Our results con…rm that, even in our
review of the traditional approach, contractionary (expansionary) shocks lead to currency’s
appreciation (depreciation).
   Notice however how, in the traditional approach, the responses are proportional to each
other: in fact, other dimensions of monetary policy besides changes in the 3-month interest
rate are completely ignored and the exchange rate responses are the same up to a scaling

                                              17
factor, the magnitude depending on the change in the (scalar value of the) short-term interest
rate. In fact, the reason why only one response is reported in the conventional approach is
exactly because the responses are proportional to each other and they only di¤er by the
magnitude of the contemporaneous e¤ect. In particular, notice how an expansionary shock
in this case always leads to an exchange rate depreciation, no matter how monetary policy
a¤ects expectations in the medium and long-run. In our framework, instead, the reaction of
exchange rates is much richer, as it depends on how the term structure changes at di¤erent
maturities.10



5        Measuring the E¤ects of Monetary Policy on Ex-
         change Rates in Unconventional Times
We now turn to analyzing the di¤erences between conventional and unconventional monetary
policy. By unconventional monetary policy we mean situations where the Central bank
cannot a¤ect the short-term interest rate (as it is stuck at the zero lower bound), and
instead either purchases assets to counteract the tightening in …nancial markets or decrease
uncertainty ("Large Scale Asset Purchases", or LSAP in short) or issues announcements
about the future path of interest rates that convey information on the length of the zero
lower bound period ("Forward guidance"). The start of the unconventional monetary policy
period in the US is marked by the …rst LSAP, in November 2008, although forward guidance
was allegedly implemented as a policy instrument since the early 2000 (Gürkaynak, Sack
and Swanson, 2005a). Note that our framework does automatically capture both LSAP and
forward guidance directly in the way monetary policy shifts in the entire yield curve.
       Figure 4 depicts the exchange rate response to the monetary policy shock. Since in the
unconventional period short-term interest rates are stuck at the zero-lower bound and cannot
be moved further, we distinguish between contractionary and expansionary policy based
  10
       Note that, even for the traditional monetary policy shock, the empirical evidence is more in line with
the overshooting hypothesis (except for Japan) than traditional studies based on monthly or quarterly data.
This suggests that the daily frequency in our data may be a crucial element to uncover overshooting.



                                                      18
solely on changes in medium-term interest rates, depicted in Panels I and II respectively.
The medium term is de…ned to be 5 years.
      The graphs on the right in Figure 4, Panels I and II, depict the US monetary policy
shocks in the unconventional period ("mp
                                      t ( )). As the …gures show, the monetary policy

shock is zero at the short-end of the yield curve, and progressively moves away from zero at
the long end of the yield curve. This re‡ects the well-known fact that, in the unconventional
period, monetary policy mostly operates by a¤ecting medium- and long-term expectations.
Notice, however, how the expected lift-o¤ from the zero lower bound is very di¤erent across
episodes: in some cases it is more gradual while in others it is more sudden.


                                      INSERT FIGURE 4 HERE


      Comparing conventional and unconventional monetary policy, thus, it is clear that move-
ments in exchange rates during unconventional monetary policy periods are mostly associated
with perceived e¤ects of monetary policy in the medium- and long-run.
      By comparing Panels I and II in Figure 4, we …nd that, on average, expansionary policy
depreciates the exchange rate while contractionary policy appreciates it.11 The exceptions
are Canada and the UK, for which expansionary policies may result in both appreciation
and depreciations.
      By comparing Figures 3 and 4, we draw the following main conclusion: overall, the
e¤ects of unconventional monetary policy are similar to those in the conventional period:
expansionary monetary policy shocks in the US typically result in a depreciation of the US
dollar. The magnitudes are also similar.
      Our empirical results are related to Rogers, Scotti and Wright (2014, 2016) and Glick
and Leduc (2015), who have investigated the e¤ects of unconventional monetary policy on
exchange rates as well. However, there are several important di¤erences between our paper
and theirs. A …rst di¤erence is that, in the latter papers, the shock is the exogenous change
in the principal component(s) extracted from a cross section of interest rates, while in our
 11
      Our unconventional sample includes some episodes of contractionary policy.



                                                     19
work the shock is the entire shift in the entire term structure due to an exogenous monetary
policy move. It is the analysis of how the whole yield curve shifts over time that allows
us to crucially di¤erentiate our results from theirs. A second, important di¤erence is that
Rogers, Scotti and Wright (2014) and Glick and Leduc (2015) use an event study approach
which allows them to estimate the contemporaneous correlation between changes in the term
structure due to monetary policy on speci…c dates and the exchange rate, but is otherwise
silent on the dynamic e¤ects; in contrast, our paper estimates the whole dynamic impulse
response. Rogers, Scotti and Wright (2014, 2016) also complement their analyses with VARs
either using a heteroskedasticity-based identi…cation (as in Rogers, Scotti and Wright, 2014,
and Wright, 2012), or external instruments (as in Rogers, Scotti and Wright, 2016) to trace
out the e¤ects of monetary policy shocks over time. Our approach instead relies on the
Functional VAR approach (Inoue and Rossi, 2017a), which provides the dynamic response
to the shift in the whole term structure viewed as a function of maturity. Finally, our analysis
naturally leads to time-varying responses of exchange rates that fundamentally depend on
the ways in which monetary policy a¤ects agents’expectations of current and future interest
rates as well as the risk and uncertainty in the economy.



6     How Do Exchange Rates Respond to Monetary Pol-
      icy Shocks?
In order to understand how exchange rates move after a monetary policy announcement,
let’s focus on the speci…c events during the unconventional monetary policy period depicted
in Figure 1. Figure 5 plots the response of exchange rates to each of these shocks.
    Recall from Figure 1 that large scale asset purchases typically decrease yields at most
maturities. The decrease has a clear hump-shaped pattern, with the largest decrease showing
up on yields at the medium-term (5 years) maturity; interestingly, the e¤ects of LSAP are
less important in the longer run as we move from LSAP-I to LSAP-III, and in the latter
case yields at longer maturities increase. LSAPs typically result in a depreciation of the US
dollar. In particular, Figure 5 shows that LSAP-I appreciates the US dollar against the UK


                                              20
pound and the Canadian dollar, and depreciates against the euro and the yen, while LSAP
II and III result in an immediate depreciation in the exchange rate relative to all countries.
The treasury security purchases announcement on 12/1/2008 decrease the yield curve as
well, and the e¤ects are larger at longer maturities than at shorter ones. Again, as a result,
the exchange rate depreciates relative to all countries.
    The responses contrast sharply with those associated with the maturity extension an-
nouncements on 9/21/2011 and 6/20/2012. The latter increase the yield curve at short
maturities and decrease it a long maturities, and result in a broad appreciation of the US
dollar against all currencies.

                                 INSERT FIGURE 5 HERE



7     The Information Channel
The identi…cation approach in the previous sections requires that monetary policy announce-
ments carry information about monetary policy changes, as opposed to new information
about the state of the economy. The idea that monetary policy announcements a¤ect agents’
beliefs about economic fundamentals, and not only about monetary policy, has been pro-
posed by Nakamura and Steinsson (2018), and is referred to as "the information channel".
Whether the information channel is empirically relevant is an open question that has at-
tracted a lot of interest. The information channel is more plausible if Central banks have
superior information about the state of the economy relative to market participants. On
the one hand, Romer and Romer (2000) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) found evidence
that this is the case in the US on average over a long sample of data. On the other hand,
Rossi and Sekhposyan (2016, 2018) investigate how the Fed’s superior information content
has evolved over time and show that, in the last decade, the Central bank lost its informa-
tional advantage; hence, the latter suggest that the informational channel may not be too
important in our empirical analysis.
    To verify the robustness of our results to the presence of information channel e¤ects,
we construct an informationally-robust measure of monetary policy shocks along the lines

                                              21
of Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco (2018). The latter is constructed as the residual from a
regression of our functional monetary policy shock on the Greenbook forecasts:

                      "mp
                       t ( ) =
                                   0 cb
                                   1 F t xq 1   +   0
                                                    2   Ftcb xq   1   Ftcb 1 xq   1   + "mpi
                                                                                         t   ( );               (5)

where "mpi
       t   ( ) is the informationally-robust monetary policy shock; Ftcb xq                         1   denotes the
Greenbook forecasts of in‡ation, real output growth and unemployment made at time t for
the previous quarter, and Ftcb xq         1     Ftcb 1 xq   1    denotes the forecast revision.12


                                        INSERT FIGURE 6 HERE


       Figure 6 repeats the analysis in Figure 2 using the monetary policy shock robust to
informational e¤ects, "mpi
                       t   ( ).13 By comparing Figure 6 with Figure 2, we note that our
broad empirical …ndings are qualitatively unchanged.



8        Uncovered Interest Rate Parity and Monetary Pol-
         icy Shocks
The main focus of our paper is to quantify the e¤ects of a US monetary policy shock on
exchange rates. However, as noted before, a US monetary policy shock may change …nancial
markets’ expectations about future foreign interest rates, not just domestic rates. In the
previous sections, we included the reaction of both domestic and foreign rates in our monetary
policy shock notion to obtain a comprehensive measure of the overall US monetary policy
shock, no matter whether it a¤ects domestic or foreign markets.
  12
       Given the small sample we have available, we can include only a limited number of regressors. Thus, we
include only the forecasts for the previous quarter as opposed to the nowcast and forecasts for future values,
as the latter are less signi…cant overall in regression (5) across countries.
  13
     Note that the analysis focuses on the conventional period since, in the unconventional period, regression
(5) would estimate a non-zero adjusted short-term interest rate even if the short-term interest rate is at
the zero lower bound. Also, estimating regression (5) in the zero lower bound period is impractical as the
number of observations is very small.


                                                            22
      In this section, instead, we investigate whether the transmission mechanism that leads to
exchange rate appreciations/depreciations is Uncovered Interest Rate Parity (UIRP). To do
so, we quantify the response of exchange rates to the component in the US monetary policy
shock that only a¤ects relative interest rate expectations –that is, in our context, relative
shifts of domestic versus foreign yield curves. More formally, UIRP implies that, absent risk
premia:
                                                      Et st+     st        Y   ;t   Y f;t ;                                       (6)

where Y f;t is the foreign interest rate at maturity                                  expected at time t. We de…ne the
shock to relative interest rate expectations, "mpdif
                                               t
                                                     f
                                                       ( ), as the change in the yield curve
di¤erential on the day of the monetary policy announcement, where "mpdif
                                                                   t
                                                                         f
                                                                           ( )=                                         Ye   ;t   dt ,
 Ye    ;t   =        Y    ;t      Y f;t ; and   Y f;t is the change in the foreign yield curve; as before,                   is the
maturity of the yield in the term structure and dt is a dummy variable indicating days of
US monetary policy announcements. We estimate the response of exchange rates as follows:

                                                         @st+j          X
                                                                        M
                                                                      =   c(h) Ye ;t ;
                                                                          e                                                       (7)
                                                   @"mpdif
                                                     t
                                                           f
                                                             ( )            =1

                Ye               Ye
                                                   (h)            @st+h
where                ;t   =           ;t   dt and e
                                                  c      = Et    @ Y e ;t        are estimated from the VAR in eq. (3),
                                                                                       0
where Xt =                     si;t ; Ye1=4;t ; Ye1;t ; Ye5;t ; Ye10;t ; Ye20;t            ; and h = 1; 2; :::; 15 is the horizon
of the response.14 Again, the VAR coe¢ cients are estimated separately in the conventional
and unconventional regimes to allow for changes in the transmission mechanism.
      We restrict our sample to the UK, Canada and Europe, due to the lack of availabil-
ity of zero-coupon data for Japan. Data for zero-coupon yield curves data are from the
Bank of England (https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/yield-curves), the European
Central Bank Data Warehouse (http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/browse.do?node=9691126) and
from the Bank of Canada (https://www.bankofcanada.ca/rates/interest-rates/bond-yield-
curves/). Note that the yield curve data for Europe start in September 2004, and thus the
sample is shorter than in the main text.
      Figure 7 reports the results; for brevity, we focus on the Euro. Panel A in the …gure
shows the change in the relative yield curves on monetary policy announcement days. By
 14
      Again, the maturity of the yields is expressed in years.

                                                                      23
comparing it with Panel B in Figure 1, the movements in the relative yield curve di¤erentials
are qualitatively similar to the movements in the US yield curve, although we notice some
di¤erences across countries. For example, the relative yield between Euro and the US is
expected to revert back to zero faster than the US one; a possible interpretation is that
markets at the time expected European monetary policy to react with an expansionary
policy within a year or so.


                                 INSERT FIGURE 7 HERE


   Since the movement in the yield curve di¤erentials are similar to those of the US yield
curve, we expect that the exchange rate responses to a change in the interest rate di¤erential
on a day of a US monetary policy announcement are qualitatively similar to the responses to
the US monetary policy shocks themselves. By comparing Panel B in Figure 7 with Figure
5, we …nd that this is the case; the only exception is the June 20, 2012 maturity extension
program announcement. Thus, what moved exchange rates on days of US monetary policy
announcements is mainly the change in the US yield curve.
   Figure 8 depicts the responses during the conventional and unconventional periods. In
the conventional period, shocks that decrease the US yield relative to Europe’s lead to a
depreciation of the US dollar, similarly to the previous sections, and vice-versa for increases.
Notice how shocks that are relatively more expansionary in the US in the short-run may
end up in an exchange rate appreciation if they are associated with more contractionary
movements in the US yield curve than Europe’s at medium- to long-term maturities. Results
are similar for the unconventional period. Results for Canada and the UK are also similar
to those in the previous sections.


                                 INSERT FIGURE 8 HERE




   To investigate more broadly the empirical evidence for UIRP, we focus on the net present
value model of exchange rates determination. According to the net present value model of

                                              24
exchange rates embedded in eq. (6), the exchange rate should be correlated with the future
path of interest rate di¤erentials. We investigate whether such correlation is present in
our data. Figure 9 depicts scatterplots of the relationship between average interest rate
di¤erentials across maturities (reported on the y-axis) and the exchange rate response on
impact (reported on the x-axis). The relationship during the conventional period, depicted
in Panel A, is clearly positive for Europe and the UK, and inconclusive for Canada. Thus,
broadly speaking, increases in interest rate di¤erentials across the yield curve maturities were
re‡ected in exchange rate appreciations. In the unconventional period, depicted in Panel B,
the relationship turns to negative for all countries perhaps due to relative time-varying risk
premia or peso problems during the unconventional era.


                                 INSERT FIGURE 9 HERE



9     Which Expectations Matter the Most?
Given that, in our framework, the monetary policy shock has multiple dimensions, it is
important to examine which changes in agents’expectations about future interest rates and
risk premia cause the exchange rate appreciation/depreciation. We do so by reporting the
components of the responses de…ned in eq. (2). The results are shown in Figures 10 and 11
for the conventional and unconventional periods, respectively. Overall, we …nd interesting
di¤erences across currencies as well as speci…c episodes, although the results are broadly
similar for conventional and unconventional monetary policy regimes.


                                INSERT FIGURE 10 HERE


    By comparing the shape of the responses, depicted in the graph in the top left corner for
each country, with the various components in the decomposition, depicted in the remaining
graphs, we draw the following conclusions. In the conventional period, the most important
components are the short-term rates (typically one year). The importance of speci…c ma-
turities depends on the currency: for example, the most important components are the 5

                                              25
years for the UK, the one year for Europe and Japan, and the 3 months and the 1 year for
Canada.


                               INSERT FIGURE 11 HERE


   In the unconventional period, the exchange rates ‡uctuations are also driven by longer
term maturities, typically 5 years (but also the 10 or 20 years, depending on the country),
in addition to the one year maturity. Interestingly, however, ‡uctuations at the very long-
end of the yield curve are most important in contractionary episodes while slightly shorter
maturities are most important in expansionary episodes. Again, the details depend on the
speci…c country.



10     Conclusions
In this paper we investigated the e¤ects of monetary policy shocks on exchange rates. We
identify monetary policy shocks as shifts in the whole yield curve in order to analyze how
changes in agents’expectations of interest rates and changes in risk premia across all matu-
rities dynamically a¤ect exchange rates.
   We …nd that, on average across episodes, the e¤ects of monetary policy shocks on ex-
change rates are qualitatively similar in both conventional and unconventional periods; in
particular, a US monetary policy easing results in a depreciation of the US dollar exchange
rate. However, the exchange rate response di¤ers depending on the e¤ects of monetary pol-
icy on people’s expectations of the interest rate path and risk premia in the short, medium
and long run in speci…c episodes. Thus, our approach can help in quantifying and further
advancing our understanding of the di¤erent dimensions of monetary policy …rst discussed
in Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005a). Furthermore, we …nd empirical evidence in favor
of the overshooting hypothesis in our daily data.




                                            26
   References
   Altavilla, Carlo and Domenico Giannone (2017), “The E¤ectiveness of Non-Standard
Monetary Policy Measures: Evidence from Survey Data”, Journal of Applied Economet-
rics 32(5), 952-964.

   Bouakez, Hafedh and Michel Normandin (2010), “Fluctuations in the Foreign Exchange
Market: How Important Are Monetary Policy Shocks?”, Journal of International Economics.

   Clarida, Richard and Jordi Galí (1994). “Sources of Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations:
How Important Are Nominal Shocks?”, Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy 41, 1-56.

   Diebold, Francis X. and Canlin Li (2006), “Forecasting the Term Structure of Government
Bond Yields," Journal of Econometrics 130(2), 337-364.

   Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976), “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics”, Journal of
Political Economy 84, 1161-76.

   Eichenbaum, Martin and Charles Evans (1996), “Some Empirical Evidence on the E¤ects
of Monetary Policy Shocks on Exchange Rates,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 1-22.

   Faust, Jon and John Rogers (2003), “Monetary Policy’s Role in Exchange Rate Behav-
ior,”Journal of Monetary Economics 1-54.

   Galí, Jordi (2018), “Forward Guidance and the Exchange Rate,”Barcelona GSE Working
Paper n. 1021.

   Glick, Reuven and Sylvain Leduc (2015), “Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Dol-
lar: Conventional Signs, Unconventional Magnitudes”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Fran-
cisco W.P. 2015-18.

   Gürkaynak, Refet S., Bryan Sack and Eric Swanson (2005a), “Do Actions Speak Louder
Than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements”,
International Journal of Central Banking 1(1),55-93.

                                           27
   Gürkaynak, Refet S., Bryan Sack and Eric Swanson (2005b), “The Sensitivity of Long-
Term Interest Rates to Economic News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic
Models,”American Economic Review 95(1), 425-436.

   Gürkaynak, Refet S., Bryan Sack and Eric Swanson (2007), “Market-Based Measures of
Monetary Policy Expectations,”Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 25, 201-212.

   Gürkaynak, Refet S., Bryan Sack and Jonathan Wright (2007), “The U.S. Treasury Yield
Curve: 1961 to the Present", Journal of Monetary Economics 54(8), 2291-2304.

   Kuttner, Kenneth (2001), “Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from
the Federal Funds Futures Market,”Journal of Monetary Economics 47 (3), 523-544.

   Inoue, Atsushi and Barbara Rossi (2017), “The E¤ects of Conventional and Unconven-
tional Monetary Policy: A New Approach”, mimeo.

   Inoue, Atsushi and Barbara Rossi (2017b), “Not-for-Publication Appendix to: The Ef-
fects of Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy: A New Approach”, mimeo.

   Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and Giovanni Ricco (2018), "The Transmission of Monetary
Policy Shocks", Bank of England Working Paper.

   Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson (2018), “High Frequency Identi…cation of Monetary
Non-Neutrality: The Information E¤ect,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(3), 1283-
1330.

   Neely, Christopher J. (2015), “Unconventional Monetary Policy Had Large International
E¤ects,”Journal of Banking & Finance 52(C), 101-111.

   Nelson, Charles R. and Andrew F. Siegel (1987), “Parsimonious Modeling of Yield
Curve”, Journal of Business 60, 473–489.

   Rogers, Jon, Chiara Scotti and Jonathan H. Wright (2014), “Evaluating Asset-Market
E¤ects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Multi-Country Review,”Economic Policy 29,
3-50.

                                           28
   Rogers, Jon, Chiara Scotti and Jonathan H. Wright (2016), “Unconventional Monetary
Policy and International Risk Premia”, Board of Governors IFD Papers No. 1172.

   Romer Christina D. and David H, Romer (2000), "Federal Reserve Information and the
Behavior of Interest Rates", American Economic Review 90(3), 429-457.

   Rossi, Barbara and Tatevik Sekhposyan (2016), “Forecast Rationality Tests in the Pres-
ence of Instabilities, With Applications to Federal Reserve and Survey Forecasts”, Journal
of Applied Econometrics 31(3), 507-532.

   Rossi, Barbara and Tatevik Sekhposyan (2018), “Is the Information Channel Empirically
Relevant?”, mimeo.

   Scholl, Almuth and Harald Uhlig (2008), “New Evidence on the Puzzles: Results from
Agnostic Identi…cation on Monetary Policy and Exchange Rates,” Journal of International
Economics 76(1), 1-13.

   Uhlig, Harald (2005), “What Are the E¤ects of Monetary Policy on Output? Results
From an Agnostic Identi…cation Procedure,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 381–419.

   Wright, Jonathan H. (2012), “What does Monetary Policy do to Long-term Interest Rates
at the Zero Lower Bound?,”Economic Journal 122, F447-F466.




                                           29
       Appendix. Details About the Estimation Procedure
       Let st+h , yt and It denote an exchange rate at time t + h, a vector of yields at time t and
the information set at time t excluding yt , respectively. Following Inoue and Rossi (2017a),
de…ne
                                        ft (yt ) = E(st+h jyt ; It ):                                             (8)

To simplify the notation, we drop the subscript t from this point on.
       Then the h-step-ahead impulse response of an exchange rate to a yield curve shock ",
where " is a vector of yield shocks, is de…ned as

                                                  f (y + ")       f (y)
                                            lim                                                                   (9)
                                             !0


provided the limit exists. Let          h    denote an (M + 1)              (M + 1) matrix of h-step-ahead
structural impulse responses and         h   denote the last row of the matrix. Then the di¤erential
can be written as
                                                          h ":                                                   (10)

       We consider a VAR model of the m time-varying parameters of the yield curve and
exchange rate returns with normally distributed disturbance terms:

                                yt = B0 + B1 yt       1   +      + Bp yt    p    + ut ;                          (11)

                                                                           iid
where the last element of yt is the exchange return, ut                            N (0(m+1) 1 ;   m+1 )   and   m+1

is an (m + 1)        (m + 1) positive de…nite matrix.15 The normal-Wishart family with the
uninformative prior parameters is used as a prior for the VAR parameters (see Appendix B
of Uhlig, 2005, for example).
       To identify structural impulse responses, we impose the short-run restriction that the
yield curve does not contemporaneously respond to exchange rate shocks. In other words,
  15
       When appropriate, we use subscripts in matrices and vector to denote their dimensions. For square
matrices, for simplicity, we only include the row dimension in the subscript.




                                                          30
the impact matrix takes the form of:
                                  2                                  3
                                        X X             X    0
                                      6                     7
                                      6                     7
                                      6 X X             X 0 7
                                      6                     7:                                        (12)
                                      6                     7
                                      6 X X             X 0 7
                                      4                     5
                                        X X             X X

To impose this restriction, let                2                          3
                                                   A11 0m         1
                                      A = 4                               5                           (13)
                                                   A21      a22
denote the Cholesky factor of . That is, A is the lower triangular matrix such that AA0 = ,
where A11 is (m    m), A21 is (1     m) and a22 is (1            1). Let Q denote a draw from the Haar
distribution over the space of (m      m) orthogonal matrices and de…ne
                                          2              3
                                             A11 Q 0m 1
                                     A~ = 4              5:                                           (14)
                                             A21 Q a22

Because                 2                     32                          30
                             Q       0m   1         Q       0m        1
                        4                     54                          5 = Im+1 ;                  (15)
                            01   m    1            01   m        1

A~ takes the form of (12) and satis…es A~A~0 =               . Thus h-step-ahead structural impulse
responses are given by the h-step-ahead reduced-form impulse responses                  h   post-multiplied
   ~ Note that these structural impulse responses are not point-identi…ed but set-identi…ed,
by A.
since we allow for arbitrary correlations among reduced-form shocks to the yields.
   To calculate the h-step-ahead structural impulse response to an (m                  1) monetary policy
shock "t , we post-multiply the last row of        hA
                                                        ~ by (A11 Q) 1 "t .




                                                    31
                                  Figures
Figure 1, Panel A. US Monetary Policy Shocks
                                 FFR Lowered to Zero Lower Bound
                    4



                  3.5



                    3



                  2.5



        Percent     2



                  1.5



                    1



                  0.5



                    0
                        0    5     10           15           20    25   30
                                             Maturity

                                 FFR Lowered to Zero Lower Bound
                  0.02


                     0


               -0.02


               -0.04


               -0.06
     Percent




               -0.08


                  -0.1


               -0.12


               -0.14


               -0.16


               -0.18
                         0   5      10           15           20   25   30
                                              Maturity




                                            32
                              Figure 1, Panel B. US Monetary Policy Shocks
                                LSAP-I, Nov. 25 2008                                                       LSAP-II, Aug. 10 2010
              0                                                                       0.01



                                                                                          0


          -0.05
                                                                                      -0.01



                                                                                      -0.02

           -0.1
Percent




                                                                            Percent
                                                                                      -0.03



                                                                                      -0.04
          -0.15

                                                                                      -0.05



                                                                                      -0.06
           -0.2


                                                                                      -0.07



          -0.25                                                                       -0.08
                  0       5     10     15              20   25   30   35                      0       5     10    15              20   25   30   35

                                            Maturity                                                                   Maturity

                                LSAP-III, Sept. 13 2012                                           Treasury Security Purchases, Nov. 3 2010
          0.06                                                                        0.25




          0.04                                                                          0.2




          0.02                                                                        0.15
Percent




                                                                            Percent
              0                                                                         0.1




          -0.02                                                                       0.05




          -0.04                                                                           0




          -0.06                                                                       -0.05
                  0       5     10     15              20   25   30   35                      0       5     10    15              20   25   30   35

                                            Maturity                                                                   Maturity

                      Maturity Extension Program: Sept 21 2011                                    Maturity Extension Program: June 20 2012
            0.1                                                                       0.04



                                                                                      0.03
          0.05



                                                                                      0.02
              0


                                                                                      0.01

          -0.05
Percent




                                                                            Percent




                                                                                          0

           -0.1

                                                                                      -0.01


          -0.15
                                                                                      -0.02



           -0.2
                                                                                      -0.03



          -0.25                                                                       -0.04
                  0       5     10     15              20   25   30   35                      0       5     10    15              20   25   30   35

                                            Maturity                                                                   Maturity




                                                                       33
                   Figure 2. Response to Monetary Policy Shocks: Conventional Period
                                                                                         Panel A. United Kingdom
                                 I. Fully Contractionary                                                                                                    II. Fully Expansionary
                   10   -4       GBPUS                                                                                                        10   -3       GBPUS
          20                                                                   0.2                                                 0.5                                                                  0.1




                                                                                                                                     0                                                                 0.05

          15                                                                 0.15




                                                    ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                              ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                                                                   -0.5                                                                   0



          10                                                                   0.1
                                                                                                                                    -1                                                                 -0.05
Percent




                                                                                                                         Percent
                                                                                                                                   -1.5                                                                 -0.1
           5                                                                 0.05
                                                      (




                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                   mp




                                                                                                                                                                              mp
                                                                                                                                    -2                                                                 -0.15
                                                   t




                                                                                                                                                                              t
           0                                                                    0

                                                                                                                                   -2.5                                                                 -0.2




          -5                                                                 -0.05                                                  -3                                                                 -0.25
               0             5           10   15                                     0    10              20   30                         0             5           10   15                                    0   10              20   30
                                   h                                                           Maturity                                                       h                                                         Maturity


                    III. More Contractionary at Short                                                                                           IV. More Expansionary at Short
                   10 -4         GBPUS                                                                                                        10 -3         GBPUS
          10                                                                 0.07                                                    2                                                                 0.25


                                                                             0.06                                                  1.5                                                                  0.2
           8

                                                                             0.05                                                                                                                      0.15
                                                                                                                                     1
                                                   ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                              ) (Change in Yield, %)
           6
                                                                             0.04                                                                                                                       0.1
                                                                                                                                   0.5

                                                                             0.03                                                                                                                      0.05
           4
Percent




                                                                                                                         Percent




                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                             0.02                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                   -0.5
           2
                                                                             0.01                                                                                                                      -0.05

                                                                                                                                    -1
                                                      (




                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                   mp




                                                                                                                                                                              mp




                                                                                0                                                                                                                       -0.1
           0
                                                   t




                                                                                                                                                                              t




                                                                                                                                   -1.5
                                                                             -0.01                                                                                                                     -0.15

          -2
                                                                             -0.02                                                  -2                                                                  -0.2


          -4                                                                 -0.03                                                 -2.5                                                                -0.25
               0             5           10   15                                     0    10              20   30                         0             5           10   15                                    0   10              20   30
                                   h                                                           Maturity                                                       h                                                         Maturity




                                                                                                                    34
                                                                                                     Figure 2 (continued)
                                                                                                            Panel B. Euro
                                    I. Fully Contractionary                                                                                                        II. Fully Expansionary
                      10 -3         EURUS                                                                                                         10 -3           EURUS
            3.5                                                                       0.2                                                2                                                                    0.1



             3
                                                                                                                                         1                                                                   0.05

                                                                                     0.15
            2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                    ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                           ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                                                                         0                                                                      0
             2

                                                                                      0.1
                                                                                                                                         -1                                                                  -0.05




                                                                                                                               Percent
Percent




            1.5



             1
                                                                                                                                         -2                                                                   -0.1
                                                                                     0.05

            0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                         (




                                                                                                                                                                                    mp
                                                      mp




                                                                                                                                         -3                                                                  -0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                      t




             0
                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                         -4                                                                   -0.2
          -0.5



             -1                                                                     -0.05                                                -5                                                                  -0.25
                  0             5           10   15                                         0   10              20   30                       0               5           10   15                                    0   10              20   30
                                      h                                                              Maturity                                                       h                                                         Maturity


                       III. More Contractionary at Short                                                                                                    IV. More Expansionary at Short
                      10   -4       EURUS                                                                                                         10   -3         EURUS
            12                                                                      0.07                                                 5                                                                   0.25


                                                                                    0.06                                                 4                                                                     0.2
            10

                                                                                    0.05                                                 3                                                                   0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                    ) (Change in Yield, %)
             8
                                                      ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                    0.04                                                 2                                                                     0.1

             6
                                                                                    0.03                                                 1                                                                   0.05
                                                                                                                               Percent
  Percent




             4                                                                      0.02                                                 0                                                                       0


                                                                                    0.01                                                 -1                                                                  -0.05
             2
                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                         (




                                                                                                                                                                                    mp
                                                      mp




                                                                                       0                                                 -2                                                                   -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                      t




             0
                                                                                    -0.01                                                -3                                                                  -0.15

            -2
                                                                                    -0.02                                                -4                                                                   -0.2


            -4                                                                      -0.03                                                -5                                                                  -0.25
                  0             5           10   15                                         0   10              20   30                       0               5           10   15                                    0   10              20   30
                                      h                                                              Maturity                                                       h                                                         Maturity




                                                                                                                          35
                                                                                                    Figure 2 (continued)
                                                                                                         Panel C. Canada
                                    I. Fully Contractionary                                                                                                        II. Fully Expansionary
                     10 -4         CADUS                                                                                                           10 -4          CADUS
            4                                                                        0.2                                                16                                                                        0.1


                                                                                                                                        14
            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.05

                                                                                    0.15                                                12
            0



                                                          ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                                    ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                        10

            -2
                                                                                     0.1                                                 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.05




                                                                                                                              Percent
Percent




            -4                                                                                                                           6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.1
                                                                                    0.05                                                 4
            -6
                                                        (




                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                     mp




                                                                                                                                                                                    mp
                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.15
                                                     t




                                                                                                                                                                                    t
            -8
                                                                                       0                                                 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.2
          -10
                                                                                                                                        -2


          -12                                                                      -0.05                                                -4                                                                       -0.25
                 0             5           10   15                                         0   10              20    30                      0                5           10   15                                        0   10              20   30
                                     h                                                              Maturity                                                        h                                                             Maturity


                      III. More Contractionary at Short                                                                                                    IV. More Expansionary at Short
                     10   -4       CADUS                                                                                                            10   -3       CADUS
            3                                                                      0.07                                                   2                                                                       0.25


                                                                                   0.06                                                                                                                            0.2
            2
                                                                                                                                        1.5

                                                                                   0.05                                                                                                                           0.15
            1




                                                                                                                                                                                        ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                     ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                   0.04                                                                                                                            0.1

            0
                                                                                   0.03                                                                                                                           0.05
                                                                                                                                        0.5
  Percent




                                                                                                                              Percent




            -1                                                                     0.02                                                                                                                              0

                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                   0.01                                                                                                                          -0.05
            -2
                                                        (




                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                     mp




                                                                                                                                                                                    mp




                                                                                      0                                                                                                                           -0.1
                                                                                                                                        -0.5
                                                     t




                                                                                                                                                                                    t




            -3
                                                                                   -0.01                                                                                                                         -0.15

                                                                                                                                         -1
            -4
                                                                                   -0.02                                                                                                                          -0.2


            -5                                                                     -0.03                                                -1.5                                                                     -0.25
                 0             5           10   15                                         0   10              20   30                         0              5           10   15                                        0   10              20   30
                                     h                                                              Maturity                                                        h                                                             Maturity




                                                                                                                         36
                                                                                                  Figure 2 (continued)
                                                                                                        Panel D. Japan
                                      I. Fully Contractionary                                                                                                     II. Fully Expansionary
                        10   -3       JAPUS                                                                                                      10   -3         JAPUS
             4.5                                                                   0.2                                                  1                                                                    0.1


               4
                                                                                                                                        0                                                                   0.05

             3.5                                                                 0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                   ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                        ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                                                                        -1                                                                     0
               3


             2.5                                                                   0.1
                                                                                                                                        -2                                                                  -0.05




                                                                                                                              Percent
 Percent




               2

                                                                                                                                        -3                                                                   -0.1
             1.5                                                                 0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                           (




                                                                                                                                                                                   mp
                                                        mp




               1
                                                                                                                                        -4                                                                  -0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                   t
                                                        t




             0.5                                                                    0

                                                                                                                                        -5                                                                   -0.2
               0


             -0.5                                                                -0.05                                                  -6                                                                  -0.25
                    0             5           10   15                                    0   10              20      30                      0               5           10   15                                    0   10              20   30
                                        h                                                         Maturity                                                         h                                                         Maturity


                        III. More Contractionary at Short                                                                                                  IV. More Expansionary at Short
                        10 -3         JAPUS                                                                                                      10 -3           JAPUS
                3                                                                0.07                                                   4                                                                   0.25


                                                                                 0.06                                                   3                                                                     0.2
              2.5

                                                                                 0.05                                                   2                                                                   0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                   ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                        ) (Change in Yield, %)




                2
                                                                                 0.04                                                   1                                                                     0.1


                                                                                 0.03                                                   0                                                                   0.05
              1.5
                                                                                                                              Percent
   Percent




                                                                                 0.02                                                   -1                                                                      0

                1
                                                                                 0.01                                                   -2                                                                  -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                           (




                                                                                                                                                                                   mp
                                                        mp




                                                                                    0                                                   -3                                                                   -0.1
              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                   t
                                                        t




                                                                                 -0.01                                                  -4                                                                  -0.15

                0
                                                                                 -0.02                                                  -5                                                                   -0.2


             -0.5                                                                -0.03                                                  -6                                                                  -0.25
                    0             5           10   15                                    0   10              20     30                       0               5           10   15                                    0   10              20   30
                                        h                                                         Maturity                                                         h                                                         Maturity



              Note to the Figure. "Fully Contractionary" means Y3;t > 0; Y96;t                                                                                                                                Y3;t > 0 and "Fully
Expansionary" means Y3;t < 0; Y96;t                                                                               Y3;t < 0. "More Contractionary at Short" means
Y3;t < 0; Y96;t                               Y3;t > 0 while "Less Expansionary at Long" means Y3;t > 0; Y96;t                                                                                                                     Y3;t < 0.




                                                                                                                         37
                                                      Figure 3. Responses to Traditional Monetary Policy
                                                                                                      Shocks in the Conventional Period
                                                                                                                    Panel A. United Kingdom
                                                      I. Contractionary                                                                                                                 II. Expansionary
                             10 -4           GBPUS                                                                                                                  10 -4         GBPUS
                 4.5                                                                                    0.2                                                2                                                                         0.25


                     4                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                           0

                 3.5                                                                                  0.15                                                                                                                           0.15
                                                                            ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                                                    ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                                                                                           -2
                     3                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.1


                 2.5                                                                                    0.1                                                                                                                          0.05
                                                                                                                                                           -4
   Percent




                                                                                                                                                Percent
                     2                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                                                           -6
                 1.5                                                                                  0.05                                                                                                                           -0.05
                                                                       (




                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                    mp




                                                                                                                                                                                                    mp
                     1                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.1
                                                                                                                                                           -8
                                                                    t




                                                                                                                                                                                                    t
                 0.5                                                                                        0                                                                                                                        -0.15

                                                                                                                                                          -10
                     0                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.2


             -0.5                                                                                     -0.05                                               -12                                                                        -0.25
                         0               5             10    15                                                 0    10              20   30                    0             5           10   15                                            0       10              20    30
                                                  h                                                                       Maturity                                                  h                                                                     Maturity

                                                                                                                              Panel B. Europe
                                                      I. Contractionary                                                                                                                 II. Expansionary
                     10      -4          EURUS                                                                                                                      10   -4       EURUS
             7                                                                                        0.2                                                   5                                                                         0.25



             6                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2


                                                                                                     0.15                                                   0                                                                         0.15
             5
                                                                  ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                                                            ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.1
             4

                                                                                                      0.1                                                  -5                                                                         0.05
Percent




                                                                                                                                                Percent




             3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0

             2
                                                                                                     0.05                                                 -10                                                                         -0.05

             1
                                                                     (




                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                  mp




                                                                                                                                                                                                    mp




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.1
                                                                  t




                                                                                                                                                                                                    t




             0
                                                                                                        0                                                 -15                                                                         -0.15


          -1                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.2


          -2                                                                                         -0.05                                                -20                                                                         -0.25
                 0                   5                10    15                                               0       10              20   30                    0             5           10   15                                                0    10              20    30
                                              h                                                                           Maturity                                                  h                                                                      Maturity




                                                                                                                                           38
                                                                                                          Figure 3 (continued)
                                                                                                             Panel C. Canada
                                               I. Contractionary                                                                                                              II. Expansionary
                         10 -4           CADUS                                                                                                    10 -4             CADUS
            1.5                                                                            0.2                                           10                                                                             0.25


                1                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                          8

            0.5                                                                           0.15                                                                                                                          0.15




                                                                ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                                          ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                                                                          6
                0                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.1


            -0.5                                                                           0.1                                                                                                                          0.05
                                                                                                                                          4
 Percent




                                                                                                                               Percent
                -1                                                                                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                          2
            -1.5                                                                          0.05                                                                                                                          -0.05
                                                              (




                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                           mp




                                                                                                                                                                                          mp
                -2                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.1
                                                                                                                                          0
                                                           t




                                                                                                                                                                                          t
            -2.5                                                                             0                                                                                                                          -0.15

                                                                                                                                         -2
                -3                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.2


            -3.5                                                                         -0.05                                           -4                                                                             -0.25
                     0               5           10   15                                         0   10              20   30                  0                 5               10   15                                         0   10              20   30
                                           h                                                              Maturity                                                       h                                                               Maturity

                                                                                                               Panel D. Japan
                                               I. Contractionary                                                                                                              II. Expansionary
                     10   -4         JAPUS                                                                                                            10   -3           JAPUS
            9                                                                             0.2                                                 0                                                                          0.25



            8                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.2


                                                                                         0.15                                            -0.5                                                                            0.15
            7
                                                           ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                                               ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.1
            6

                                                                                          0.1                                             -1                                                                             0.05
  Percent




                                                                                                                               Percent




            5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0

            4
                                                                                         0.05                                            -1.5                                                                           -0.05

            3
                                                              (




                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                           mp




                                                                                                                                                                                          mp




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.1
                                                           t




                                                                                                                                                                                          t




            2
                                                                                            0                                             -2                                                                            -0.15


            1                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.2


            0                                                                            -0.05                                           -2.5                                                                           -0.25
                0                5             10     15                                         0   10              20   30                      0                 5           10   15                                         0   10              20   30
                                          h                                                               Maturity                                                        h                                                              Maturity



            Notes to the …gure. Each of the eight …gures plots the monetary policy shock (panel on the
right) and the corresponding exchange rate’s response (panel on the left) for the currencies
indicated in the title. The monetary policy shocks are selected to be contractionary (Panel
A) and expansionary (Panel B) at the shortest maturity. "Contractionary" means Y3;t > 0
and "Expansionary" means Y3;t < 0.




                                                                                                                          39
                Figure 4. Response to Monetary Policy Shocks: Unconventional Period
                                                                                           Panel A. United Kingdom
                                          I. Contractionary                                                                                                       II. Expansionary
                     10    -3       GBPUS                                                                                                     10   -3       GBPUS
            5                                                                   0.1                                                  4                                                                       0.3


                                                                                                                                     3                                                                       0.2
                                                                               0.05
            4
                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.1




                                                                                                                                                                              ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                      ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                     1
            3                                                                                                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                               -0.05
  Percent




                                                                                                                       Percent
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.1

            2                                                                                                                        -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.2
                                                                                -0.1
                                                                                                                                     -2

            1                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                      mp
                                                         (




                                                                                                                                                                              mp
                                                                                                                                     -3
                                                                               -0.15
                                                      t




                                                                                                                                                                              t
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.4
                                                                                                                                     -4
            0
                                                                                -0.2
                                                                                                                                     -5                                                                      -0.5



            -1                                                                 -0.25                                                 -6                                                                      -0.6
                 0              5           10   15                                    0    10              20   30                       0             5           10   15                                         0   5   10      15      20   25   30
                                      h                                                          Maturity                                                     h                                                                  Maturity

                                                                                                      Panel B. Europe
                                          I. Contractionary                                                                                                       II. Expansionary
                     10   -3        EURUS                                                                                                     10   -3       EURUS
            6                                                                   0.1                                                   2                                                                       0.3


                                                                                                                                      1                                                                       0.2
            5                                                                  0.05
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.1
                                                      ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                                    ) (Change in Yield, %)
            4                                                                     0                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0

                                                                                                                                     -2
            3                                                                  -0.05
Percent




                                                                                                                           Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.1

                                                                                                                                     -3

                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.2
            2                                                                   -0.1
                                                                                                                                     -4

                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                         (




                                                                                                                                                                              mp
                                                      mp




                                                                                                                                     -5
            1                                                                  -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                              t
                                                      t




                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.4
                                                                                                                                     -6

            0                                                                   -0.2
                                                                                                                                     -7                                                                      -0.5



          -1                                                                   -0.25                                                 -8                                                                      -0.6
                0               5           10   15                                    0    10              20   30                       0             5           10   15                                         0   5   10       15     20   25   30
                                      h                                                          Maturity                                                     h                                                                  Maturity




                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                              Figure 4 (continued)
                                                                                                  Panel C. Canada
                                       I. Contractionary                                                                                                           II. Expansionary
                     10 -3       CADUS                                                                                                      10 - 3       CADUS
            8                                                                  0.1                                                  8                                                                           0.3



            7                                                                                                                       6                                                                           0.2
                                                                              0.05

                                                                                                                                    4
            6                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.1




                                                    ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                                ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                    2
            5                                                                                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                             -0.05
  Percent




                                                                                                                        Percent
            4                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.1

                                                                                                                                   -2

            3                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.2
                                                                              -0.1
                                                                                                                                   -4

            2                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.3
                                                      (




                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                   mp




                                                                                                                                                                                mp
                                                                             -0.15                                                 -6
                                                   t




                                                                                                                                                                                t
            1                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.4
                                                                                                                                   -8

                                                                              -0.2
            0                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.5
                                                                                                                                  -10


            -1                                                               -0.25                                                -12                                                                           -0.6
                 0           5           10   15                                     0   10              20   30                        0            5              10    15                                           0   5   10      15      20   25   30
                                   h                                                          Maturity                                                        h                                                                     Maturity

                                                                                                    Panel D. Japan
                                       I. Contractionary                                                                                                           II. Expansionary
                     10 -4       JAPUS                                                                                                                       JAPUS
            20                                                                0.1                                                  0.01                                                                          0.3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                  0.005
                                                                             0.05

            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1
                                                                                                                                        0
                                                   ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                                       ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                  -0.005
            10
                                                                             -0.05
  Percent




                                                                                                                    Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.1

                                                                                                                                   -0.01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.2
                                                                              -0.1
             5
                                                                                                                                  -0.015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.3
                                                      (




                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                   mp




                                                                                                                                                                                mp




                                                                             -0.15
                                                   t




                                                                                                                                                                                t




                                                                                                                                   -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.4
             0

                                                                              -0.2
                                                                                                                                  -0.025
                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.5



            -5                                                               -0.25                                                 -0.03                                                                        -0.6
                 0           5           10   15                                     0   10              20   30                            0            5           10    15                                          0   5   10      15      20   25   30

                                   h                                                          Maturity                                                         h                                                                    Maturity




        Note to the …gure. Each of the four …gures plots the monetary policy shock (panel on the
right) and the corresponding exchange rate’s response (panel on the left) for the currencies
indicated in the title. "Contractionary" means Y12;t > 0 and "Expansionary" means Y12;t < 0
for all countries.




                                                                                                                   41
                                      Figure 5. Response to Monetary Policy Shocks
                             10 -3
                                          LSAP-I, Nov. 25 2008                                                   10 -3
                                                                                                                                LSAP-II, Aug. 10 2010
                     6                                                                            0.5

                                                                   GBPUS                                                                                 GBPUS
                     4                                                                                   0
                                                                   EURUS                                                                                 EURUS
                     2                                             CADUS                                                                                 CADUS
                                                                                                -0.5
                                                                   JAPUS                                                                                 JAPUS
                     0
                                                                                                     -1

                    -2
       Percent




                                                                                     Percent
                                                                                                -1.5

                    -4

                                                                                                     -2
                    -6

                                                                                                -2.5
                    -8

                                                                                                     -3
                   -10


                   -12                                                                          -3.5



                   -14                                                                               -4
                         0                  5               10             15                                0                    5                10                 15

                                                 Maturity                                                                              Maturity


                              10 -3
                                         LSAP-III, Sept. 13 2012                                                 10 -3
                                                                                                                      Treasury Security Purchases, Nov. 3 2010
                     1                                                                               2

                                                                   GBPUS                                                                                 GBPUS
                   0.5
                                                                   EURUS                             0
                                                                                                                                                         EURUS
                                                                   CADUS                                                                                 CADUS
                     0
                                                                   JAPUS                                                                                 JAPUS
                                                                                                    -2
                 -0.5


                                                                                                    -4




                                                                                     Percent
       Percent




                    -1



                 -1.5
                                                                                                    -6


                    -2
                                                                                                    -8

                 -2.5

                                                                                                 -10
                    -3



                 -3.5                                                                            -12
                         0                  5               10             15                                0                    5                10                 15

                                                 Maturity                                                                              Maturity

                                Maturity Extension Program: Sept 21 2011
                             10 -3                                                                                     Maturity Extension Program: June 20 2012
                    8                                                                                                10 -4
                                                                                                         20
                                                                   GBPUS                                                                                GBPUS
                    7
                                                                   EURUS                                                                                EURUS
                                                                   CADUS                                                                                CADUS
                    6                                                                                    15
                                                                   JAPUS                                                                                JAPUS
                    5

                                                                                                         10
         Percent




                    4
                                                                                               Percent




                    3

                                                                                                             5

                    2



                    1
                                                                                                             0


                    0



                   -1                                                                                     -5
                         0                  5               10             15                                    0                5               10             15
                                                 Maturity                                                                              Maturity




Note. The …gure plots responses of exchange rates on selected announcement dates.




                                                                                42
           Figure 6. Response to Monetary Policy Shocks Robust to Informational
                                                                                                 E¤ects: Conventional Period
                                                                                                  Panel A. United Kingdom
                                      I. Fully Contractionary                                                                                                      II. Fully Expansionary
                       10 -4          GBPUS                                                                                                            10 -3       GBPUS
          20                                                                         0.18                                                   0.5                                                               0.05


                                                                                     0.16
                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
          15                                                                         0.14
                                                                                                                                            -0.5
                                                        ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                                     ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                     0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.05
                                                                                                                                             -1
          10                                                                          0.1
Percent




                                                                                                                                  Percent
                                                                                     0.08                                                   -1.5                                                               -0.1


           5                                                                         0.06
                                                                                                                                             -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.15
                                                           (




                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                        mp




                                                                                                                                                                                     mp
                                                                                     0.04
                                                        t




                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                            -2.5
           0                                                                         0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.2
                                                                                                                                             -3
                                                                                        0


          -5                                                                         -0.02                                                  -3.5                                                              -0.25
               0                  5           10   15                                        0     10              20   30                         0           5           10   15                                    0   10              20   30
                                        h                                                               Maturity                                                     h                                                         Maturity


                        III. More Contractionary at Short                                                                                                IV. More Expansionary at Short
                        10   -3       GBPUS                                                                                                            10 -3       GBPUS
               2                                                                      0.15                                                    2                                                               0.25



                                                                                                                                            1.5                                                                0.2
          1.5
                                                                                       0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.15
                                                                                                                                              1
               1


                                                                                                                                                                                     ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                            ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.1
                                                                                      0.05                                                  0.5
          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.05
                                                                                                                                  Percent
Percent




                                                                                                                                              0

               0                                                                         0                                                                                                                       0

                                                                                                                                            -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.05
          -0.5
                                                                                     -0.05                                                   -1
                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                           (




                                                                                                                                                                                     mp
                                                        mp




                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                        t




           -1
                                                                                                                                            -1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.15
                                                                                      -0.1
          -1.5
                                                                                                                                             -2                                                                -0.2


           -2                                                                        -0.15                                                  -2.5                                                              -0.25
                   0              5           10   15                                        0     10              20   30                         0           5           10   15                                    0   10              20   30
                                        h                                                               Maturity                                                     h                                                         Maturity




                                                                                                                             43
                                                                                                      Figure 6 (continued)
                                                                                                                 Panel B. Euro
                                    I. Fully Contractionary                                                                                                         II. Fully Expansionary
                      10 -3         EURUS                                                                                                          10 -3           EURUS
             4                                                                        0.18                                                1                                                                   0.05


            3.5                                                                       0.16
                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
             3                                                                        0.14




                                                                                                                                                                                     ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                            ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                                                                          -1
            2.5                                                                       0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.05

             2                                                                         0.1
                                                                                                                                          -2




                                                                                                                                Percent
Percent




            1.5                                                                       0.08                                                                                                                     -0.1

                                                                                                                                          -3
             1                                                                        0.06

                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                         (




                                                                                                                                                                                     mp
                                                      mp




            0.5                                                                       0.04
                                                                                                                                          -4




                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                      t




             0                                                                        0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.2
                                                                                                                                          -5
          -0.5                                                                           0


             -1                                                                      -0.02                                                -6                                                                  -0.25
                  0             5           10   15                                          0   10              20   30                       0               5           10   15                                    0   10              20   30
                                      h                                                               Maturity                                                       h                                                         Maturity


                       III. More Contractionary at Short                                                                                                     IV. More Expansionary at Short
                      10   -3       EURUS                                                                                                          10   -3         EURUS
             3                                                                       0.15                                                 6                                                                   0.25


                                                                                                                                          5                                                                     0.2
             2
                                                                                      0.1
                                                                                                                                          4                                                                   0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                     ) (Change in Yield, %)
             1
                                                      ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                          3                                                                     0.1
                                                                                     0.05
             0
                                                                                                                                          2                                                                   0.05
                                                                                                                                Percent
  Percent




            -1                                                                          0                                                 1                                                                       0


                                                                                                                                          0                                                                   -0.05
            -2
                                                                                     -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                         (




                                                                                                                                                                                     mp
                                                      mp




                                                                                                                                          -1                                                                   -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                      t




            -3
                                                                                                                                          -2                                                                  -0.15
                                                                                      -0.1
            -4
                                                                                                                                          -3                                                                   -0.2


            -5                                                                       -0.15                                                -4                                                                  -0.25
                 0              5           10   15                                          0   10              20   30                       0               5           10   15                                    0   10              20   30
                                      h                                                               Maturity                                                       h                                                         Maturity




                                                                                                                           44
                                                                                                      Figure 6 (continued)
                                                                                                          Panel C. Canada
                                          I. Fully Contractionary                                                                                                    II. Fully Expansionary
                          10 -4          CADUS                                                                                                       10 -4          CADUS
             8                                                                       0.18                                                 14                                                                       0.05



             6                                                                       0.16                                                 12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                     0.14
             4                                                                                                                            10




                                                           ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                                      ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                     0.12
             2                                                                                                                             8                                                                       -0.05

                                                                                      0.1




                                                                                                                                Percent
Percent




             0                                                                                                                             6

                                                                                     0.08                                                                                                                           -0.1

             -2                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                     0.06

             -4                                                                                                                            2                                                                       -0.15
                                                              (




                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                           mp




                                                                                                                                                                                      mp
                                                                                     0.04
                                                           t




                                                                                                                                                                                      t
             -6                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                     0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.2

             -8                                                                         0                                                 -2



            -10                                                                      -0.02                                                -4                                                                       -0.25
                  0                  5           10   15                                     0   10              20    30                      0                5           10   15                                        0   10              20   30
                                           h                                                          Maturity                                                        h                                                             Maturity


                           III. More Contractionary at Short                                                                                                 IV. More Expansionary at Short
                           10   -3       CADUS                                                                                                        10   -3       CADUS
                  1                                                                  0.15                                                   2                                                                       0.25


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                      0.1
             0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                          ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                            ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                     0.05

                  0                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                Percent
  Percent




                                                                                        0                                                                                                                              0

                                                                                                                                            0
            -0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.05

                                                                                     -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                              (




                                                                                                                                                                                      mp
                                                           mp




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.1
                                                                                                                                          -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                      t
                                                           t




              -1                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.15
                                                                                      -0.1
                                                                                                                                           -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.2


            -1.5                                                                     -0.15                                                -1.5                                                                     -0.25
                      0              5           10   15                                     0   10              20   30                         0              5           10   15                                        0   10              20   30
                                           h                                                          Maturity                                                        h                                                             Maturity




                                                                                                                           45
                                                                                                         Figure 6 (continued)
                                                                                                               Panel D. Japan
                                        I. Fully Contractionary                                                                                                           II. Fully Expansionary
                         10   -3       JAPUS                                                                                                             10   -3         JAPUS
               3.5                                                                       0.18                                                   1                                                                   0.05


                                                                                         0.16
                3
                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                         0.14




                                                                                                                                                                                           ) (Change in Yield, %)
               2.5



                                                               ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                                                                                -1
                                                                                         0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.05
                2
                                                                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                                -2




                                                                                                                                      Percent
 Percent




               1.5                                                                       0.08                                                                                                                        -0.1

                                                                                                                                                -3
                                                                                         0.06
                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                            (




                                                                                                                                                                                           mp
                                                         mp




                                                                                         0.04
                                                                                                                                                -4




                                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                         t




               0.5
                                                                                         0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.2
                                                                                                                                                -5
                0
                                                                                            0


           -0.5                                                                         -0.02                                                   -6                                                                  -0.25
                     0             5           10   15                                          0   10              20      30                       0               5           10   15                                    0   10              20   30
                                         h                                                               Maturity                                                          h                                                         Maturity


                           III. More Contractionary at Short                                                                                                       IV. More Expansionary at Short
                         10 -3         JAPUS                                                                                                             10 -3           JAPUS
                4                                                                       0.15                                                    4                                                                   0.25


                                                                                                                                                3                                                                     0.2
                3
                                                                                         0.1
                                                                                                                                                2                                                                   0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                           ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                         ) (Change in Yield, %)




                2
                                                                                                                                                1                                                                     0.1
                                                                                        0.05

                                                                                                                                                0                                                                   0.05
                1
                                                                                                                                      Percent
     Percent




                                                                                           0                                                    -1                                                                      0

                0
                                                                                                                                                -2                                                                  -0.05

                                                                                        -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                            (




                                                                                                                                                                                           mp
                                                         mp




                                                                                                                                                -3                                                                   -0.1
               -1
                                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                         t




                                                                                                                                                -4                                                                  -0.15
                                                                                         -0.1
               -2
                                                                                                                                                -5                                                                   -0.2


               -3                                                                       -0.15                                                   -6                                                                  -0.25
                    0              5           10   15                                          0   10              20      30                       0               5           10   15                                    0   10              20   30
                                         h                                                               Maturity                                                          h                                                         Maturity



               Note to the Figure. "Fully Contractionary" means Y1=4;t > 0; Y5;t                                                                                                                                    Y1=4;t > 0 and "Fully
Expansionary" means Y1=4;t < 0; Y5;t                                                                                     Y1=4;t < 0. "More Contractionary at Short" means
Y1=4;t < 0; Y5;t Y1=4;t > 0 while "Less Expansionary at Long" means Y1=4;t > 0; Y5;t Y1=4;t <
0.




                                                                                                                                 46
                                      Figure 7, Panel A. Change in Yield Curve Di¤erential
                                             LSAP-I, Nov . 25 2008                                                  LSAP-II, Aug. 10 2010
                       0.05                                                                    0.04

                                                                       GBPUS                                                                  GBPUS
                                                                                               0.02
                          0
                                                                       EURUS                                                                  EURUS
                                                                       CADUS                                                                  CADUS
                                                                                                  0

                       -0.05
                                                                                               -0.02


                        -0.1
         Percent




                                                                                     Percent
                                                                                               -0.04



                                                                                               -0.06
                       -0.15


                                                                                               -0.08
                        -0.2

                                                                                                -0.1

                       -0.25
                                                                                               -0.12



                        -0.3                                                                   -0.14
                               0       5     10     15      20   25    30      35                      0       5     10    15      20   25    30       35

                                                     Maturity                                                               Maturity

                                             LSAP-III, Sept. 13 2012                                       Treasury Security Purchases, Nov . 3 2010
                        0.1                                                                    0.25

                                                                       GBPUS                                                                  GBPUS
                                                                       EURUS                                                                  EURUS
                                                                                                0.2
                       0.05                                            CADUS                                                                  CADUS


                                                                                               0.15

                          0
         Percent




                                                                                     Percent    0.1


                       -0.05

                                                                                               0.05



                        -0.1
                                                                                                  0




                       -0.15                                                                   -0.05
                               0       5     10     15      20   25    30      35                      0       5     10    15      20   25    30       35

                                                     Maturity                                                               Maturity

                                    Maturity Extension Program: Sept 21 2011                               Maturity Extension Program: June 20 2012
                         0.1                                                                   0.15

                                                                       GBPUS                                                                  GBPUS
                        0.05
                                                                       EURUS                                                                  EURUS
                                                                       CADUS                                                                  CADUS
                           0
                                                                                                0.1


                       -0 .05
                                                                                     Percent
             Percent




                        -0 .1

                                                                                               0.05

                       -0 .15



                        -0 .2


                                                                                                  0
                       -0 .25



                        -0 .3



                       -0 .35                                                                  -0.05
                                0      5     10     15      20   25    30      35                      0       5     10    15      20   25    30       35

                                                     Maturity                                                               Maturity




    Note to the …gure. The …gure plots the change in the yield di¤erential for the events listed in
the title.




                                                                                47
                                      Figure 7, Panel B. Response to Monetary Policy Shocks
                               10-3
                                           LSAP-I, Nov . 25 2008                                       10-4
                                                                                                                   LSAP-II, Aug. 10 2010
                     6                                                                        2

                                                                     GBPUS                                                                   GBPUS
                     4
                                                                     EURUS                                                                   EURUS
                                                                                              0
                                                                     CADUS                                                                   CADUS

                     2
                                                                                              -2


                     0




                                                                                   Percent
           Percent




                                                                                              -4

                     -2


                                                                                              -6
                     -4



                                                                                              -8
                     -6




                     -8                                                                      -10
                          0                  5                10             15                    0                  5               10              15

                                                   Maturity                                                                Maturity


                               10-3
                                           LSAP-III, Sept. 13 2012                                        Treasury Security Purchases, Nov . 3 2010
                                                                                                       10-3
                     0.5                                                                      2

                                                                     GBPUS                                                                   GBPUS
                      0                                              EURUS                    0
                                                                                                                                             EURUS
                                                                     CADUS                                                                   CADUS
                   -0.5
                                                                                              -2


                      -1
                                                                                              -4
                                                                                   Percent
         Percent




                   -1.5

                                                                                              -6
                      -2


                                                                                              -8
                   -2.5


                                                                                             -10
                      -3



                   -3.5                                                                      -12
                           0                  5               10             15                    0                  5               10              15

                                                   Maturity                                                                Maturity

                                 Maturity Extension Program: Sept 21 2011
                               10-3
                                                                                                         Maturity Extension Program: June 20 2012
                                                                                                       10-4
                     8                                                                        4

                                                                     GBPUS                                                                   GBPUS
                     7
                                                                     EURUS                    2                                              EURUS
                                                                     CADUS                                                                   CADUS
                     6
                                                                                              0


                     5
                                                                                              -2
                                                                                   Percent
           Percent




                     4

                                                                                              -4

                     3

                                                                                              -6
                     2


                                                                                              -8
                     1



                     0                                                                       -10



                     -1                                                                      -12
                          0                  5                10             15                    0                  5               10              15

                                                   Maturity                                                                Maturity




    Note to the …gure. The …gure plots the response of exchange rates to the events listed in the
title.




                                                                              48
Figure 8. Response to Relative Yield Curves on Announcement Days: Euro
                                                      Panel A. Conventional Period
                                          I. Fully Contractionary         II. Fully Expansionary
                                  10 -3        E URUS                                                                                                                                       10 -3            E URUS
                         3                                                                           0.16                                                                        1                                                                                              0.05



                                                                                                     0.14
                     2.5                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0

                                                                                                     0.12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                        ) (Change in Yield, %)
                         2                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                       0.1                                                                                                                                                                     -0.05


                     1.5                                                                                                                                                        -2
        Percent




                                                                                                                                                                      Percent
                                                                                                     0.08

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.1

                                                                                                     0.06
                         1                                                                                                                                                      -3


                                                                                                     0.04                                                                                                                                                                      -0.15
                                                                      (




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                   mp




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mp
                     0.5                                           t                                                                                                            -4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                     0.02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.2
                         0                                                                                                                                                      -5
                                                                                                            0



                   -0.5                                                                             -0.02                                                                       -6                                                                                             -0.25
                             0             5            10   15                                                 0       10              20        30                                 0                   5             10        15                                                         0          10              20             30
                                                 h                                                                           Maturity                                                                             h                                                                                         Maturity



       III. More Contractionary at Short                                                                                                                                IV. More Expansionary at Short
                                 10 -3         E URUS                                                                                                                                        10 -3           E URUS
                      3                                                                             0.12                                                                        2.5                                                                                                  0.1



                                                                                                      0.1                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.05
                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                    0.08
                                                                   ) (Change in Yield, %)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                      1                                                                             0.06

                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                  Percent
           Percent




                                                                                                    0.04

                      0                                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                    0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                            -0.5

                     -1                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                      (




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mp
                                                                   mp




                                                                                                                                                                                 -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.15



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t
                                                                   t




                                                                                                    -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                            -1.5
                     -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.2
                                                                                                    -0.04                                                                        -2


                     -3                                                                             -0.06                                                                   -2.5                                                                                                -0.25
                          0                5         10      15                                              0          10           20           30                                    0                5                 10    15                                                           0            10              20         30

                                                 h                                                                           Maturity                                                                             h                                                                                             Maturity


                                                        Panel B. Unconventional Period
                                                I. Contractionary             II. Expansionary
                                 10 -3         E URUS                                                                                                                                 10 -4              E URUS
                  1.5                                                                                 0.4                                                                   2                                                                                                 0.2



                      1                                                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                 0.1
                                                                                                      0.3

                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                         -2                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ) (Change in Yield, %)
                                                                           ) (Change in Yield, %)




                      0                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                                         -4                                                                                                   -0.1
                                                                                                                                                            Percent
       Percent




                  -0.5

                                                                                                      0.1                                                                -6                                                                                                   -0.2

                     -1

                                                                                                                                                                         -8                                                                                                   -0.3
                  -1.5                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                       (




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mp
                                                                    mp




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t
                                                                    t




                                                                                                                                                                      -10                                                                                                     -0.4
                     -2

                                                                                                     -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                      -12                                                                                                     -0.5
                  -2.5



                     -3                                                                              -0.2                                                             -14                                                                                                     -0.6
                           0               5            10    15                                             0      5   10      15      20   25   30                            0                    5                10        15                                                    0           5   10         15   20        25   30

                                                 h                                                                           Maturity                                                                         h                                                                                            Maturity




                                                                                                                                                       49
                                  Figure 9, Panel A. UIRP in the Conventional Period
                                  United Kingdom                                                                                         Europe
                                                    GBPUS                                                                                        EURUS
                 0.2                                                                                           0.15




                0.15
                                                                                                                0.1



                 0.1
                                                                                                               0.05
Average Shock




                                                                                               Average Shock
                0.05

                                                                                                                  0

                   0


                                                                                                               -0.05
                -0.05



                                                                                                                -0.1
                 -0.1




                -0.15                                                                                          -0.15
                        -4   -3    -2             -1           0            1   2         3                            -6   -5   -4   -3        -2        -1         0   1   2       3
                                         Exchange Rate Response on Impact             10 -3                                           Exchange Rate Response on Impact           10 -3




                                            Canada
                                                    CADUS
                0.15




                 0.1




                0.05
Average Shock




                   0




                -0.05




                 -0.1




                -0.15
                    -1.5     -1   -0.5            0           0.5           1   1.5       2
                                         Exchange Rate Response on Impact             10 -3




                                                                                          50
                                             Figure 9, Panel B. UIRP in the Unconventional Period




                                             United Kingdom                                                                                                             Europe
                                                                  GBPUS                                                                                                       EURUS
                       0.2                                                                                                                 0.3




                       0.1                                                                                                                 0.2




                         0                                                                                                                 0.1




                                                                                                                           Average Shock
       Average Shock




                       -0.1                                                                                                                  0




                       -0.2                                                                                                                -0.1




                       -0.3                                                                                                                -0.2




                       -0.4                                                                                                                -0.3
                           -10     -8        -6            -4         -2          0           2       4           6                               -3   -2.5   -2   -1.5       -1       -0.5        0   0.5   1      1.5
                                                       Exchange Rate Response on Impact                       10 -3                                                 Exchange Rate Response on Impact             10 -3




                                                          Canada
                                                                  CADUS
                       0.15


                        0.1


                       0.05


                          0


                  -0.05
 Average Shock




                       -0.1


                  -0.15


                       -0.2


                  -0.25


                       -0.3


                  -0.35
                       -12       -10    -8        -6         -4       -2        0         2       4       6           8
                                                       Exchange Rate Response on Impact                        10 -3




                        Notes to the …gure. The …gure reports scatterplots of average interest rate di¤erentials across
maturities on days of US monetary policy announcements (y-axis) and their relative exchange rate
response (x-axis).




                                                                                                                      51
Figure 10. Response Decomposition: Conventional Period, UK
                                        Panel A. United Kingdom
                                          I. Fully Contractionary
                      10 -3       GBPUS                                             10 -4       1,t
   Percent   2                                                             0




                                                               Percent
             1
                                                                           -1
             0

             -1                                                            -2
                  1           2     3       4     5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                    h                                                           h

                      10 -3         2,t                                             10 -3       3,t
             2                                                             2
   Percent




                                                                 Percent
             1
                                                                           1
             0

             -1                                                            0
                  1           2     3       4     5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                    h                                                           h


                      10 -3         4,t                                             10 -4       5,t
             1                                                             5
   Percent




                                                           Percent


                                                                           0
             0
                                                                           -5

             -1                                                        -10
                  1           2     3       4     5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                    h                                                           h


                                          II. Fully Expansionary
                      10 -3       GBPUS                                             10 -4       1,t
             2                                                             3
   Percent




                                                                 Percent




             0                                                             2

             -2                                                            1

             -4                                                            0
                  1           2     3       4     5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                    h                                                           h

                      10 -3         2,t                                             10 -3       3,t
             2                                                             0
   Percent




                                                               Percent




                                                                           -1
             0
                                                                           -2

             -2                                                            -3
                  1           2     3       4     5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                    h                                                           h


                      10 -3         4,t                                             10 -4       5,t
             1                                                           10
   Percent




                                                             Percent




             0                                                             5

             -1                                                            0

             -2                                                            -5
                  1           2     3       4     5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                    h                                                           h




                                                      52
                               Panel A (continued). United Kingdom
                                    III. More Contractionary at Short
                       10 -4       GBPUS                                             10 -5       1,t
             10                                                             0


 Percent




                                                                Percent
              5                                                             -2

              0                                                             -4

             -5                                                             -6
                  1            2     3         4   5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                           h

                       10 -4             2,t                                         10 -4       3,t
             10                                                             5
 Percent




                                                                Percent
              5
                                                                            0
              0

             -5                                                             -5
                  1            2     3         4   5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                           h


                       10 -4             4,t                                         10 -4       5,t
              1                                                             2
   Percent




                                                                Percent
              0                                                             1

             -1                                                             0

             -2                                                             -1
                  1            2     3         4   5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                           h


                                    IV. More Expansionary at Short
                      10 -3        GBPUS                                             10 -4       1,t
             2                                                              6
Percent




                                                                  Percent




             0                                                              4

           -2                                                               2

           -4                                                               0
                 1             2     3         4   5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                           h

                      10 -3          2,t                                             10 -3       3,t
             2                                                              4
Percent




                                                                Percent




                                                                            2
             0
                                                                            0

           -2                                                               -2
                 1             2     3         4   5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                           h


                      10 -3          4,t                                             10 -4       5,t
             2                                                              5
Percent




                                                            Percent




                                                                            0
             0
                                                                            -5

           -2                                                         -10
                 1             2     3         4   5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                           h




                                                       53
                                                    Figure 10 (continued)
                                                        Panel B. Euro
                                                    I. Fully Contractionary
                    10 -3               EURUS                                              10 -4       1,t
           4                                                                      1
Percent




                                                                      Percent
           2                                                                      0

           0                                                                      -1

           -2                                                                     -2
                1               2         3           4      5                         1           2   3     4   5
                                          h                                                            h

                    10 -3                 2,t                                              10 -3       3,t
           2                                                                      2
Percent




                                                                      Percent
           1                                                                      0

           0                                                                      -2

           -1                                                                     -4
                1               2         3           4      5                         1           2   3     4   5
                                          h                                                            h


                    10 -3                 4,t                                              10 -3       5,t
           4                                                                      2
Percent




                                                                      Percent

           2                                                                      0

           0                                                                      -2

           -2                                                                     -4
                1               2         3           4      5                         1           2   3     4   5
                                          h                                                            h


                                                     II. Fully Expansionary
                        10 -3           EURUS                                              10 -4       1,t
                5                                                                  4
     Percent




                                                                        Percent




                                                                                   2
                0
                                                                                   0

               -5                                                                 -2
                    1               2     3            4     5                         1           2   3     4   5
                                          h                                                            h


                        10 -3                 2,t                                          10 -3       3,t
                2                                                                  4
     Percent




                                                                        Percent




                0                                                                  2

               -2                                                                  0

               -4                                                                 -2
                    1               2     3            4     5                         1           2   3     4   5
                                          h                                                            h


                        10 -3                 4,t                                          10 -3       5,t
                5                                                                  4
 Percent




                                                                        Percent




                0                                                                  2

               -5                                                                  0

           -10                                                                    -2
                    1               2     3            4     5                         1           2   3     4   5
                                          h                                                            h




                                                                 54
                                  Panel B (continued). Euro
                                 III. More Contractionary at Short
                    10 -3       EURUS                                         10 -5       1,t
            2                                                        5


 Percent




                                                       Percent
            1                                                        0

            0                                                        -5

           -1                                                      -10
                1           2     3     4     5                           1           2   3     4   5
                                  h                                                       h

                    10 -4         2,t                                         10 -4       3,t
           10                                                        5
Percent




                                                           Percent
            5
                                                                     0
            0

           -5                                                        -5
                1           2     3     4     5                           1           2   3     4   5
                                  h                                                       h


                    10 -4         4,t                                         10 -4       5,t
            5                                                        10
 Percent




                                                         Percent     5
            0
                                                                     0

           -5                                                        -5
                1           2     3     4     5                           1           2   3     4   5
                                  h                                                       h


                                 IV. More Expansionary at Short
                    10 -3       EURUS                                         10 -4       1,t
            5                                                        10
 Percent




                                                         Percent




                                                                     5
            0
                                                                     0

           -5                                                        -5
                1           2     3     4     5                           1           2   3     4   5
                                  h                                                       h

                    10 -3         2,t                                         10 -3       3,t
            2                                                        2
 Percent




                                                           Percent




            0                                                        0

           -2                                                        -2

           -4                                                        -4
                1           2     3     4     5                           1           2   3     4   5
                                  h                                                       h


                    10 -3         4,t                                         10 -3       5,t
           10                                                        2
Percent




                                                           Percent




            5                                                        0

            0                                                        -2

           -5                                                        -4
                1           2     3     4     5                           1           2   3     4   5
                                  h                                                       h




                                                  55
                                       Figure 10 (continued)
                                          Panel C. Canada
                                       I. Fully Contractionary
                   10 -3       CADUS                                        10 -4       1,t
          1                                                        2
Percent




                                                         Percent
          0                                                        0

          -1                                                       -2

          -2                                                       -4
               1           2     3       4      5                       1           2   3     4   5
                                 h                                                      h

                   10 -3         2,t                                        10 -3       3,t
          1                                                        1
Percent




                                                         Percent
                                                                   0
          0
                                                                   -1

          -1                                                       -2
               1           2     3       4      5                       1           2   3     4   5
                                 h                                                      h


                   10 -3         4,t                                        10 -3       5,t
          4                                                        1
Percent




                                                         Percent

          2                                                        0

          0                                                        -1

          -2                                                       -2
               1           2     3       4      5                       1           2   3     4   5
                                 h                                                      h


                                        II. Fully Expansionary
                   10 -3       CADUS                                        10 -4       1,t
          2                                                        4
Percent




                                                         Percent




          1                                                        2

          0                                                        0

          -1                                                       -2
               1           2     3       4      5                       1           2   3     4   5
                                 h                                                      h

                   10 -3         2,t                                        10 -3       3,t
          2                                                        4
Percent




                                                         Percent




                                                                   2
          0
                                                                   0

          -2                                                       -2
               1           2     3       4      5                       1           2   3     4   5
                                 h                                                      h


                   10 -3         4,t                                        10 -3       5,t
          5                                                        4
Percent




                                                         Percent




                                                                   2
          0
                                                                   0

          -5                                                       -2
               1           2     3       4      5                       1           2   3     4   5
                                 h                                                      h




                                                    56
                                    Panel C (continued). Canada
                                    III. More Contractionary at Short
                      10 -4        CADUS                                           10 -5       1,t
             5                                                            5


Percent




                                                            Percent
                                                                          0
             0
                                                                          -5

           -5                                                         -10
                 1             2     3         4   5                           1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                         h

                      10 -4          2,t                                           10 -4       3,t
             5                                                            5
Percent




                                                                Percent
             0                                                            0


           -5                                                             -5
                 1             2     3         4   5                           1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                         h


                      10 -4          4,t                                           10 -4       5,t
             5                                                            5
Percent




                                                                Percent
             0                                                            0


           -5                                                             -5
                 1             2     3         4   5                           1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                         h


                                    IV. More Expansionary at Short
                       10 -3       CADUS                                           10 -4       1,t
              2                                                           10
   Percent




                                                               Percent




                                                                          5
              0
                                                                          0

             -2                                                           -5
                  1            2     3         4   5                           1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                         h

                       10 -3             2,t                                       10 -3       3,t
              2                                                           2
   Percent




                                                                Percent




                                                                          0
              0
                                                                          -2

             -2                                                           -4
                  1            2     3         4   5                           1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                         h


                       10 -3             4,t                                       10 -3       5,t
             10                                                           2
 Percent




                                                                Percent




              5                                                           0

              0                                                           -2

             -5                                                           -4
                  1            2     3         4   5                           1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                         h




                                                       57
                                          Figure 10 (continued)
                                             Panel D. Japan
                                          I. Fully Contractionary
                      10 -3       JAPUS                                             10 -4       1,t
  Percent    5                                                             1




                                                                Percent
                                                                           0
             0
                                                                           -1

            -5                                                             -2
                 1            2     3       4      5                            1           2   3     4   5
                                    h                                                           h

                      10 -3         2,t                                             10 -3       3,t
             4                                                             5
  Percent




                                                                Percent
             2
                                                                           0
             0

            -2                                                             -5
                 1            2     3       4      5                            1           2   3     4   5
                                    h                                                           h


                      10 -3         4,t                                             10 -4       5,t
             5                                                             5
  Percent




                                                            Percent


                                                                           0
             0
                                                                           -5

            -5                                                         -10
                 1            2     3       4      5                            1           2   3     4   5
                                    h                                                           h


                                           II. Fully Expansionary
                      10 -3       JAPUS                                             10 -4       1,t
             5                                                              4
Percent




                                                                 Percent




             0                                                              2

             -5                                                             0

            -10                                                            -2
                  1           2     3        4     5                            1           2   3     4   5
                                    h                                                           h

                      10 -3         2,t                                             10 -3       3,t
             5                                                              5
Percent




                                                             Percent




             0                                                              0

             -5                                                            -5

            -10                                                           -10
                  1           2     3        4     5                            1           2   3     4   5
                                    h                                                           h


                      10 -3         4,t                                             10 -3       5,t
            10                                                              2
  Percent




                                                                 Percent




             5                                                              1

             0                                                              0

             -5                                                            -1
                  1           2     3        4     5                            1           2   3     4   5
                                    h                                                           h




                                                       58
                                     Panel D (continued). Japan
                                    III. More Contractionary at Short
                       10 -3       JAPUS                                           10 -5       1,t
               4                                                          5


   Percent




                                                           Percent
               2                                                          0

               0                                                          -5

              -2                                                     -10
                   1           2     3     4     5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                         h

                       10 -3         2,t                                           10 -3       3,t
               2                                                          1
   Percent




                                                               Percent
               1
                                                                          0
               0

              -1                                                          -1
                   1           2     3     4     5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                         h


                       10 -4         4,t                                           10 -4       5,t
              10                                                          4
 Percent




                                                               Percent
               5                                                          2

               0                                                          0

              -5                                                          -2
                   1           2     3     4     5                             1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                         h


                                     IV. More Expansionary at Short
                       10 -3       JAPUS                                           10 -4       1,t
               5                                                          10
Percent




                                                              Percent




               0                                                           5

              -5                                                           0

           -10                                                            -5
                   1           2     3     4      5                            1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                         h

                       10 -3         2,t                                           10 -3       3,t
               5                                                          10
    Percent




                                                              Percent




                                                                           5
               0
                                                                           0

              -5                                                          -5
                   1           2     3     4      5                            1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                         h


                       10 -3         4,t                                           10 -3       5,t
               5                                                           1
Percent




                                                                Percent




               0                                                           0

              -5                                                          -1

           -10                                                            -2
                   1           2     3     4      5                            1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                         h




                                                      59
Figure 11. Response Decomposition: Unconventional Period
                                                     Panel A. United Kingdom
                                                               I. Contractionary
                               10 -3               GBPUS                                                                   1,t
                     6                                                                               1
           Percent




                                                                                        Percent
                     4
                                                                                                     0
                     2

                     0                                                                              -1
                          1                2         3         4     5                                   1             2   3         4   5
                                                     h                                                                     h

                               10 -4                 2,t                                                      10 -3        3,t
                     5                                                                               2
  Percent




                                                                                        Percent
                     0                                                                               1

                     -5                                                                              0

              -10                                                                                   -1
                          1                2         3         4     5                                   1             2   3         4   5
                                                     h                                                                     h


                               10 -3                 4,t                                                      10 -3        5,t
                     2                                                                               3
      Percent




                                                                                          Percent

                                                                                                     2
                     0
                                                                                                     1

                     -2                                                                              0
                          1                2         3         4     5                                   1             2   3         4   5
                                                     h                                                                     h


                                                               II. Expansionary
                                   10 -3           GBPUS                                                       10 -3           1,t
                          5                                                                          1
       Percent




                                                                                           Percent




                          0
                                                                                                     0
                          -5

                     -10                                                                             -1
                               1               2         3     4     5                                    1            2   3         4   5
                                                         h                                                                 h


                                   10 -3                 2,t                                                                   3,t
                          4                                                                 0.01
                Percent




                                                                              Percent




                                                                                                     0
                          2
                                                                                         -0.01

                          0                                                              -0.02
                               1               2         3     4     5                                    1            2   3         4   5
                                                         h                                                                 h

                                                         4,t                                                   10 -3           5,t
              0.02                                                                                   5
 Percent




                                                                                           Percent




                          0                                                                          0


            -0.02                                                                                    -5
                               1               2         3     4     5                                    1            2   3         4   5
                                                         h                                                                 h




                                                                         60
                                           Panel B. Europe
                                           I. Contractionary
                       10 -3       EURUS                                                           1,t
            10                                                                1


 Percent




                                                                    Percent
              5
                                                                              0
              0

              -5                                                              -1
                   1           2     3     4        5                              1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                             h

                       10 -4         2,t                                               10 -4       3,t
              4                                                               10
  Percent




                                                                   Percent
              2                                                               5

              0                                                               0

              -2                                                              -5
                   1           2     3     4        5                              1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                             h


                       10 -4         4,t                                               10 -3       5,t
            10                                                                5
 Percent




                                                                    Percent
              5
                                                                              0
              0

              -5                                                              -5
                   1           2     3     4        5                              1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                             h


                                               II. Expansionary
                       10 -3       EURUS                                               10 -4       1,t
               5                                                               5
Percent




                                                               Percent




               0                                                               0

              -5                                                              -5

            -10                                                              -10
                   1           2     3     4        5                              1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                             h

                       10 -3         2,t                                                           3,t
               1                                                       0.01
    Percent




                                                         Percent




               0                                                               0

              -1                                                    -0.01

              -2                                                    -0.02
                   1           2     3     4        5                              1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                             h


                       10 -3         4,t                                                           5,t
              10                                                       0.01
  Percent




                                                         Percent




               5
                                                                               0
               0

              -5                                                    -0.01
                   1           2     3     4        5                              1           2   3     4   5
                                     h                                                             h




                                                        61
                                                         Figure 11 (continued)
                                                           Panel C. Canada
                                                            I. Contractionary
                                10 -3        CADUS                                                                     1,t
                    10                                                                           1
     Percent




                                                                                    Percent
                       5
                                                                                                 0
                       0

                    -5                                                                        -1
                           1             2     3           4     5                                   1             2   3         4   5
                                               h                                                                       h

                                10 -4          2,t                                                        10 -4        3,t
                       5                                                                      10
   Percent




                                                                               Percent
                       0                                                                         5

                    -5                                                                           0

               -10                                                                            -5
                           1             2     3           4     5                                   1             2   3         4   5
                                               h                                                                       h


                                10 -4          4,t                                                        10 -3        5,t
                       5                                                                      10
          Percent




                                                                               Percent


                       0                                                                         5


                    -5                                                                           0
                           1             2     3           4     5                                   1             2   3         4   5
                                               h                                                                       h


                                                            II. Expansionary
                                             CADUS                                                         10 -3           1,t
              0.01                                                                               1
Percent




                                                                                       Percent




                       0                                                                         0

           -0.01                                                                                 -1

           -0.02                                                                                 -2
                            1            2     3            4     5                                   1            2   3         4   5
                                               h                                                                       h

                                 10 -3             2,t                                                                     3,t
                       5                                                                0.01
             Percent




                                                                          Percent




                                                                                                 0
                       0
                                                                                      -0.01

                       -5                                                             -0.02
                            1            2     3            4     5                                   1            2   3         4   5
                                               h                                                                       h


                                 10 -3             4,t                                                                     5,t
                       4                                                                0.02
             Percent




                                                                          Percent




                       2                                                                0.01

                       0                                                                         0

                       -2                                                             -0.01
                            1            2     3            4     5                                   1            2   3         4   5
                                               h                                                                       h




                                                                     62
                                                         Panel D. Japan
                                                         I. Contractionary
                                10 -3        JAPUS                                                                          1,t
                       2                                                                       1


          Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                       1
                                                                                               0
                       0

                    -1                                                                     -1
                           1             2     3         4        5                                1                2       3         4       5
                                               h                                                                            h

                                10 -4          2,t                                                         10 -4            3,t
                    10                                                                     20
     Percent




                                                                               Percent
                       5
                                                                                           10
                       0

                    -5                                                                         0
                           1             2     3         4        5                                1                2       3         4       5
                                               h                                                                            h


                                10 -4          4,t                                                         10 -4            5,t
                       5                                                                       5
          Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                       0                                                                       0


                    -5                                                                     -5
                           1             2     3         4        5                                1                2       3         4       5
                                               h                                                                            h


                                                             II. Expansionary
                                             JAPUS                                                          10 -3               1,t
              0.02                                                                                 2
Percent




                                                                                     Percent




                       0
                                                                                                   0
            -0.02

            -0.04                                                                              -2
                            1            2     3             4        5                                1                2       3         4       5
                                               h                                                                                h

                                 10 -3             2,t                                                                          3,t
                       5                                                                 0.02
             Percent




                                                                           Percent




                                                                                                   0
                       0
                                                                                     -0.02

                       -5                                                            -0.04
                            1            2     3             4        5                                1                2       3         4       5
                                               h                                                                                h


                                 10 -3             4,t                                                      10 -3               5,t
                       4                                                                           1
             Percent




                                                                                     Percent




                       2
                                                                                                   0
                       0

                       -2                                                                      -1
                            1            2     3             4        5                                1                2       3         4       5
                                               h                                                                                h




                                                                      63
     Note to Figure 10. "Fully Contractionary" means Y1=4;t > 0; Y5;t   Y1=4;t > 0 and "Fully
Expansionary" means Y1=4;t < 0; Y5;t     Y1=4;t < 0. "More Contractionary at Short" means
Y1=4;t < 0; Y5;t Y1=4;t > 0 while "Less Expansionary at Long" means Y1=4;t > 0; Y5;t Y1=4;t <
0.

     Notes to Figure 11. Each of the four …gures plots the monetary policy shock (panel
on the right) and the corresponding exchange rate’s response (panel on the left) for the
currencies indicated in the title. "Contractionary" means Y20;t > 0 and "Expansionary"
means Y20;t < 0 for all countries except Japan, for which "Contractionary" means Y10;t > 0
and "Expansionary" means Y10;t :




                                             64
