                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DO NEIGHBORHOODS AFFECT CREDIT MARKET DECISIONS OF LOW-INCOME
  BORROWERS? EVIDENCE FROM THE MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY EXPERIMENT

                                          Sarah Miller
                                          Cindy K. Soo

                                       Working Paper 25023
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25023


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2018, Revised March 2020




The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Russell Sage Foundation Award 83-17-14.
In addition, the authors thank Mark Shroder and Lydia Taghavi at the Department of Housing and
Urban Development for providing the Moving to Opportunity Data, Cathleen Kelmar, Tushar
Takkar, and Leila Agha for their assistance with the provision of the Experian credit report data,
and Heather Lamoureux for assisting with the provision of the alternative credit data from Clarity
Services, Inc. The authors also gratefully acknowledge useful feedback received from Joanne Hsu
and seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute Household Finance Group, the Western
Finance Association Annual Meetings, the University of California-Berkeley Real Estate Group,
New York University Stern-Real Estate, The Federal Reserve Board - George Washington
University Financial Literacy Series, the University of Houston Finance department, the
University of Oregon Finance department, and the University of Michigan Finance group. The
results presented in this paper do not reflect the opinions of the aforementioned institutions, nor
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Sarah Miller and Cindy K. Soo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Neighborhoods Affect Credit Market Decisions of Low-Income Borrowers? Evidence
from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment
Sarah Miller and Cindy K. Soo
NBER Working Paper No. 25023
September 2018, Revised March 2020
JEL No. D12,D14,G41

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper isolates the causal impact of neighborhood environment on credit outcomes of low-
income borrowers by analyzing the participants of the Moving to Opportunity (MTO)
experiment. MTO was a unique, large-scale experiment that offered families vouchers to move to
better neighborhoods via randomized lottery. We find higher credit scores and use among those
required to move to the lowest poverty areas as young children. For those who moved as adults,
we find that better neighborhoods lead to a reduction of overdue debts and delinquencies, but
only among those given unrestricted neighborhood choice.


Sarah Miller
Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
mille@umich.edu

Cindy K. Soo
University of Michigan,
Ross School of Business,
701 Tappan Street,
Ann Arbor MI 48109-1234
csoo@umich.edu
       Borrowers in low-income neighborhoods tend to use and access credit very differently than those

in high-income neighborhoods. Relative to higher-income borrowers, studies find low-income house-

holds are more likely to repeatedly borrow at high interest rates, use high-interest credit products

such as payday loans, be categorized as high-risk or sub-prime borrowers, and have limited access

to formal credit.1 The observed borrowing differences across poor and non-poor households raise

alarming concerns for policies aimed at ensuring equal credit access and preventing discriminatory

lending within low income neighborhoods. Disentangling whether it is the neighborhood or the

borrower, however, that drives these behaviors is challenging empirically. Individuals select into

their neighborhoods based on their own unobservable tastes and characteristics, which may in turn

impact their financial decisions.

       In this paper, we overcome this challenge and isolate the causal impact of neighborhoods on

the borrowing behavior of low income households by linking participants of the Moving to Op-

portunity (MTO) experiment to nearly two decades of credit report data. The MTO experiment

was a unique, large-scale randomized controlled trial conducted by the Department of Housing and

Urban Development between 1994 and 1998. This experiment randomized individuals living in

low-income subsidized housing projects into one of two treatment groups. The first group, called

the Experimental group, received a voucher that required participants to move to a neighborhood

with a less than 10 percent poverty rate. The second treatment group, called the Section 8 group,

received an unrestricted Section 8 voucher, which provided the same rent subsidy but allowed the

recipient to move to a neighborhood of her choice. The MTO experiment was designed to measure

the impacts of these treatments relative to a control group of families that were currently living in

government subsidized public housing in high poverty (> 40 percent) neighborhoods. As previously

documented in Kling et al. (2007), Ludwig et al. (2012), Chetty et al. (2016), and others, being

randomized into either treatment group resulted in a substantial reduction in neighborhood poverty

rate.

       Prior literature provides support for several channels through which neighborhood environment

may impact credit outcomes. A number of studies highlight the positive impacts neighborhoods

could have on behavior through peer effects, either through social learning or mimicking of better
   1
    See for example Rhine et al. (2006), Dobbie and Skiba (2013), Brevoort et al. (2015), Adams et al. (2009), Miller
et al. (2018) and Finkelstein et al. (2012))



                                                         2
norms (Gross and Souleles (2002), Duflo and Saez (2012), Bursztyn et al. (2014), Lieber and Skim-

myhorn (ming)). Better neighborhoods could also directly impact outcomes by simply facilitating

greater local access to mainstream financial institutions while simultaneously distancing borrowers

from the influence of local high-cost subprime lenders. At the same time, studies also suggest

better neighborhoods could lead to overborrowing through peer pressure to “keep up” with the

consumption of their higher-income neighbors (Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Bernheim (1994)).

Even in the absence of peer effects, lower poverty neighborhoods could impose higher costs of

living while simultaneously disrupting informal lending support networks. Finally, neighborhoods

could indirectly impact credit outcomes if they lead to improvements in other dimensions, such as

earnings.

   Our results show that neighborhoods impact credit outcomes of low-income households, through

both direct and indirect channels. Prior studies of MTO document increased earnings into adult-

hood among the youngest children of MTO, but consistently find zero effects on earnings of adults

and older children who moved to better neighborhoods. Thus if neighborhoods impact credit solely

through income, we would expect to find impacts on credit outcomes among those who moved as

young children only. We find, however, that adults who were allowed to select the neighborhood

they moved to significantly reduce their overdue debt and delinquencies. Our additional analy-

sis suggests that requiring adults to move to the lowest poverty neighborhoods imposes higher

consumption costs that outweigh debt reduction benefits of moving. Importantly, these results

uncover the first economic benefits of better neighborhood environment among adults and older

children. Prior MTO studies had previously concluded that moving had no detectable benefits on

the economic outcomes of adults, and thus focused on the benefits to young children.

   Our analysis first examines the impact of the MTO neighborhood experiment on the long-term

use of credit and creditworthiness. We find that younger children who moved to the lowest poverty

neighborhoods experience the greatest increases in use of credit and credit score into adulthood.

Among this group, voucher usage increased credit scores approximately 11 points relative to the

control group. This increase in credit score was accompanied by a meaningful impact on credit

limits, credit use, and credit availability. Participants randomized to Experimental families early

in childhood are approved for $821 more in credit limits in adulthood, or 62% more relative to

the control group mean. They utilize more credit and also have more revolving credit available.

                                                3
Applying a ‘back of the envelope’ calculation using estimates from recent studies that assess the

effect of income on credit scores, we find that approximately half of the improvements in credit score

are likely to be attributed to the observed income increases experienced by this group. We find

similar impacts, although of smaller magnitude, among younger children within Section 8 families

who also moved to better neighborhoods relative to the control group, but did not experience as

large of a reduction in neighborhood poverty rate as the Experimental families.

   Inconsistent with an income channel, however, we also find significant impacts on the repayment

of debts and delinquencies among adults. This is in contrast to previous MTO studies, which have

essentially found no economic benefits of moving to a low poverty neighborhood among those who

moved as adults. Interestingly, we only find these improvements among adults who were allowed

to choose the neighborhood they moved to. Adults who moved within this Section 8 treatment

group have $333 or 35% less in amounts more than 30 days overdue relative to the control group

average. We also find that adults who moved to better neighborhoods of their choice owe $245 or

66% less in overdue taxes, and $280 or 42% less debts in court judgments relative to the control

group mean. This reduction in debt is significant in magnitude given that earnings in this group are

less than $14,000 (Chetty et al. (2016)). We find similar reduction in delinquent debts, although

with less precision, among older children who moved within Section 8 families. We do not find any

statistically significant effects on delinquency among those in this age group who were randomized

to the Experimental group.

   Because of the low-income profiles of the MTO sample, we further evaluate whether participants

use alternative subprime credit options such as payday loans. Payday loans are short-term, non-

collateralized small loans that coincide with the payday of a borrower’s employer. These loans

typically come with very high fees ranging from $10 to $20 per $100 borrowed. We find that younger

children within the Section 8 voucher group show the largest and most significant reductions in

payday borrowing. Younger children within families assigned to Section 8 vouchers borrow about

50% less in payday loans annually relative to the control group.

   We pursue further analysis to explore the direct channels through which neighborhoods may

have impacted our results. First, we explore peer effect channels by using a large 4 million random

sample of credit reports to richly characterize the residents in zip codes where MTO participants

lived between 2001 and 2017. We find that participants who received vouchers both as adults and

                                                  4
as young children live in neighborhoods in adulthood where residents have higher credit scores and

used greater amounts of credit relative to the control group. Since both age groups experienced

significant changes in peers, it is somewhat surprising that the credit scores and use of credit

measures only improve for those randomized as young children, as the existing literature on peer

effects (Fay et al., 2002; Brown et al., 2008, e.g.) might have predicted that all participants would

behave more like their neighbors after being exposed to the new peer group.

   The fact that we do not observe similar debt reductions among adults in the Experimental group

suggests that the requirement to move to very low poverty neighborhoods incurs potential negative

impacts that dominate any positive neighborhood impacts gained by adults who were able to choose

their neighborhood within the Section 8 group. Utilizing our 4 million panel data set further, we

test whether neighborhoods adults in the Experimental group moved to show evidence of higher

costs of living or expenditures. Consistent with higher costs of living or external habit formation

models, we find that adults who were required to move to the lowest poverty neighborhoods also

move to neighborhoods where peer expenditures and credit utilization rates are higher.

   Finally, we use additional data from the Census Business Patterns to examine whether MTO

participants moved to neighborhoods with a greater number of physical banks or payday loan stores.

We observe that younger children in the Section 8 group who reduced their payday loan usage also

reside in zip code with fewer payday loan stores in adulthood. This suggests that the physical

presence of such intermediaries may be an important channel through which neighborhoods affect

use of payday loans. We do not, however, find that MTO adults or older children move to zip

codes with more traditional lending institutions or fewer payday loan stores. Note that this does

not imply that neighborhoods do not impact credit access through other credit supply channels,

but does suggest that the physical number of traditional bank branches located in a zip code is not

driving the reductions in debts we observe across adults who move to neighborhoods with Section

8 vouchers.

   Our work is the first to isolate a causal impact of neighborhood environment on credit outcomes

of subprime, low-income households. Understanding the extent to which neighborhoods can affect

credit outcomes is crucial to policies that aim to improve subprime borrowing behavior by altering

neighborhood characteristics. We find better neighborhood environment does have significant im-

pacts on credit outcomes, but that these effects are not uniform across borrowers. Younger children

                                                 5
who move to the lowest poverty neighborhoods in early childhood experience improvements consis-

tent with channels of income and peer effects: among this group, we find the greatest increases in

credit scores, credit limits, and mainstream credit use. For those who moved as adults, we find that

those who were allowed to choose the neighborhood they move to are able to significantly reduce

their overdue debts and delinquencies. However, despite this reduction in delinquencies, they do

not experience statistically significant increases in credit scores or credit limits. Our work is con-

sequently the first to document positive impacts of neighborhoods on economic outcomes among

adults in the MTO experiment. Our findings caution, however, that moving to the lowest poverty

neighborhoods can impose costs that overwhelm the positive impacts on older children and adults

without additional assistance. These results are particularly relevant for policymakers considering

the trade offs surrounding whether or not to encourage families to choose certain neighborhoods

that researchers believe are beneficial to young children, as has been implemented in a recent high

profile experiment by Bergman et al. (2019).

     The paper is organized as follows. Section I provides background and describes our data. Section

II outlines our hypotheses and proposes mechanisms through which neighborhoods could affect

credit outcomes. Section III describes our empirical analysis and presents our main results. Section

IV revisits Section II and discusses which hypotheses are consistent with our results. Section V

provides alternative specifications, additional results, and robustness checks. Section VI concludes.



                               I.    Background and Data

A.    The Moving to Opportunity Experiment

     The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) was authorized by Congress in

1992 to conduct a unique large-scale experiment across five U.S. cities named the Moving to Op-

portunity (MTO) experiment. The project aimed to address whether moving from a high to low

poverty neighborhood would improve the socioeconomic prospects of low-income families. From

1994 to 1998, HUD randomly allocated rental assistance vouchers to households with children liv-

ing in Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York. Participation in the program was

voluntary, but due to excess demand for vouchers, the MTO program was able to allocate vouchers

by randomized lottery. Families had to be currently residing in a high poverty census tract (>40


                                                  6
percent) and living in a public housing project or Section 8 assisted housing to apply.

       MTO randomly assigned participating households into one of three groups: the Experimental

group, the unrestricted (“Section 8”) voucher group, and a control group. The Experimental

group received housing vouchers that could only be used in Census tracts with poverty rates less

than 10 percent in the first year. This group also received additional intensive housing relocation

counseling services. The Section 8 voucher group received regular unrestricted vouchers that had

no location constraint. To be eligible for the experiment, families had to be already living in

public housing or receiving housing assistance; the control group simply experienced no change

in their housing assistance. Note that this eligibility criteria implies that the vouchers provided

by the MTO program did not represent any additional income subsidy in housing assistance, but

rather enabled families the opportunity to move out of their current housing location. The MTO

experiment enrolled a total of 4,608 low-income families into its program.

       As intended, the MTO experiment created significant variation in the types of the neighborhood

in which adult participants lived and their children were raised. Those who received and used the

Section 8 voucher moved to lower poverty neighborhoods relative to the control group and the

Experimental group was more likely to reside in lower poverty neighborhoods relative to both the

control group and the Section 8 group (see, e.g., Kling et al. (2007)). These effects on neighborhood

are persistent: Chetty et al. (2016) find these relative neighborhood poverty rates are true for

children both during childhood and into adulthood as well.2

       Initial studies of MTO found no effect of being randomized into the Experimental or Section

8 group on adult economic self-sufficiency or earnings, and mixed results for children, with some

positive effects detected for female children but negative effects on male children (Kling et al., 2007).

Follow-up on longer-term effects found that adults in the MTO treatment groups had improved

health as evidenced by lower rates of obesity and elevated glycated hemoglobin (a measure of

diabetes risk) (Ludwig et al., 2011). Additional long-term follow up found that those in the MTO
   2
     Follow up studies on mobility patterns of MTO show that participants within both treatment groups continued
to live in neighborhoods with on average lower poverty rates relative to the control group. MTO only required
Experimental voucher recipients to stay in their initial lower poverty neighborhood for one year. While the majority
of both treatment groups had moved again by 2002, voucher recipients of the Experimental voucher continued to
live in neighborhoods with lower poverty rates relative to those who received the Section 8 vouchers with no location
constraint (Orr et al. (2003)). Chetty et al. (2016) show that children of families who received the Experimental
vouchers lived in neighborhoods with on average lower poverty rates than those within families who received Section
8 vouchers, and similarly those within the Section 8 group lived in neighborhoods with lower poverty rates relative
to the control group.


                                                         7
treatment groups reported improved subjective well-being and suggestive improvements in mental

and physical health, but no improvements in labor market outcomes (Ludwig et al., 2012). Finally,

a study using tax data analyzed the long-term impacts of MTO on both children and adults who

were involved in the experiment (Chetty et al., 2016). Consistent with previous research, the

authors found null effects on earnings for those who participated in MTO as adults. However, they

found substantial improvements along several dimensions for children in the treatment groups who

were younger than 13 at the time of random assignment. In particular, they find an approximately

30 percent increase in earnings, a 2.5 percentage point increase in college attendance rates, and

lower single parenthood rates for children in the Experimental group. The authors find no effect

for children who were older at random assignment.


B.    MTO Data

     The data used in our analysis relies on two sources. First, we obtain information on all MTO

participants, including both those who were adults and children at the time of the experiment,

directly from HUD. Baseline information collected on MTO participants is extremely thorough

and includes variables such as employment status, income, government benefits, neighborhood

characteristics, and reasons for participating in MTO. These baseline surveys also report details on

children within each MTO household, including school behaviors or learning disabilities for older

children and birth weight for younger children. Detailed descriptions of all variables can be found

in Sanbonmatsu and Lindau (2011).

     In contrast to Chetty et al. (2016), our data do not contain information on the exact date

of random assignment for each participant. Instead, we see the site at which each individual is

associated, and we know the range of dates during which random assignment occurred at each site.

We therefore classify individuals as being, e.g., under 13 at random assignment if they were under

13 at the midpoint of their site’s random assignment period. Although this will likely result in some

mis-classification between older and younger children, this assignment mechanism should capture

the broad age groups we seek to define (i.e., child or adult; younger or older children).

     Following prior studies on MTO, we apply sampling weights to address changes in random as-

signment ratios during course of the MTO program (Kling et al. (2007), Chetty et al. (2016)). Each

individual is weighted by the inverse of his or her probability of being assigned to the Experimental

                                                 8
group. See Orr et al. (2003) for full details on sample weights construction.


C.        Traditional and Alternative Credit Data

         We obtain individual-level credit reports for MTO participants from Experian, one of the three

major credit bureau agencies. Our credit report data contain a snapshot of a consumer’s credit

profile observed annually from 2001 to 2017 in June of each year. Credit reports were matched

by name and social security number (SSN), which were provided by HUD to Experian. Data

was matched through a blinded process in order to protect privacy and all personally identifying

information was removed from the credit records before being provided to the authors for analysis.

         Our data allow us to observe adult MTO participants for up to 17 years. Those who were

children only enter the data set as adults, and most commonly around the age of 20 according to

Brevoort et al. (2015). Thus, all children will be eligible to enter the dataset by 2017, but we will

only observe credit outcomes for children in later years.

         We further link MTO participants to a novel data set provided by Clarity Services, Inc., a

subsidiary credit reporting agency of Experian that specializes in the subprime consumer market.

Clarity supplements information on alternative credit behavior–in particular, applications for and

use of payday loans–that is not available from traditional reporting agencies such as Experian.3

Given the low-income population of MTO participants, these types of alternative lending sources

may be particularly relevant. The Clarity payday loan data are provided to us at the loan level,

allowing us to see the repayment history and outcomes for specific accounts for the years 2014 to

2017. We also observe inquiries for payday loans over the same time period. We aggregate this

information to the year level to conduct our analysis.

         Clarity data includes over 60 million consumers, and covers over 70% of non-prime consumers

across the United States. However, despite their broad coverage, Clarity only obtains this informa-

tion for loans originating with lenders who use their underwriting services, so their database may
     3
     Payday loans are a short-term, single payment loans named after the fact that borrowers scheduled loan repayment
coincides with their next payday from their employer. Payday loans are unsecured by any collateral, but require
evidence of a regular income and a checking account. Lenders will typically accept a pay stub or Social Security
check as income evidence. Loan amounts are typically very small, ranging from $50 to $300, and very short-term, two
to four weeks, depending on the timing of the borrowers income. Fees associated with these single payment loans are
typically very high relative to the loan amount, ranging from $10 to $20 per $100 borrowed. While loan maturation
is usually set to the borrowers next payday, lenders often provide the option for borrowers to roll over or re-borrow
within a few days of the due date.



                                                         9
not include information on all products used by each borrower. This is an important caveat to our

analysis because effects on payday lending may be present but not observable in the Clarity data.

Nevertheless, we believe Clarity offers the best existing coverage of payday borrowing behavior

across the U.S..

         In addition, we note that online payday lenders are over-represented in Clarity’s database as

they are more likely to need external information when processing loan applications. These lenders

provide an interesting opportunity to evaluate the extent to which neighborhood affects borrowing

beyond physical access to brick-and-mortar storefront lenders.


D.        Match Rate and Summary Statistics

         We link the MTO data to administrative credit bureau and alternative credit records by name

and social security number (SSN). A total of 15,892 individuals participated in MTO, and HUD

provided valid SSNs for 11,512 of these participants, including adults and children.4 Of those SSNs,

we matched 95.2% (10,958 individuals) to Experian and 74% (8,515) to the alternative Clarity credit

data. Match rates to Experian are similar across all three treatment arms as demonstrated in Table

A1; note that the match rate listed for the control group contains the overall match rate, including

those without valid SSNs. It is also important to note that individuals only appear in the Clarity

credit data if they have used a subprime loan product cover by this dataset; we therefore have no

reason to expect a 100% match rate for this dataset.

         Although most individuals with a valid social security number were matched to the Experian

database, younger participants are typically observed for fewer years. For example, an individual

who was age 5 when his family received a voucher in 1996 might not have a credit report until age

20, in 2011. Such an individual would be observed for seven years (2011 to 2017), while his parents

might be observed for 17 years (2001 to 2017). On average, we observe matched participants for

8.6 years; those who were adults at random assignment we observe for 11 years on average; those

who were under age 13 at random assignment we observe for 6 years on average. As shown in Table

A1, the number of years for which we observe an individual does not vary across treatment arm.

         The original and follow-up MTO evaluations ensure that treatment and control groups are
     4
    The number of valid SSNs was provided to the authors by Experian and validity was determined through Expe-
rian’s internal analysis. The authors themselves did not have direct access to the SSN variable.



                                                     10
balanced across baseline characteristics. We replicate balance tests for our linked MTO-credit

sample, and find that treatment and control groups remain balanced. Out of the 52 baseline

covariates from the original MTO study, we find 3 significant differences between groups at the

p < 0.05 level and 3 additional differences significant at the p < 0.10 level. Given that we do not

adjust these t-tests for multiple comparisons, these differences are consistent of what we would

expect with random assignment.

      Table A1 presents summary statistics and results of the balance tests for a key set of covariates.5

MTO families came from very poor socioeconomic conditions. Table A1 shows that for our matched

sample, less than a quarter of the heads of household were employed, less than 40 percent had

completed high school, and most (80 percent) were receiving government assistance. Nearly a

third of the families had a teenage birth, and most had never been married. Nearly half reported

being a victim of a crime just 6 months prior to enrolling in MTO, and more than three-quarters

reported that their primary reasons for moving was to get away from gangs or drugs. Consistent

with the original MTO studies, more than 90 percent of the household heads were female and

African-American or Hispanic.



                      II.      Empirical Hypotheses and Framework

      Neighborhood effects are notoriously difficult to estimate because individuals endogenously

sort into neighborhoods based on unobserved characteristics. The MTO Experiment is a unique

setting to observe changes in individuals’ proximity to financial institutions and modifications to

peer groups in a robust and controlled setting. At the same time, moving neighborhoods changes

a bundle of characteristics simultaneously. While the MTO experiment allows us to identify a

causal effect of neighborhood changes, gaining an understanding of which channels neighborhoods

may move through to impact credit decisions is important and informative for policy design. In

the following, we outline channels through which MTO neighborhood changes can impact credit

decisions to inform any potential effects we estimate in our analysis.
  5
      Balance tests for all 52 covariates are available upon request.




                                                            11
A.    Direct Effects of Neighborhood through Credit Demand

     We begin by considering first order direct impacts neighborhoods may have on credit outcomes

by altering an individuals’ demand for credit. First, neighborhoods could affect demand for credit

through peer effects. Studies have shown peer effects have causal effects on individual stock market

and retirement investments (Brown et al. (2008), Hong et al. (2004), Duflo and Saez (2012), Bursz-

tyn et al. (2014)). Models of peer effects applied to the stock market posit that social interaction

may serve as a mechanism for observational learning or information diffusion (Hong et al. (2004);

Banerjee (1992); Ellison and Fudenberg (1993)), and experimental evidence shows that unsophis-

ticated investors in particular are strongly influenced by such “social learning” (Bursztyn et al.,

2014). Moving to a better neighborhood has the potential to expose MTO participants to peer

groups that influence their credit decisions through the same social mechanisms. This channel is

supported by studies of payday lending that find evidence that some low income borrowers improve

behavior in response to information disclosure interventions (Bertrand and Morse (2011), Burke

et al. (2016)). Better neighborhoods may provide low income borrowers with the peer groups to

learn about different credit products or provide better information to avoid high interest credit

products. At the same time, if neighbors’ behavior is not observable to participants, these peer

effects may be muted (Lieber and Skimmyhorn, ming).

     Alternatively, MTO participants may simply try to mimic the behavior of others in their neigh-

borhood for the purpose of social conformity without any information transmission occurring.

While information transmission via peers networks is likely to lead to “better” behavior, a mecha-

nism that implies MTO participants will simply behave more like their neighbors could be positive

or negative, depending on the behavior of their neighbors. While “social information” models of

peer effects suggest that moving to a neighborhood with more financially sophisticated neighbors

could improve borrowing behavior, models of conformity or external habit formation (Abel (1990);

Bernheim (1994); Campbell and Cochrane (1999)) suggest peers could have the opposite effect. By

encouraging consumption at the level of their higher-income neighbors, moving to a low poverty

neighborhood could generate a “keeping up with the Joneses effect” that may lead individuals

to take on debt in order to increase consumption to unsustainable levels (Agarwal et al., 2019;

Bertrand and Morse, 2016).



                                                 12
         Even in the absence of peer effects, moving to a lower poverty neighborhood may also directly

raise living costs, or encourage investments in children that require greater spending. Of the MTO

participants, nearly three-fourths of the participants were young, single mothers where moving

to a low poverty neighborhood may have increased basic costs of child care. Follow up surveys

of MTO participants who moved to the lowest poverty neighborhoods also lost access to public

transportation, free recreational activities, health care, shopping, and churches relative to those

who stayed in more central locations with higher poverty shares (Orr et al. (2003)). Thus if

moving to a low poverty neighborhood raises costs, we might expect MTO then to have negative

impacts on credit outcomes, especially for adults who were required to move to the lowest poverty

neighborhoods and bear the greatest burden of the initial move.6


B.        Direct Effects of Neighborhood through Credit Supply

         Moving neighborhoods also has the potential to directly impact credit supply by changing a

borrower’s physical access to lending institutions. This is particularly relevant for low income bor-

rowers, where a central issue in policy debates has been over access to finance, both through the

lack of availability of traditional credit and the prevalence of subprime credit products such as pay-

day loans across low income neighborhoods. A better neighborhood has the potential to bring low

income borrowers physically closer to traditional banks and put increased distance between bor-

rowers and high-cost alternative or payday lenders. Exposure to financial institutions in childhood

could also have life long impacts on the use of credit; for example, Brown et al. (2019) find that

local exposure to formal banking instutitions early in childhood leads to long-term improvements

in consumer credit outcomes. At the same time, moving to a very low poverty neighborhood can

potentially result in losing informal family or friend lending networks that are difficult to maintain

from a distance. Beyond changing the proximity of lending intermediaries, neighborhoods might

also affect lenders’ willingness to supply credit if positive peer effects make repayment more likely.

Lenders may also be willing to lend more to those with higher incomes, which could be indirectly

affected by the neighborhood environment, as described in the next subsection.
     6
    Note that subsidy amount allotted for MTO vouchers were implemented in the same way as the current Section
8 voucher program in that there is a cost of living adjustment by metropolitan area, but not by neighborhood within
MSA. Families who received vouchers with the location restraint additional counseling services to locate suitable
housing, but not any other additional resources



                                                        13
C.        Indirect Effects of Neighborhood through Improved Income

         We would also expect neighborhoods to impact credit indirectly through improvements in in-

come and subsequent changes in liquidity constraints, which in turn affect credit score, willingness

to lend, and demand for credit. To be eligible for the MTO experiment, participants had be to cur-

rently receiving public housing assistance. Thus, receiving a MTO voucher did not itself translate

immediate cash liquidity relief.7 However, recent results Chetty et al. (2016) find increased earnings

for participants who were moved to better neighborhoods as young children. Increased wealth or

income has the potential to provide additional liquidity to repay debts or qualify for additional

credit. In a recent study, Brown et al. (2019) find borrowers with subprime scores increase their

credit utilization by 6.9 percentage points and reduce their debt-to-income ratio by 3.4 percentage

points in response to a positive wealth shock. A number of studies also report positive correlations

between income and credit scores (Beer et al., 2018), though credit bureaus do not use income as

a direct input in their score calculations.

         Both short and long-term studies of MTO have consistently found no effects on wages and

earnings for participants who were adults at random assignment of the MTO experiment. Thus,

we can use the disparate subgroup results on earnings to distinguish whether any impacts we

identify are working through the income channel. If we detect effects on credit among those were

children at random assignment but not among adults, wages and earnings likely play an important

role. If we do find any impacts among those who moved as adults or older children, however, it is

unlikely earnings serves as a channel for neighborhood effects on credit among these subgroups.
     7
    To be eligible for the MTO experiment, control group families had to be already receiving housing assistance
through public housing. Without a MTO voucher, families would have to otherwise give up their housing subsidy
in order to move to a different unit or neighborhood. The MTO vouchers essentially lower the cost of moving by
allowing families to relocate without giving up their current rental subsidy (Sanbonmatsu and Lindau (2011)). Both
MTO treatment groups received standard Section 8 vouchers where the value of the vouchers are based on the 40th
percentile of median rents within a city. Specifically, the voucher paid for the difference between 30 percent of
household income and the citys Fair Market Rent, which was designated by HUD to be at the 40th percentile of rents
within a city. So, for example, if a household made $500 per month, and the Fair Market Rent was $800 per month,
the voucher would provide a subsidy of up to $650 per month.




                                                       14
                       III.     Empirical Analysis and Results

A.    Empirical Framework

     In our baseline analysis, we compare financial outcomes in the Experimental group and the

Section 8 group to the control group that did not experience an improvement in neighborhood

quality with the following standard specification:



                                Yi = β0 + β1 Expi + β2 Sec8i + βs + i                               (1)

where Expi and Sec8i are indicators for the Experimental or Section 8 arm, with the control group

serving as the omitted category. We include site fixed effects (βs ) to control for potential differences

across treatment sites. In this model, β1 and β2 measure the differences between treatment groups

and control group means. Because not all families in MTO used their voucher, this baseline

specification measures the intent-to-treat (ITT) effect, i.e. the effect of being offered a voucher in

the MTO program.

     The ITT estimates of Equation (1) should understate the effect of using a voucher as not all

families that were offered a MTO voucher actually used them. Therefore, we report treatment-on-

treated (TOT) estimates across our outcomes in our main tables. Following prior studies on MTO,

we instrument actual voucher takeup with the offer of a MTO voucher. We estimate:


                          Yi = β0 + β1 ExpTi akeup + β2 Sec8Ti akeup + βs + i                       (2)


where ExpTi akeup and Sec8Ti akeup are now indicators for actually using the housing voucher. We

estimate with 2SLS and instrument ExpTi akeup and Sec8Ti akeup with Expi and Sec8i . In order

to interpret these estimates as causal, we must assume being offered a MTO voucher only affects

financial outcomes through actual takeup and there was no average effect on borrowing of being just

offered a MTO voucher if the family did not use it. Families who chose not to move still received

counseling services, but these services provided only housing search advice and excluded any general

services that we think might affect credit outcomes. Given these assumptions, we interpret β1 and

β2 of equation (2) as the causal effect of physically moving to a low poverty neighborhood or using

a traditional Section 8 voucher (Angrist et al., 1996).

                                                   15
      Credit records contain a large number of outcomes measuring use of credit, credit worthiness,

and delinquencies. Following Kling et al. (2007), we collapse our outcome variables into one sum-

mary index per topic of outcomes in order to reduce the number of hypotheses tested and to improve

our power to detect effects if present. Outcomes are grouped into three broad “domains”: use of

credit and creditworthiness, delinquency behavior, and payday borrowing. We briefly describe these

outcomes here; see the data appendix for additional information and descriptive statistics.

      Our credit domain contains several outcomes. We include each consumer’s credit score provided

by Experian’s Vantage Score, a model that is comparable to the Fair Isaac Corporation (FICO)

credit scores. The score incorporates characteristics across a borrowers credit report including

payment history, delinquencies, number of accounts, and credit applications to assess his or her

likelihood to be over 90 days delinquent on loans. Vantage Scores range from 300 to 850,8 and

scores below 600 indicate subprime borrowers. We include the total credit limit across all credit

cards active on a borrower’s credit report and the total amount of credit available (i.e., unused). To

measure use of credit, we examine total balance on all accounts, including non-revolving accounts

such as mortgages, car loans, and student loans, and we examine the minimum monthly payment

due across credit cards. It is important to note that, while higher levels of debt may be indicative

of more engagement with formal credit markets, debt is not necessarily a “good” outcome for

consumers. These results therefore do not necessarily show that this group is better off, only that

they are more likely to borrow through formal channels that are reported to credit bureaus.

      The delinquency index is comprised of 4 outcomes. First, we include the amount a borrower

holds 30 days past due or more on open accounts. This would include, for example, an overdue

credit bill. Second, we include the amount in tax liens, or overdue taxes. Third, we include the

amount ordered to be paid by a court judgement. These judgments could concern, for example,

unpaid rent cases or child support, and can be used to seize collateral and wages. Finally, we

include amount of debt past due held by third party collection agencies. Debts held in collections

are those that have been repeatedly pursued but unsuccessfully collected by lenders and finally sent

to third party agencies for collection. Any amount of debt sent to third party collections can have

a large negative impact on a borrower’s credit score.

      To examine payday borrowing, we consider the total amount borrowed annually across all
  8
      This is based on the Vantage Score 3.0 model. Prior VantageScore models ranged from 501 to 900.


                                                        16
payday loans, the amount borrowed across payday loans taken out online, payday amounts borrowed

in person at physical storefronts, and the number of payday loan applications a borrower has.

   Within these domains, we standardize all outcome variables into z-scores by subtracting the

mean and dividing by the standard deviation of the control group. We then average these z-scores

with equal weighting into one summary outcome measure, represented by Yit . This allows us to

test whether the outcomes taken together as a whole indicate changes within these domains. Com-

pressing multiple measures into a single index can also improve power if each component is a noisy

measure of the same underlying concept. Our focus for these domains is on the sign and significance

of the coefficients rather than directly comparing the levels across the different experimental arms.

Components have been oriented so that a higher credit index indicates greater credit worthiness

and credit usage, a lower delinquency index indicates reduced debts and delinquencies, and a lower

payday index signals less payday usage.

   We cluster all standard errors by family since the level of MTO random assignment occurred

by family. P-values are based on a clustered bootstrap with 999 repetitions. Given the number

of hypotheses we consider simultaneously, we may find a few false significant estimates based on

sample probability alone. Thus, for the components of the indices, we calculate domain-wise error

rate adjusted p-values and report these in square brackets below, using the methods described in

Westfall and Young (1993). These p-values limit the probability of rejecting at least one true null

hypothesis within each topic to be no more than 5% (for tests using a 95% confidence interval).

We calculate these p-values using the algorithm outlined in Anderson (2012), which is discussed in

more detail in the appendix.

   Finally, we also conduct statistical tests as to whether the effect of voucher use is the same across

age groups and treatment arms. We denote significance levels of these tests with two symbols: †

indicates significance levels of a test for equality of the effect across children randomized under age

13 with each older age group within the same treatment arm, while  indicates significance levels

of a test for equality of the effect across the Section 8 and Experimental arm among those in the

same age group. Note that we do not adjust these tests for equality across groups for multiple

comparisons. We also do not adjust our p-values for multiple comparisons in all Appendix Tables,

which we consider exploratory.



                                                  17
B.        Summary Impacts

         Table I provides a summary of our analysis across our 3 broad domains: credit, delinquency, and

payday usage. Across all participants, our results show that credit usage increased for those who

received Experimental vouchers and were required to move to the lowest poverty neighborhoods.

We do not find statistically significant improvements in delinquency or payday across all partici-

pants in the Experimental group. We do, however, find significant reductions in delinquencies and

payday usage among participants who received Section 8 vouchers and were allowed to choose the

neighborhoods they moved to with no location constraint. While the estimate for the credit index

is positive across all Section 8 participants, the results are not statistically different from 0 and our

confidence intervals do not allow us to rule out increases in credit use as large as 0.06 standard

deviations or decreases in credit use as large as 0.02 standard deviations.

         The subsequent columns of Table I reveal that these differential impacts are driven by varying

effects across different age subgroups. We split our analysis on MTO participants into 3 age

subgroups: those were age 18 or older at random assignment (adults), those who were children

by older ages of 13-17 at random assignment, and by those who were younger children under the

age of 13 at random assignment.9 The first row of Table 1 shows that credit index estimates are

strongly positive and significant for young children who moved with the Experimental vouchers,

and positive and significant at the 10 percent level for those within the Section 8 treatment group.

Estimates for adults and older children are not significantly different than zero. As noted above, we

orient signs such that a positive estimate indicates increased traditional credit usage, availability,

and creditworthiness from the underlying outcomes.

         In contrast to credit, our results show that the significant reductions in delinquencies within the

Section 8 voucher group are driven by the adult and older children subgroups. For delinquencies,

we orient signs such that a negative estimate indicates a reduction in overdue ebts and delinquent

payments. Columns 4 and 6 of Table I show that estimates for the delinquency indices are negative

and highly significant for adults and older children who moved within the Section 8 voucher. This

is the first evidence from the MTO experiment that documents a significant improvement in any
     9
    Note that our outcomes for children are measured when these children are adults, beginning from when we observe
their first credit report. Thus, this could be a different age per child participant depending when they incur their first
credit report. We have also restricted our analysis such that we estimate our model holding fixed adult age across
child participants and find similar results (see Section V).



                                                           18
economic outcome for adults and older children MTO participants. For younger children, estimates

for the delinquency index are negative across both treatment groups, but significant only for younger

children within the Experimental treatment group.

       Our estimates for the payday index show that reductions are driven primarily by participants

in the Section 8 voucher group. Results are negative across all age groups, but only statistically

significant among younger children within the Section 8 voucher group. For other age groups

and treatment arms, our confidence intervals do not allow us to reject moderately sized decreases

or increases in this outcome. In the following tables we present the estimates for the individual

outcome underlying each of our overall indices.


C.      Impacts of MTO on Use of Traditional Credit and Creditworthiness

       Table II presents the TOT estimates for each individual outcome underlying the summary credit

index.10 The credit index is comprised of 5 components: credit scores, credit limits, total balance,

monthly payments, and credit availability. Note that all of these measures are equilibrium credit

market outcomes that reflect both borrower’s credit demand and lender’s willingness to supply

credit.

       For younger children, the mean credit score of the control group is 495.6. Vantage Scores below

500 are considered “deep subprime,” so the control group mean is only just below this critical level.

We find that using an Experimental voucher increases credit scores by 11 points, indicating an

improved ability to borrow for this younger group relative to the control. The estimate is significant

at the 5 percent level, and the symbol  indicates that it differs significantly from the effect observed

in the Section 8 group at the 10 percent level. Prior studies have found that a 2% increase in credit

scores for subprime borrowers leads to significant differences in credit use and borrowing behavior

(Gross et al. (2018), Dobbie et al. (2017)), suggesting that this improvement in score is potentially

large enough to alter this group’s ability to borrow. Furthermore since credit history is a component

of credit score, we would expect impacts to accumulate as younger individuals continue to build

their credit history; see Section V for more evidence on these trajectories. We also find that younger

children in the Experimental group have significantly higher credit scores than younger children
  10
       ITT estimates can be found in the Appendix.




                                                     19
who moved with Section 8 families, indicated by the diamond symbol following the coefficient.11 It

is also notable that the effect on credit scores from moving to a low poverty neighborhood as a child

is comparable to other effects documented in the literature, such as the impact of the removal of a

bankruptcy flag (Gross et al., 2018) or the effect of receiving health insurance through a government

program (Brevoort et al., 2019), indicating that effects of this magnitude are plausible.

       In contrast to what we observe among the Experimental group, we do not find any improvements

in credit scores for younger children assigned to the Section 8 group relative to the control group

mean, and our standard error allows us to rule out increases in credit score larger than 8 points.

The lower panels show that we similarly find no statistically significant effect on credit scores for

older children or adults across both treatment groups. Estimated coefficients for older children

and adults within the Experimental group are actually negative, though these are not statistically

significant, and our confidence interval excludes improvements in score larger than about 7 points

(for older children) or 8 points (for adults). Estimates of the effect on those randomized as older

children in the Experimental group differ significantly from the effect estimated among those who

were randomized to the Experimental group as young children at the 10% level, as indicated by

the symbol †.

       Column 3 presents the MTO neighborhood impacts on credit card limits aggregated across

all open cards. The average credit limit across all ages in the control group is $2930, indicating

a fairly credit constrained sample; the typical adult in a credit reporting database has a credit

limit of over $20,000 on their combined credit cards (Gross et al. (2018), Miller and Soo (2018)).

Younger children of the control group have lower average credit limits of $1,333. Our TOT estimates

indicate that moving to a low poverty neighborhood with an Experimental voucher generated an

$821 increase in credit limits. This represents a 62% increase over the control group mean. Younger

children within the Section 8 group also experience significantly higher credit limits relative to the
  11
     We follow Experian’s coding of assigning “unscorable” reports a very low credit score of 4. Our analysis therefore
embeds within it both the effect of moving from the “unscorable” range to the “scorable” range and the effect of
increased scores among those who are already scored. Alternatively, we can conduct this analysis using two separate
outcomes: a binary variable equal to 1 if the participant has any credit score, and the average credit score among
those who are not unscorable. When we do this, we find that those assigned to the Experimental group at young
ages experience a decrease in the probability of being unscorable of about 0.8 percentage points, or 18% relative
to the control group mean. The effects on average score remain positive and statistically significant, but smaller in
magnitude if we exclude the unscorable. The interpretation of the effect on average credit score when conditioning
on the credit file being “scorable” is complicated due to the selection of participants into the scorable range; for that
reason, we focus on the version that imputes a low score for unscored participants throughout our analysis.



                                                           20
control group mean. The TOT estimates for Section 8 younger children show an increase of $366

with p < 0.10 level, which is 20% greater than the control group mean.

   We find young children who moved with MTO vouchers also appear to be more active users of

mainstream credit than the control group. Column 4 reports the effect of MTO on the total balance

across all accounts. This includes both revolving and non-revolving accounts such as mortgages,

auto loans, and student debt. The The TOT estimate shows that Experimental voucher use resulted

in $4,298 or 62% higher balances relative to the control group mean of $6,742 on average. We find

significant effects of voucher use at the p < 0.10 level for young children of Section 8 families, across

a range of $898 to $3,642 greater. Consistent with credit scores and credit limits, we do not find

any impacts on total balance across adults or older children among either MTO treatment group.

   Column 5 reports the minimum monthly payment due across credit cards. These results also

indicate that participants in the Experimental group are more active mainstream credit card users

relative to the control group. The average younger child who grew up within a control group family

has a monthly payment of approximately $120. Estimates show that across younger children using

an Experimental voucher results in monthly payments that are $46 or about 37% greater than the

control group mean. Younger children randomized into Section 8 group also results in significantly

higher payments of than the control group, of approximately $26 or 22% higher. While these effects

are not as large as those observed among the Experimental group, estimates are not statistically

different between the two treatment groups within the younger children subgroup. Again, we

do not find moving to better neighborhoods has any statistically significant impact on monthly

payments across adults or older children randomized into either MTO treatment group, although

our confidence intervals are fairly wide.

   Finally in column 6, we examine the amount of revolving credit MTO participants have available

relative to those in control group families. We examine this outcome separately to evaluate whether

individuals are credit constrained. Although our results indicate that younger children in the

Experimental group have higher limits, we also see from their monthly payments in column 5 that

they borrow more. Available revolving credit captures whether there is remaining credit available

after accounting for the amount borrowed. We find that younger children not only qualify for

greater credit limits and are more active users of credit, but they also maintain their payments

such that they have significantly more credit available to use across credit cards. Column 6 shows

                                                   21
that younger children who moved with the Experimental vouchers are nearly 80% higher relative to

a control group mean of $829. The stars following the coefficient indicate a significance at the 5%

level, and the subsequent two daggers indicate that this estimate is also statistically different and

significantly higher than our estimate for younger children within the Section 8 treatment group

at the 5% level. Nonetheless, we also find younger children who moved with Section 8 families still

have 44% greater revolving credit available than younger children within the control group.


D.     Impacts of MTO on Delinquency

      Table III presents the TOT estimates for each individual outcome underlying the summary

delinquency indices in Table I.12 The first column reports the same delinquency indices reported

in Table I. As noted above, in contrast to our results on credit we find the benefits of the MTO

program to delinquencies are instead concentrated across adult and older children subgroups who

moved with Section 8 vouchers. As discussed, participants who moved with Section 8 vouchers were

allowed to use the voucher in any neighborhood of their choosing, while those who received the

Experimental voucher were required to move to a neighborhood of poverty levels below 10 percent.

      Column 2 of Table III reports individual estimates on debts a borrower holds 30 days past due.

We only find statistically significant reductions in amounts past due across adults within the Section

8 treatment group. Adults within the control group hold approximately on average $945 in past

due debt across our sample period. This debt is of relative significant magnitude given that Chetty

et al. (2016) finds annual reported earnings of less than $15,000. Our estimates find that adults

who moved with a Section 8 voucher have 35% ($333) less overdue debt than the control group

average. Older children who were assigned to the Section 8 group hold about $400 less in amounts

overdue, although it is not statistically significant once the multiple comparison adjustment is

applied (p=0.192). Estimated effects are also negative for adults and children assigned to the

Experimental group, but not statistically significant. Estimated effects for younger children are

actually positive, indicating they hold higher debts than the control group average but estimates

are not significant.

      Column 3 examines the effects of MTO on tax lien amounts, or overdue taxes. Like overdue

debts, we only find statistically significant estimates among adults within the Section 8 voucher
 12
      ITT estimates can be found in the Appendix.


                                                    22
group. TOT estimates show that an adult that moved with a Section 8 voucher holds $101 less or

66% decrease relative to the control group average tax liens. Children across any of the treatment

groups do not show any significant impacts on tax lien amounts, though children in the control

group owe relative small amounts in taxes, less than $150.

   Column 4 examines the impacts of MTO on debts that have been taken to court. Adults in

the control group owe approximately $671 in judgment amounts on average, while older children

hold slightly less at $625 and younger children owe much less at $216. We again find significantly

lower debts among adults in the Section 8 voucher group relative to the control group. Our TOT

estimates show adults who took up the Section 8 voucher owe $280 less–42% less than the control

group. Impacts are significant at the 10% level. Adults assigned to the Experimental group also

have lower debts relative to the control group, though estimates are no longer significant once

adjusted for multiple comparisons. Older children in the Section 8 group again show large negative

effects on court judgments. Our estimate suggests that using a Section 8 voucher lowers these

debts by $456, 73% lower than the control group average, but is only marginally significant at

p = 0.14. Younger children across both treatment groups and older children in the Experimental

group otherwise do not show any significant estimates on court judgment amounts.

   Column 5 reports the impact of MTO on overdue debts held by third party collection agencies.

Overall we do not find statistically significant effects of MTO on the balance held in 3rd party

collection agencies across any age or MTO treatment group, although our confidence intervals

cannot reject either large negative or large positive effects. Note that although the estimated effects

on individual components are not themselves significant, the estimate for the summary index can

provide more power and detect significant effects within the domain as a whole. Within the older

children Section 8 subgroup, for example, estimates on amounts past due, tax liens, and judgement

amounts are nearly significant at the 10% level and estimated coefficients are of large magnitude.

The overall delinquency index for older children within Section 8 families is thus negative and

highly significant at the p = 0.01 level, indicating overall lower delinquencies relative to the control

group. Similarly, the overall delinquency index of younger children within the Experimental group

is negative and significant at the 10 percent level. While not significant, estimated impacts of

an Experimental voucher for younger children on tax liens and bills sent to third party collection

agencies are particularly large and negative when compared to the control group mean.

                                                  23
E.      Impacts of MTO on Payday Loan Usage

       Given the subprime credit scores of most of the MTO sample, MTO families may have turned

to alternative lending options such as payday loans. Tables IV reports the effects of the MTO

program on the outcomes underlying the payday indices in Table I. We find reduced payday usage

primarily across younger children within families that moved with Section 8 vouchers. We calculate

negative impacts for adults and older children but effects are not statistically significant.

       Column 2 reports the total amount held in payday loans each year. On average across all ages,

MTO participants within the control group take out approximately $19 in payday loans per year.

Note that this is averaged over many people who take out $0 in payday loans and some people who

take out larger amounts.13 Estimated impacts are negative and significant for younger children of

Section 8 families. For younger children, the mean total payday amount in the control group is

$22. Younger children within families that took up a Section 8 voucher hold $16 less in payday

loans – a 72% decline in debt relative to the control group mean. Estimated impacts within the

Experimental treatment group are negative across all subgroups, but not statistically significant.

The estimated impact on payday amounts for adults within the Section 8 group are essentially

equal to zero, and effects for older children are positive but not significantly different than 0.

       Columns 3 and 4 of Tables IV break up the total payday amounts into internet and storefront.

Payday loans were originally offered alongside check cashing storefront vendors, but have more

recently expanded to offer online options as well. The amount borrowed across these types are

both approximately $9 on average (including many zeroes for non-users) for online and storefront

within the MTO control group. Adults borrow slightly less online than younger children ($7 versus

$10), while older children within the control group borrow nearly twice the amount ($17) online.

Younger children within the control group also borrow more than adults from physical stores ($12

v $7), while older children of the control group borrow much less from physical stores ($2).

       We again find the negative impacts on payday usage among younger children within Section

8 families, from both online and storefront lenders. The TOT estimates indicate that younger

children within Section 8 families who used the voucher borrow $5.5 less in online payday loans
  13
    The size of a typical payday loan in our sample is $250, although some users take out many loans within a single
year. On average, those who use payday loans take out 2.8 loans per year. Summary statistics on payday and all
other outcomes are available in the data appendix.




                                                        24
on average than children within the control group, indicating they hold nearly 50% fewer debts in

internet payday loans. Younger children within Section 8 families also borrow $10.7 less in storefront

payday loans, more than 60% relative to the control group mean. The reduction in usage of online

payday loans is particularly interesting because online payday loans are essentially accessible from

anywhere. This suggests that the reduction in payday loan usage is not due exclusively to increased

costs associated with physically accessing brick-and-mortar payday loan stores, and could instead

be driven by peer effects, marketing, information, or neighborhood social norms. Estimated impacts

on storefront amounts for Section 8 younger children are also large in magnitude, indicating 80%

less payday debt than the control group mean with p < 0.05. Effects for adults, older children, and

younger children within the Experimental group for both internet and storefront payday borrowing

are not significantly different from zero.

   The final component of our index measures the number of payday inquiries, or applications

for payday loans both online and storefront. The control group applies for an average of 0.1

payday loans per year. Older children within Section 8 families show to make fewer payday loan

applications, although the effect is not statistically significant. Other estimated impacts for all

other age and treatment groups are also not significant for payday applications. Although Clarity

covers a large percentage of sub-prime borrowers, and over 70 percent of MTO recipients were

linked to the Clarity database, it is important to note that these data underestimate payday loan

usage and inquiries. The Clarity data only contain information on payday loans and inquiries for

lenders that use their underwriting services, so decreases in payday loan usage from lenders not

included in the Clarity database would not be captured in our analysis.



                    IV.      Channels of Neighborhood Impact

   In our main analysis, we find that moving to lower poverty neighborhoods has benefits for credit,

delinquencies, and payday usage, but with differential impacts across age groups and treatment

arms. In particular, we find that requiring families to move to the lowest poverty neighborhoods

with the Experimental voucher increases credit scores and use of credit in adulthood among those

randomized as young children, but does not improve outcomes for those randomized to the Experi-

mental arm as adults and older children. In contrast, we find that allowing families to move to the


                                                 25
neighborhood of their choice with Section 8 vouchers results in significant reductions in overdue

debts and delinquencies for those randomized as adults and older children, while still modestly

improving credit worthiness and usage in adulthood for those randomized as younger children.

We thus pursue further exploratory analysis to understand the potential channels through which

neighborhoods may have generated this pattern of results. While the nature of the experiment does

not allow us to conclusively state which channels are the most important, we are able to explore

patterns that are suggestive of certain mechanisms but not others.


A.    Direct Effects of Neighborhood through Credit Demand

     In Section II, we identify channels through which neighborhoods can directly affect credit out-

comes by altering participants demand for credit. We first explore peer effects, one of the most

prominent mechanisms cited by the empirical literature within household finance. We could observe

younger children in MTO families experience improved credit scores and and adults in Section 8

families reduce delinquencies through “positive” peer effect channels such as information diffusion

or “mimicking” good peer behavior.

     In order to examine this peer effect channel further, we first characterize the credit and delin-

quency outcomes of the neighbors of MTO participants. To do so, we obtain a random sample of a

panel of 4 million individuals and use it to estimate average outcomes of residents within zip codes

where MTO participants lived in between 2001 to 2017. Our MTO linked credit sample allows us

to follow the zip code of residence of MTO participants over our sample period.14 We then merge

each MTO participant with zip code characteristics derived from our random sample to calculate

the credit characteristics of other zip code residents. This allows us to compare the outcomes of

MTO participants to the outcomes of peer residents in the same zip code.15

     It is important to note that these variables characterize zip code characteristics of MTO par-

ticipants many years after they received the MTO voucher. Differences in zip code characteristics

across treatment arms therefore demonstrate the persistent and long-term impact of MTO voucher
  14
     Zip code is the finest geographic level available on the credit report. Note that zip codes are a finer level of
geography than used in other studies of peer effects, such as e.g. Brown et al. (2008) who use metropolitan statistical
area.
  15
     A small number of MTO participants live in zip codes for which too few people are observed in the 4 million
Experian sample to calculate zip code level means. These individuals are excluded. This affects fewer than 8 percent
of the observations.



                                                          26
receipt on these neighborhood characteristics. Also note that because we use participants’ zip codes

from credit reports to define neighborhoods, these measures are the neighborhood characteristics of

MTO participants as adults. Our estimates for MTO children therefore indicate the characteristics

of neighborhood they chose to move to in adulthood.

       Column 1 of Table V summarizes the average credit outcomes of peers within neighborhoods

MTO participants moved to into one peer credit index. This index combines all the same under-

lying components we measure in Table V of MTO participants themselves: credit scores, credit

limits, total balance, monthly payment, and credit availability. As noted in previous sections, it

is important to remember that these variables are all equilibrium outcomes of credit market de-

mand and supply. Thus finding that young children of the MTO participants look more like their

peers could be consistent with a peer effect of “mimicking” or social information, but could also

be consistent with lenders supplying greater credit access to the neighborhoods they move to. In

the following section, we test more directly whether the supply channel moves through proximity

to financial institutions.

       The peer credit index thus describes the average equilibrium credit market outcomes of neigh-

borhood residents within the zip codes MTO adults moved to after random assignment and MTO

children moved to into adulthood.16 The positive and significant coefficients reported in Table V

demonstrates that being randomized into the Experimental or Section 8 group led individuals to

live in neighborhoods where a typical resident has higher creditworthiness and greater use of main-

stream credit markets. We observe this increase on neighborhood credit quality for all age groups,

with particularly large effects among those randomized to the Experimental group as young children

and adults. We find suggestive evidence of improvements among those in the Experimental group

who were randomized as older children, although the effect sizes are smaller and not statistically

significant.

       We further explore peer effects by evaluating more systematically whether the MTO experiment

caused participants’ credit outcomes to look more like their neighbors as well. To do this, we

re-scale our estimates of β1 and β2 of the underlying credit components in Column 1 by the

difference between the voucher recipients’ neighbors and the control group for each outcome.17
  16
    Results on the underlying components for peers are providing in Appendix Tables A5 and A6.
  17
    More details on this re-scaling are found in the Appendix. This method is similar to that used in Finkelstein
et al. (2016).


                                                       27
Appendix Figures A3 and A4 plot the coefficient estimates of these re-scaled estimates, β˜1 and

β˜2 , with asterisks to indicate whether these estimates are statistically significantly different from

zero.18 The magnitude of the estimates can be interpreted as the percentage to which the voucher

recipients have “converged” towards their neighbors’ behavior, or if their behavior remains closer

to the control group. For example, β˜1 = 1 indicates that the recipients of the voucher now behave

exactly like their neighbors; β˜1 = 0.50 indicates that the recipients have converged 50 percent to

the behavior of their new neighbors; and β˜1 = 0 indicates that the recipients have not converged

at all and behave exactly like the control group.

      Figures A3 and A4 show that we only find consistent evidence of convergence towards neigh-

bors’ behavior among those who were youngest (under age 13) at the time of random assignment

in both the Experimental and Section 8 treatment groups. We find that among credit use and

creditworthiness outcomes, MTO participants converge towards their peers across all components

in the both treatment groups. In general, the size of the convergence is no more than 5 percent–that

is, the younger children in MTO treatment groups move no more than approximately 5 percent of

the way towards their new peers. This effect may seem small, but it is important to bear in mind

that there is tremendous inequality between MTO participants–who were all residents of public

housing projects with low levels of educational attainment in single parent (mother) families–and a

typical individual living in a low poverty neighborhood. Making up even 5 percent of this gap can

represent meaningful improvements given the low baseline rates of engagement with formal credit

markets. Nonetheless it is important to keep in mind that although they experienced improvements

in credit-worthiness and greater credit use, younger children in both treatment groups still remain

very different from the average resident of the low poverty neighborhoods they inhabit. At the

same time, we find no consistent evidence of convergence for those randomized to the Experimental

group as older children or adults. If anything, we find that these groups behaved less like their

new neighbors than the control group. This lack of convergence again suggests that if peer effects

existed at all for these groups, that they were dominated by other factors.

      In column 2 of Table V we examine the average delinquency behavior of peers within neighbor-

hoods MTO participants moved to into adulthood. We do not find that MTO participants live in

neighborhoods with any lower average delinquency behavior than the neighborhoods experienced
 18
      We show significance levels, rather than confidence intervals, in order to keep the y-axis scale readable.


                                                            28
by the control group, and our confidence intervals can rule out all but small improvements. Al-

though we see no improvements overall, Appendix Table A6 shows that the neighbors of Section 8

adults did have significantly lower amounts of debt 30 days past due and in collections, but higher

amounts of debt due in judgements. Thus when we examine how much Section 8 adults converge

their delinquency behavior to their neighbors, we find estimates that are close to 0 – because their

MTO neighborhood peers reduced their delinquencies no more than their control group counter-

parts – or significantly greater than 1 – because they reduced their debts significantly more than

both their control group and their neighborhood peers.19 Thus it appears there is some evidence

suggesting that Section 8 adults reduced their past due debt due to peer effects, although the

pattern is not as strong as observed for those randomized as young children.

    It is important to highlight that we do not find the same benefits to delinquencies for adults

in the Experimental treatment group that we find for those in the Section 8 voucher group. Thus,

this result suggests that the type of voucher plays an important role in the mechanism through

which the MTO program impacted credit behaviors. The MTO program required families in the

Experimental arm to move to neighborhoods of very low poverty rates, while Section 8 families

could utilize their vouchers with no restriction.20 Moving to a very low poverty neighborhood could

add higher living costs while simultaneously disrupting informal peer lending networks. Thus in

Column 3 of Table V we examine this channel by comparing the average level of peer credit card

spending across treatment arms as a proxy for neighborhood cost of living.21 We find that while

adults in both treatment arms live in zip codes where peers have higher spending on average relative

to the control group, and adults in the Experimental arm live in neighborhoods with significantly

higher average expenditures than those in the Section 8 group.22 Our estimates show that using

a Section 8 voucher causes participants to live in zip codes in adulthood where average credit
  19
     Note that nothing restricts the convergence estimate to be inside of the (0,1) interval. An estimate significantly
greater than 1 indicates that while their neighborhood peers have lower past due debt, for example than the control
group, MTO adults reduced their delinquency even more so than their neighbors — reducing delinquency behavior far
past their neighborhood peers relative to the control group. Second, if they move to neighborhoods where residents
are largely similar to the control group, ∆y will be close to zero, which would indicate that there are no peer effects
because, essentially, there has been no “treatment” – the experimental arm is not experiencing “new” peers.
  20
     Follow up studies document that families in the Experimental arm moved – and on average stayed – in locations
that were further from their original locations, while Section 8 families moved to better neighborhoods that were
closer.
  21
     Gross et al. (2018) develop a model showing the relationship between credit card balances and consumption. In
this work, the authors show that in many empirical settings credit card balances are a good measure of consumption,
particularly in low income populations with low levels of liquid savings such as the MTO participants.
  22
     Note that credit card expenditures are not themselves a component of the credit index reported in Column 1.


                                                          29
card balances are approximately $182 higher relative to the control. Adults using an Experimental

voucher move to zip codes where average balance are $380 higher, more than double the increase

in peer expenditures of those who moved using a Section 8 voucher. We find a similar pattern

across children, although a smaller magnitude ($195) among those randomized as older children.

Given that Chetty et al. (2016) find that treated MTO participants live in neighborhoods with lower

poverty rates and higher average incomes as adults, it is perhaps unsurprising that these participants

also live in neighborhoods where residents tend to have higher spending. As such, this result is

not entirely novel. However, because we observe participants over different years in adulthood, and

because expenditure and income can vary if savings rates differ across neighborhoods, we provide

the results in Table V to re-establish this fact for our sample.

     In column 4 of Table V we also further explore the neighborhood credit utilization rates – or the

ratio of balance to available credit – as a further test of higher living costs in MTO neighborhoods.

If residents of MTO neighborhoods are spending more, utilization rates provide a measure of how

constrained this spending is within their credit availability. Interestingly, we find that only families

who moved with the Section 8 voucher live in neighborhoods with lower utilization relative to the

control group. Although this estimate is only statistically significant among those randomized as

young children, the point estimate is consistently negative for the Section 8 group, but positive for

those in the Experimental group who moved as older children or adults. Thus, adults who moved

with the Experimental voucher may not only faced higher living costs but also pressure to “keep

up with the Joneses” given that their neighbors were earning and spending higher amounts than

the MTO participants. Given the null estimates on income from prior studies, we know adults in

both MTO treatment groups did not have any additional income to support their families. Thus if

moving to a low poverty neighborhood required additional costs and investment in their children,

adults who were required to move to the lowest poverty neighborhoods in the Experimental may

have not had the additional resources to pay off past debt as adults in the Section 8 group.


B.    Direct Effects of Neighborhood through Credit Supply

     As described in Section II, neighborhood proximity to lending institutions has also been pro-

posed as an important mechanism that drives the relationship between neighborhoods and credit

market behavior. To examine this relationship, we assemble data from the Census Business Pat-

                                                  30
terns on the number of banks and lending institutions (NAICS 522110) and number of payday loan

stores (NAICS 522291 and 522390, following Bhutto (2014)). We then calculate the number of

banking and payday loan institutions within each zip code MTO participants move to from 2001

to 2017. If physical proximity to payday loan stores reduces payday borrowing, we would expect

individuals who moved to better neighborhoods to reside in areas with fewer payday loans stores

relative to those who did not move with the experiment. In the same way if neighborhoods impact

credit outcomes through proximity to traditional banking institutions, we would find treatment

participants to move to neighborhoods with a greater number of banking institutions relative to

the control group.23 The two separate treatment groups of the MTO experiment may feel different

impacts of distance from informal lending networks. Families who moved with the Experimental

treatment group were required to move to neighborhoods of very low poverty groups, while those

assigned to the Section 8 treatment group were allowed to move to any neighborhood of their choos-

ing. Thus, families within the Section 8 group may have been able choose locations that allowed

them to maintain informal lending networks more than those assigned the Experimental vouchers.

Follow up MTO studies find that Section 8 treatment households moved to neighborhoods with

higher average poverty rates than Experimental families, of approximately 27.8 percent versus 10.8

percent respectively.

       Columns 5 and 6 of Tables V examine whether MTO participants moved to zip codes with

fewer payday loan stores or greater access to physical banks. Our estimates indicate that only

younger children of Section 8 families moved to zip codes with statistically significantly fewer payday

establishments; using a Section 8 voucher lowered the number of payday low stores in the zip code

in adulthood by 0.16 stores, or about 8 percent among this group. This reduction in neighborhood

payday establishments is significantly different from the effect observed in the Experimental group

at the 5% level (as denoted by the  symbol). In addition to being the only group for which we

observe reductions in payday store access, the youngest Section 8 voucher recipients are also the

only subgroup in which we observe reductions in payday loan use. Taken together, these results

suggest that the physical presence of payday loan stores in a neighborhood may be an important

mechanism by which neighborhoods affect subprime borrowing behavior. Although we find no
  23
    Recall that we examine the number of financial intermediaries for participants in adulthood. It is important
to note that even in the absence of differential proximity to financial intermediaries in adulthood, participants
randomized as children may have still experienced different exposure to financial intermediaries in childhood.


                                                       31
statistically significant change in the number of banks in neighborhoods relative to the control

group, we do observe that those randomized at young ages in the Experimental group live in

neighborhoods with more banks than the Section 8 group, further suggesting that the benefits to

credit access we observe for younger children in the Experimental group may be in part due to

physical availability of banks within a zip code. While we do not detect that the number of banks

differs significantly between the treatment arms and the control group, we note that our confidence

intervals do not allow us to reject that there may have been meaningful effects.

     Finally as we note in the previous section, even if we do not find differences in the number of

physical institutions, this does not rule out that MTO participants may have moved to zip codes

where lenders provided greater credit access in those neighborhoods. Lenders may for some reason

been more willing to lend to MTO participants if participants appeared more likely to repay debts

after moving to an low poverty neighborhood. While we do not find that those randomized as young

children to the Experimental group had fewer delinquencies, other work by Chetty et al. (2016)

shows that they had higher incomes in adulthood, which may have increased creditors’ willingness

to lend. We explore this mechanism in the next sub-section.


C.    Indirect Effects of Neighborhood through Income

     Finally, we explore indirect effects moving to MTO neighborhoods could have on credit outcomes

through income. Results from Chetty et al. (2016) show that only younger children who were

randomized into the experimental voucher group experienced higher incomes in adulthood, and

that the incomes of those randomized as adults or older children were unaffected. We also find the

largest impact of the vouchers on credit score and use of credit in this group. Increases in income

may alter both the demand for credit, if higher income consumers tend to apply for more credit,

and the supply of credit, if lenders are more willing to provide credit to those with higher incomes.

Recent work in empirical household finance allows us to provide a “back of the envelope” calculation

as to how much of the observed increase in credit score among the Experimental group is due to the

increase in income and how much might be attributable to neighborhood effects operating through

a non-income channel.

     Chetty et al. (2016) find that young children who moved with Experimental vouchers earn

approximately $3,447 more annually than young children who stayed within the control group

                                                 32
respectively. Cookson et al. (2019) estimate a $5000 to $20,0000 increase in wealth increases credit

scores for subprime, low income borrowers by 4 to 7 points, which would attribute between 36%

and 63% of our 11 point estimate to improved income. We can also conduct a similar calculation

using work that relies on the random assignment of bankruptcy petitioners to judges to conduct a

similar analysis. Dobbie and Song (2015) show that Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection increases

annual income by $5,562 on average and Dobbie et al. (2017) show that it increases credit scores

by 17 points. Dobbie et al. (2017) also show that half of the effect of bankruptcy protection on

financial outcomes dissipates after the actual period of bankruptcy protection ends, suggesting that

the “indirect” impact of bankruptcy on credit score is an increase of approximately 8.5 points.24

Under the (strong) assumption that the credit score increase is driven primarily by the increase

in earnings, we would therefore ascribe at most a 1.5 point increase to every $1000 in additional
                   8.5
annual earnings ( $5,562 × $1, 000). Since income increased by about $3,447 in the experimental

group, we might expect a 5.2 point increase in credit score resulting directly from the increase

in income experienced by those randomized to the Experimental group; again, this suggests that

about half of the effect of neighborhoods on credit score may be due to the income channel, with the

remaining effect likely due to more direct neighborhood mechanisms such as exposure to financial

institutions or peer effects.


D.      Summary of Discussion

       While neighborhoods could affect a myriad of secondary outcomes, we identify 4 potential

mechanisms that appear to be well-established within the empirical literature on household finance.

Moving to a lower poverty neighborhood could improve delinquency or liquidity if adults benefit

from (1) a “social information” peer effect or (2) a local supply effect (i.e. physical and proximate

access to banking institutions and increased distance to payday loan stores or higher willingness

of lenders to supply credit). At the same time, adults might experience increases in delinquency if

they are subjected to (3) a “Keeping Up with the Joneses” peer effect or (4) a disruption cost of

moving away from local support networks, which it is reasonable to assume are larger for adults in
  24
    We calculate that roughly half of the overall effect is due to the “indirect” effects of bankruptcy by comparing
the effect observed in years 6-10, after the bankruptcy protection period has ended, to the effect from the pooled
two-stage least squares estimator reported in the working paper version of Dobbie et al. (2017). Since credit score
is not reported separately for years 1-5 and years 6-10, we assume it follows the same pattern as other financial
outcomes that are reported over these time intervals.


                                                        33
the Experimental group given the experimental design.

   From previous research, we know that adults who participated in MTO did not experience any

increase in earnings or change in employment outcomes. Indeed, despite collecting a wide variety

of survey and administrative outcomes, MTO follow up evaluations detected essentially no impact

of the program on income or labor market outcomes for adults (Orr et al., 2003; Kling et al., 2007;

Sanbonmatsu and Lindau, 2011; Chetty et al., 2016). Our results suggest that the improvements

in delinquency behavior for Section 8 adults and older children therefore reflect the direct impact

of neighborhoods on credit behavior.

   The fact that we do not observe similar improvements among the Experimental adults and older

children suggest that the negative effects of moving to a higher income neighborhood described in

(3) and (4) must be dominating any positive effects of (1) and (2) for this group. Furthermore,

the experimental design makes it likely that the benefits of (1) and (2) are at least as large for the

Experimental group as for the Section 8 adults. So, the fact that we find improvements among

Section 8 adults in delinquency outcomes suggests that, on net, the direct neighborhood effects

of moving out of a public housing facility and into a neighborhood of one’s choosing are positive,

but there is no evidence of benefits if the voucher recipient is forced to move to a low poverty

neighborhood where living costs and disruption costs are higher.

   This finding has important policy implications. Our results show that adults and older children

are better off if they are permitted to choose their own neighborhoods, and this improvement

reflects a direct effect of neighborhoods on outcomes. This finding is relevant particularly in light

of recent, high profile work encouraging local housing authorities to incentivize families to move to

pre-selected neighborhoods (Bergman et al. (2019)).

   In contrast, those who move early in childhood face a very different set of costs and benefits.

While the negative direct impacts of (3) and (4) may still be present, the positive direct effects of

(1) and (2) may be larger, since children have a longer period over which they can benefit from

peer effects and proximity to credit institutions. Indeed, Brown et al. (2019) find that exposure to

financial institutions early in life can have long-run implications on household finance outcomes.

   In addition to these direct impacts of neighborhoods, those who were children during MTO

also may experience better financial outcomes due to the indirect impact of neighborhood–that is,

improved incomes, which might in turn improve credit market behavior and outcomes. Naturally,

                                                 34
the presence of both direct and indirect effects makes mechanisms difficult to untangle. Here,

we benefit from the rapidly developing literature in household finance that measures how changes

in income affect credit market outcomes using a variety of quasi-experimental methods. Back-

of-the-envelope calculations suggest that higher income accounts for about half of the impact of

neighborhood on credit scores. This suggests the additional impact of neighborhood on credit likely

works through direct channels such as peer effects and nearby access to financial institutions.



              V.      Additional Results and Heterogeneity Analysis

      In addition to our main analysis, we also undertake several supplemental analyses to further

explore the effects of neighborhoods across different groups and outcomes. Because we consider

these results exploratory, we do not apply the multiple hypothesis adjustment to the inference

conducted in these analyses.

      First, we examine the impact of MTO on homeownership, mortgage delinquency, and bankruptcy.25

These outcomes have garnered particular interest in the literature surrounding peer effects given

the hypothesized relationship between social stigma and bankruptcy and foreclosure (e.g., Gross

and Souleles (2002), Cohen-Cole and Duygan-Bump (2008)) as well as the role of neighbors’ income

and consumption in increasing the likelihood of bankruptcies (Agarwal et al., 2019).

      The results are reported in Table A7. We observe that using a voucher at a young age results

in participants being more likely to have a mortgage in adulthood. We do not find statistically

significant effects on the likelihood of being delinquent on the mortgage or of declaring bankruptcy,

although our confidence intervals cannot rule out meaningfully sized effects.

      Second, we undertake further heterogeneity analysis based on the age of random assignment.

We explore the impact observed in the credit records at age 24 and older of those randomly assigned

under the age of 10, at ages 10-12, 13-15 and 16-18. These results are reported in Appendix Figure

A3. We confirm that the strongest impacts of neighborhood on credit-worthiness and usage emerge

for those who were youngest when random assignment occurred–particularly those under age 10

(for the Experimental and Section 8 group) and those age 10-12 (for the Experimental group).

Our analysis of delinquency outcomes is significantly noisier, making it difficult to draw strong
 25
      Note that we do not have foreclosures as a variable in our dataset.



                                                          35
conclusions, but we note that large negative coefficients are observed in both the Experimental and

Section 8 groups for those randomized at the youngest ages.

   Third, we explore how the effects of MTO change as participants age. Appendix Figure A4

shows the effect of moving to a lower income neighborhood at ages 18-21, age 22-24, age 25-27

and age 28 and older. The blue line shows the impact of MTO at these ages for those who were

randomized at a young age (under 13) and the green line shows the impact for those who were

randomized at an older age (13-17). We see that the effects appear to grow over time for those in

the Experimental group who were randomized at young ages, suggesting that the impact of MTO

may be become larger as they move towards their prime earning years, consistent with impacts on

income found in Chetty et al. (2016). Among the Section 8 group, we see that the impact of MTO

on measures related to delinquency is larger for those in older age ranges, although the pattern is

less clear for measures related to use of credit.



                                       VI.     Conclusion

   This paper examines the impact of better neighborhood on credit and subprime credit decisions

of low-income households within the Moving to Opportunity Experiment. We find that neighbor-

hood environment has significant direct impacts on credit outcomes, outside of channels of income.

We find that the youngest children in the MTO experimental group experienced the greatest ben-

efits in terms of credit-worthiness and use of credit. Young children of families in the experimental

arm were required to move to the lowest poverty neighborhoods (<10 percent) and received the

longest exposure to low poverty neighborhoods. We find that these children have higher credit

limits and credit scores in adulthood relative to the control group, along with greater active use

of credit and revolving credit available. These results are consistent with credit improvements

through income increases documented by Chetty et al. (2016). Back-of-the-envelope calculations

suggest that higher income accounts for about half of the impact of neighborhood on credit scores

of younger children, and the additional impact of neighborhood on credit likely works through

alternative direct channels such as peer effects.

   In contrast to prior MTO results, however, we document positive impacts for adults on other

dimensions. We find adults and older children within the Section 8 voucher group experience


                                                    36
significant improvements in delinquencies and overdue debts. Interestingly, we do not find the same

benefits to delinquencies for adults in the Experimental treatment group. Our analysis suggests that

adults within the Experimental group moved to neighborhoods with higher average expenditures,

and thus may have been unable to repay debts as easily as those given an unrestricted choice of

neighborhood. Requiring families to move to low poverty neighborhoods could have also reduced

access to informal support systems and avenues of borrowing, such as from family and friends. Our

results suggest that policies that aim to improve neighborhood environments may also consider

providing flexibility in neighborhood choice in order to retain informal support networks already

in place or provide additional assistance to keep up with increased costs of living.

   We also note that in most cases, the magnitude of the effects we uncover are large and eco-

nomically meaningful when compared to the baseline mean in the control group, but small when

compared to the disparities observed between MTO group and the overall population. For example,

the $821 increase in average credit card limits experienced by those randomized to the Experimental

arm as young children is more than 60% higher when compared to their control group counter-

parts. However, it is trivial compared to the average credit card limit in the population, which is

over $20,000 (Gross et al., 2018). This implies that while improving neighborhood quality makes

progress in alleviating the credit constraints of low income borrowers, it will likely not make a

meaningful impact on the observed disparities between rich and poor.

   Our results highlight the policy concern that many local housing authorities still face in relo-

cating families to low poverty neighborhoods. While many acknowledge the benefits of a better

neighborhoods, local authorities still face challenges on how to help families maintain economic

self-sufficiency once in a higher cost neighborhood. In our conversations with local housing author-

ities, even if voucher recipients are able to find housing that accepts Section 8 vouchers in lower

poverty neighborhoods, families face challenges in building the credit to qualify for or remain in

neighborhoods with low poverty rates. Since the rental subsidy of a Section 8 voucher is set by

metropolitan area, the amount of the subsidy is of lower value in a higher cost zipcode. The null

effects we find on credit scores and credit limits for adults, reveal that it is still very difficult to

build credit with improved improved delinquency behaviors alone. Thus, our findings highlight

that while moving to better neighborhoods can have important intergenerational benefits for credit

behavior, assisting families in building and maintaining the credit to remain these neighborhoods

                                                  37
remains an important policy concern.




                                       38
                        Table I Effect of MTO on Credit Outcomes: Summary


                            All Participants            Adults          Older Children         Young Children
                            Exp        Sec 8      Exp        Sec 8      Exp      Sec 8         Exp      Sec 8
                            (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)          (7)        (8)

    Credit Index          0.051*      0.022       0.035      0.003     -0.047†    -0.0138    0.082***     0.0348*
                          (0.030)    (0.020)     (0.051)    (0.012)    (0.043)    (0.036)     (0.025)     (0.019)

    Delinquency Index      -0.008   -0.025***     0.008    -0.033***    -0.010   -0.042***   -0.035*      -0.009
                          (0.012)    (0.006)     (0.021)    (0.011)    (0.018)    (0.015)     (0.018)     (0.013)

    Payday Index           -0.003    -0.009**     -0.009     -0.008     -0.048     -0.001     0.001     -0.033***
                          (0.004)     (0.005)    (0.023)    (0.017)    (0.033)    (0.048)     (0.022)     (0.011)

    Observations          136,203                63,410                25,942                 46,851


Note: This table reports the difference in means for recipients of Experimental or Section 8 vouchers relative to the
control group. The mean of the outcome variable in the control group is reported at the bottom of each respective
column. Per comparison p-values are reported in parentheses, and family-wise error rate adjusted p-values are
reported in square brackets under each estimate. See text for more details. The symbol † indicates that the estimate
differs significantly from the estimate among those randomized as young children. The symbol  indicates that the
estimate differs significantly from the estimate of the effect of the Section 8 treatment arm. Significance levels: *=10
percent; **=5 percent; ***=1 percent




                                                           39
                 Table II      Effect of MTO on Credit Outcomes, Adults and Children


                                 Credit Index   Credit Score     Credit Limit   Total Balance    Monthly Payment      Credit Avail
                                     (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)               (5)                (6)

 Children: < 13 years at RA
 Experimental v Control            0.082***       10.94**        821.1***        4298***             45.52**               659.1**
                                    (0.025)        (4.913)        (318.670)      (1530.587)           (19.718)             (285.499)
                                                   [0.026]         [0.010]         [0.005]             [0.021]              [0.021]
 Section 8 v Control               0.035*           -0.276         366.0*           2270*              26.37*               367.9*
                                   (0.019)         (4.152)        (209.717)      (1371.696)           (15.935)             (204.453)
                                                   [0.947]         [0.081]         [0.098]             [0.098]              [0.072]
 Control Group Mean                                  495.6          1333            6742                120.2                828.7

 Observations                       46851           46851           46851           46851              46851                46851

 Children: 13-17 at RA
 Experimental v Control            -0.047†         -11.19†        -687.2†          -1145               3.828               -611.6††
                                   (0.043)          (9.162)       (597.326)      (3135.556)           (31.409)             (464.506)
                                                    [0.222]        [0.250]         [0.715]             [0.903]               [0.188]
 Section 8 v Control                -0.014           6.462          -67.34          -2188              -20.60                -221.6
                                   (0.035)         (10.864)       (438.664)      (3678.551)           (22.456)             (405.768)
                                                    [0.552]        [0.878]         [0.552]             [0.359]               [0.585]
 Control Group Mean                                  519.7           2315           14050               195.2                 1567

 Observations                       25942           25942           25942           25942              25942                25942

 Adults at RA
 Experimental v Control             0.034           -2.090          993.6           -1465              -2.855                942.8
                                   (0.051)         (5.118)        (843.745)      (3330.037)           (36.703)             (878.085)
                                                   [0.683]         [0.239]         [0.660]             [0.938]              [0.283]
 Section 8 v Control                0.003            5.053          544.2†          -3814              -20.31                251.3
                                   (0.012)         (3.873)        (538.215)      (3170.245)           (23.378)             (232.595)
                                                   [0.192]         [0.312]         [0.229]             [0.385]              [0.280]
 Control Group Mean                                   558            4374           23001               310.8                3270

 Observations                       63410           63410           63410           63410              63410                63410


Note: This table reports the difference in means for recipients of Experimental or Section 8 vouchers relative to the
control group. The mean of the outcome variable in the control group is reported at the bottom of each respective
column. Per comparison p-values are reported in parentheses, and family-wise error rate adjusted p-values are
reported in square brackets under each estimate. See text for more details. The symbol † indicates that the estimate
differs significantly from the estimate among those randomized as young children. The symbol  indicates that the
estimate differs significantly from the estimate of the effect of the Section 8 treatment arm. Significance levels: *=10
percent; **=5 percent; ***=1 percent




                                                            40
             Table III      Effect of MTO on Delinquency Outcomes, Adults and Children


                                      Delinquency Index     30 Days Past Due     Tax Liens    Judgment Amount       Collections
                                             (1)                  (2)               (3)             (4)                 (5)

 Panel A: Age < 13 years at RA
 Experimental v Control                     -0.035*                67.13          -241.5          -12.08            -425.6
                                             (0.018)              (88.663)        (243.328)        (123.367)         (428.822)
                                                                   [0.449]          [0.321]         [0.922]           [0.321]
 Section 8 v Control                         -0.009                 176.9           -128.4           104.5             -246.5
                                            (0.013)              (245.942)        (178.513)        (173.503)         (216.989)
                                                                   [0.472]          [0.472]         [0.547]           [0.256]
 Control Group Mean                                                 447.5            143.8            216.5             1775

 Observations                                46851                46851             46851            42654             46851

 Panel B: Ages 13-17 years at RA
 Experimental v Control                      -0.010                -123.5          -52.40            -208.3            142.9
                                            (0.018)              (296.461)        (82.629)         (752.730)         (516.395)
                                                                  [0.677]          [0.526]          [0.782]           [0.782]
 Section 8 v Control                       -0.042***               -399.0          -42.90           -456.9†            -231.9
                                            (0.015)              (305.786)        (29.432)         (314.238)         (285.699)
                                                                  [0.192]          [0.145]          [0.146]           [0.417]
 Control Group Mean                                                 981.9           105.4             625.1             2028

 Observations                                25942                25942             25942            18206             25942

 Panel C: Adults at RA
 Experimental v Control                      0.008                 -177.9            165.9           -400.5†           224.2†
                                            (0.021)              (253.589)        (131.748)        (417.971)         (244.911)
                                                                   [0.483]          [0.208]          [0.338]           [0.360]
 Section 8 v Control                       -0.033***             -333.4**†          -101.0*         -279.5*†            0.472
                                            (0.011)              (149.724)         (55.931)        (153.677)          (94.146)
                                                                   [0.026]          [0.071]          [0.069]           [0.996]
 Control Group Mean                                                 944.4            151.9            671.4             1915

 Observations                                63410                63410             63410            41661             63410


Note: This table reports the difference in means for recipients of Experimental or Section 8 vouchers relative to the
control group. The mean of the outcome variable in the control group is reported at the bottom of each respective
column. Per comparison p-values are reported in parentheses, and family-wise error rate adjusted p-values are
reported in square brackets under each estimate. See text for more details. The symbol † indicates that the estimate
differs significantly from the estimate among those randomized as young children. The symbol  indicates that the
estimate differs significantly from the estimate of the effect of the Section 8 treatment arm. Significance levels: *=10
percent; **=5 percent; ***=1 percent




                                                          41
                Table IV Effect of MTO on Payday Outcomes, Adults and Children


                                 Payday Index     Payday Amt      Internet Amt    Storefront Amt    Payday Inquiries
                                     (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)

 Children: < 13 years at RA
 Experimental v Control              0.001           -3.306          2.279             -5.585           0.0191
                                     (0.022)         (9.053)         (4.506)          (14.648)           (0.026)
                                                     [0.715]         [0.613]           [0.703]           [0.455]
 Section 8 v Control               -0.033***       -16.17***†       -5.473**          -10.69**           0.00281
                                    (0.011)          (6.095)         (2.271)           (5.230)           (0.014)
                                                     [0.008]         [0.016]           [0.041]           [0.846]
 Control Group Mean                                    22.11          9.946              12.17            0.0857

 Observations                        23204           23204           23204             23204              23204

 Children: 13-17 years at RA
 Experimental v Control               -0.048          -12.91         -17.62*            4.713            -0.0357
                                     (0.126)         (75.368)       (10.679)          (13.346)           (2.589))
                                                      [0.525]        [0.152]           [0.683]            [0.313]
 Section 8 v Control                  -0.001           9.231          -4.570           13.80†            -0.0509
                                     (0.001)        (368.210)       (31.321)          (62.772)            (0.349)
                                                      [0.553]        [0.765]           [0.281]            [0.265]
 Control Group Mean                                    19.93          17.13             2.803              0.146

 Observations                         7716            7716            7716             7716                7716

 Adults: 18+ at RA
 Experimental v Control               -0.009          -1.723          -5.636           3.913             -0.00129
                                     (0.006)         (2.710)         (3.934)          (9.581)             (0.001)
                                                      [0.864]        [0.099]          [0.724]             [0.989]
 Section 8 v Control                  -0.008        -0.000654         -1.360           1.359              -0.0285
                                     (0.328)         (0.001)         (4.549)          (1.260)             (0.026)
                                                      [0.989]        [0.884]          [0.826]             [0.884]
 Control Group Mean                                    14.58           7.077           7.503               0.105

 Observations                        17628           17628           17628             17628              17628


Note: This table reports the difference in means for recipients of Experimental or Section 8 vouchers relative to the
control group. The mean of the outcome variable in the control group is reported at the bottom of each respective
column. Per comparison p-values are reported in parentheses, and family-wise error rate adjusted p-values are
reported in square brackets under each estimate. See text for more details. The symbol † indicates that the estimate
differs significantly from the estimate among those randomized as young children. The symbol  indicates that the
estimate differs significantly from the estimate of the effect of the Section 8 treatment arm. Significance levels: *=10
percent; **=5 percent; ***=1 percent




                                                          42
                     Table V       Exploring Direct Channels of Neighborhood Impact


                                              Peer Index                 Cost of Living                Credit Supply
                                         Credit     Delinquency     CC Spending Utilization       Payday Stores   Banks
                                          (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)          (6)

 Children: Age < 13 years at RA
 Experimental v Control                0.281***     0.00349        425.3***        -0.385        0.0142        0.38
                                         (0.046)       (0.020)         (69.503)       (0.554)         (1.029)       (0.407)
                                         [0.000]       [0.861]          [0.000]       [0.487]         [0.989]       [0.350]
 Section 8 v Control                    0.189***      -0.00736        239.3***       -0.75***        -0.164**       -0.0963
                                         (0.031)       (0.019)         (39.107)       (0.287)         (0.072)       (0.483)
                                         [0.000]       [0.693]          [0.000]       [0.009]         [0.022]       [0.842]
 Control Group Mean                      0.0502        0.0708            1.902         58.54           5.155          2632

 Observations                            41615          41615           41615          41615          46851          46851

 Children: Ages 13-17 years at RA
 Experimental v Control                 0.0763       -0.015         194.7*          0.074        0.0763        0.352
                                         (0.040)       (0.087)        (111.224)       (0.516)        (0.429)        (0.685)
                                         [0.058]       [0.864]         [0.080]        [0.886]        [0.859]        [0.608]
 Section 8 v Control                     0.0537        -0.0334           76.6          -0.132        0.0314†         0.131
                                         (0.045)       (0.057)        (216.688)       (0.402)        (0.410)        (1.710)
                                         [0.234]       [0.556]         [0.724]        [0.743]        [0.939]        [0.939]
 Control Group Mean                      0.0228        -0.0517          1.399           57.95         3.910          2790

 Observations                            24216          24216           24216          24216          25942          25942

 Adults: 18+ at RA
 Experimental v Control                0.260***      0.00615        380.9***         0.165        0.0647       -0.0156
                                        (0.025)        (0.071)         (62.247)       (1.904)        (0.144)        (0.153)
                                         [0.000]       [0.931]          [0.000]       [0.931]        [0.654]        [0.919]
 Section 8 v Control                   0.0686***       -0.0162        181.9***         -0.437        -0.0367         0.219
                                        (0.011)        (0.017)         (29.726)       (0.384)        (0.041)        (0.224)
                                         [0.000]       [0.327]          [0.000]       [0.255]        [0.372]        [0.327]
 Control Group Mean                     -0.0273         -0.104           1.326          58.06         3.540          2715

 Observations                            59542          59542           59542          59542          63410          63410


Note: This table reports the difference in means for recipients of Experimental or Section 8 vouchers relative to the
control group. The mean of the outcome variable in the control group is reported at the bottom of each respective
column. Per comparison p-values are reported in parentheses, and family-wise error rate adjusted p-values are
reported in square brackets under each estimate. See text for more details. The symbol † indicates that the estimate
differs significantly from the estimate among those randomized as young children. The symbol  indicates that the
estimate differs significantly from the estimate of the effect of the Section 8 treatment arm. Significance levels: *=10
percent; **=5 percent; ***=1 percent




                                                          43
                                     REFERENCES

Abel, A. (1990). Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the joneses. American

Economic Review 80 (2), 38–42.

Adams, W., L. Einav, and J. Levin (2009). Liquidity constraints and imperfect information in

subprime lending. American Economic Review 99 (1), 49–84.

Agarwal, S., V. Mikhed, and B. Scholnick (2019). Peers’ income and financial distress: Evidence

from lottery winners and neighboring bankruptcies. forthcoming, Review of Financial Statistics.

Anderson, M. (2012). Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early intervention:

A reevaluation of the abecedarian, perry preschool, and early training projects. Journal of the

American Statistical Association 103 (484), 1481–1495.

Angrist, J. D., G. W. Imbens, and D. B. Rubin (1996). Identification of causal effects using

instrumental variables. Journal of the American statistical Association 91 (434), 444–455.

Banerjee, A. V. (1992, 08). A Simple Model of Herd Behavior*. The Quarterly Journal of

Economics 107 (3), 797–817.

Beer, R., F. Ionescu, and G. Li (2018). Are income and credit scores highly correlated? FEDS

Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, https://doi.org/10.

17016/2380-7172.2235.

Bergman, P., R. Chetty, S. DeLuca, N. Hendren, L. Katz, and C. Palmer (2019). Creating Moves

to Opportunity: Experimental Evidence on Barriers to Neighborhood Choice. NBER Working

Paper 26164.

Bernheim, B. D. (1994). A theory of conformity. Journal of Political Economy 102 (5), 841–877.

Bertrand, M. and A. Morse (2011). Information disclosure, cognitive biases, and payday borrowing.

Journal of Finance 66 (6), 18651893.

Bertrand, M. and A. Morse (2016). Trickle-down consumption. Review of Economics and Statis-

tics 5 (98), 863879.


                                                44
Bhutto, N. (2014). Payday loans and consumer financial health. Journal of Banking and Fi-

nance 47, 230–242.

Brevoort, K., P. Grimm, and M. Kambara (2015). Data point: Credit invisibles. CFPB Report.

Brevoort, K., D. Grodzicki, M. Hackmann, and S. Koulayev (2019). The credit consequences of

unpaid medical bills. NBER Working Paper 24002.

Brown, J., Z. Ivkovic, P. Smith, and S. Weisbenner (2008). Neighbors matter: Causal community

effects and stock market participation. The Journal of Finance 63 (3), 1509–1531.

Brown, J. R., J. A. Cookson, and R. Z. Heimer (2019). Growing up without finance. Journal of

Financial Economics.

Burke, K., J. Leary, and J. Wang (2016). Information disclosure and payday lending in texas.

Working Paper.

Bursztyn, L., F. Ederer, B. Ferman, and N. Yuchtman (2014). Understanding mechanisms under-

lying peer effects: Evidence from a field experiment in financial decisions. Econometrica 82 (3),

12731301.

Campbell, J. Y. and J. H. Cochrane (1999). By force of habit: A consumptionbased explanation

of aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107 (2), 205–251.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, and L. Katz (2016). The effects of exposure to better neighborhoods

on children: New evidence from the moving to opportunity experiment. American Economic

Review 106 (4), 855–902.

Cohen-Cole, E. and B. Duygan-Bump (2008). Household bankruptcy decision: The role of social

stigma vs information sharing. Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Cookson, J. A., E. Gilje, and R. Heimer (2019). Shale shocked: The long run effect of income on

household debt. Working Paper.

Dobbie, W., P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, N. Mahoney, and J. Song (2017). Bad credit, no problem?

credit and labor market consequences of bad credit reports. Working Paper.


                                              45
Dobbie, W., P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, and C. S. Yang (2017). Consumer bankruptcy and financial

health. The Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (5), 853–869.

Dobbie, W. and P. Skiba (2013). Information asymmetries in consumer credit markets: Evidence

from payday lending. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (4), 256–82.

Dobbie, W. and J. Song (2015). Debt relief and debtor outcomes: Measuring the effects of

consumer bankruptcy protection. American Economic Review 105 (3), 12721311.

Duflo, E. and E. Saez (2012). The role of information and social interactions in retirement plan

decisions: Evidence from a randomized experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (3),

815–842.

Ellison, G. and D. Fudenberg (1993). Rules of thumb for social learning. Journal of Political

Economy 101 (4), 612–643.

Fay, S., E. Hurst, and M. White (2002). The household bankruptcy decision. American Economic

Review 92 (3), 706–718.

Finkelstein, A., M. Gentzkow, and H. Williams (2016). Sources of geographic variation in health

care: Evidence from patient migration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 4 (131), 1681–1726.

Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. Wright, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J. Newhouse, H. Allen, and

K. Baicker (2012). The oregon health insurance experiment: Evidence from the first year. Quar-

terly Journal of Economics 127 (3), 1057–1106.

Gross, D. and N. Souleles (2002). Explaining the increase in bankruptcy and delinquency: Stigma

versus risk-composition. Review of Financial Studies 15 (1), 319–347.

Gross, T., M. Notowidigdo, and J. Wang (2018). The marginal propensity to consumer over the

business cycle. Working Paper.

Hong, H., J. D. Kubik, and J. C. Stein (2004). Social interaction and stock-market participation.

The Journal of Finance 59 (1), 137–163.

Kling, J., J. Liebman, and L. Katz (2007). Experimental analysis of neighborhood effects. Econo-

metrica 75 (1), 83–119.

                                              46
Lieber, E. M. and W. Skimmyhorn (forthcoming). Peer effects in financial decision making. Journal

of Public Economics.

Ludwig, J., G. Duncan, L. Gennetian, L. Katz, R. Kessler, J. Kling, and L. Sanbonmatsu (2012).

Neighborhood effects on the long-term well-being of low-income adults. Science 337 (601), 1505–

1510.

Ludwig, J., G. Duncan, L. Gennetian, L. Katz, R. Kessler, J. Kling, L. Sanbonmatsu, and T. Mc-

Dade (2011). Neighborhoods, obesity, and diabetes a randomized social experiment. New England

Journal of Medicine 365, 1509–1519.

Miller, S., L. Hu, R. Kaestner, B. Mazumder, and A. Wong (2018). The aca medicaid expansion

in michigan and financial health. Working paper.

Miller, S. and C. Soo (2018). Does increasing formal credit access reduce payday borrowing?

Working Paper.

Orr, L. L., J. D. Feins, R. Jacob, E. Beecroft, L. Sanbonmatsu, L. F. Katz, J. B. Liebman, and J. R.

Kling (2003). Moving to opportunity for fair housing demonstration program: Interim impacts

evaluation. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development

and Research.

Rhine, S. L. W., W. H. Greene, and M. Toussaint-Comeau (2006). The importance of check-cashing

businesses to the unbanked: Racial/ethnic differences. Review of Economics and Statistics 1 (88),

146–157.

Romano, J. P. and M. Wolf (2016). Efficient computation of adjusted p-values for resampling-based

stepdown multiple testing. Statistics and Probability Letters 113, 38–40.

Sanbonmatsu, Lisa, J. L. L. F. K. L. A. G. G. J. D. R. C. K. E. A. T. M. and S. T. Lindau (2011).

Moving to opportunity for fair housing demonstration program: Final impacts evaluation. U.S.

Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and Research.

Westfall and Young (1993). Resampling-Based Multiple Testing: Examples and Methods for P-

Value Adjustment. New York Wiley.


                                                47
Do Neighborhoods Affect Credit Market Decisions of
Low-Income Borrowers? Evidence from the Moving to
            Opportunity Experiment
                                           Internet Appendix

                                          Sarah Miller    Cindy K. Soo



                Appendix A.                  Calculation of adjusted p-values

   We calculate p-values that are adjusted to account for the fact that we examine multiple out-

comes within broad domains (“families”). We group outcomes into families based on topic: payday

borrowing, delinquency, debt, and public records. The method that we use controls the probability

that we incorrectly reject at least one true null hypothesis within a family of outcomes to the level of

the test (e.g., 5 percent). We calculate these p-values using a free step-down re-sampling algorithm,

following Kling et al. (2007), Anderson (2012), Finkelstein et al. (2012) and others. This algorithm

and its properties are described in greater detail in Westfall and Young (1993) and Romano and

Wolf (2016). In places where we report standard errors, we derive these from the implied t-statistic

associated with the p-values (either adjusted or unadjusted as noted in the text) in order to have

a consistent method of inference throughout the paper. The algorithm is implemented as follows:

  1. We generate the original treatment effect for each outcome j, β1 . . . βm , and the original p-

      values, p1 . . . pm , using Huber-White standard errors clustered at the family level and order

      these outcomes by significance, 1 to m.

  2. We re-sample families from the data with replacement and re-estimate treatment effects for

      each outcome (β1∗ , . . . , βm
                                   ∗ ).


  3. We generate p-values under the null hypothesis by testing βj∗ = βj for each j = 1 . . . m and

      denote each p-value as p∗j .

  4. We enforce the significance ordering of our original inference by computing p∗∗
                                                                                  j =

      min(p∗j , p∗j+1 , . . . , p∗m ), where j denotes the original significance rank of the outcome, with j =

      1 being the most significant and j = m the least significant. This is referred to as enforcing

      monotonicity.

                                                         48
  5. We repeat steps 2 through 4 999 times, generating many p∗∗
                                                             j s.

  6. We add up the number of times that p∗∗
                                         j < pj . Call the total number Sj . We then calculate

     pfj wer = Sj /1000.

  7. We enforce monotonicity a second time by defining pfj wer = max(pf1 wer∗ , pf2 wer∗ , . . . , pjf wer∗ ).

     This ensures that larger unadjusted p-values always correspond to larger adjusted p-values.

For the unadjusted p-value, we simply calculate fraction of p∗j that fall below pj , without any

monotonicity enforcement, following, e.g. Romano and Wolf (2016).




                                                     49
          Appendix B.              Estimating Convergence to Neighbors

   In order to assess the role of peer effects in driving our results, we systematically examine

whether MTO participants who moved to lower income neighborhoods behaved more like their

new neighbors as a result of the move. This is not obvious from the direct effects of the program,

as reported in Tables II and III, because these estimates do not incorporate information on the

behavior of neighbors. Since individuals in low poverty neighborhoods do not necessarily have

better repayment behavior than those in high poverty neighborhoods, it is necessary to incorporate

information about MTO participants’ neighbors. In order to do so, we define the difference between

voucher recipients’ neighbors and the control group for each outcome y as


                                            ∆y,g = ȳn,g − ȳc                                  (B1)


where ȳn,g is the average of outcome y among the neighbors of each treatment group g. Large

values of ∆y mean that voucher recipients have neighbors that look very different from the control

group on outcome y, whereas small values of ∆y indicate that voucher recipients’ neighbors are not

very different from the control group. We then re-scale our estimates of β1 from equation (1) by

this ∆ by estimating




                       Yi = β0 + β˜1 ∆y,exp × Expi + β˜2 ∆y,sec8 × Sec8i + βs + i .            (B2)


   Note that this approach is similar to the one used in Finkelstein et al. (2016). Our estimates

of β˜1 and β˜2 are presented graphically in Figure A1 and A2 respectively. Asterisks indicate that β̃

differs significant from zero. We exclude one outcome for those who were randomized at ages 13 to

17, the use of storefront payday loan products, because the size of this estimate is very large once

scaled by ∆y and renders the other estimates difficult to read.

   Comparing across all three panels of each figure, we observe evidence that the only age group

within the Experimental treatment arm that appeared to move systematically towards their neigh-

bors were those who were randomized when under age 13. This group moved closer to their

neighbors for 10 of the 13 outcomes considered; of these, 5 outcomes show statistically significant


                                                    50
convergence towards neighbors.26 In contrast, those randomized later in childhood in the Experi-

mental group show, if anything, divergence from their neighbors in the low poverty areas relative to

what they would have experienced had they been randomized into the control group. Among those

randomized into the Experimental group in adulthood, there does not appear to be a consistent

pattern, with evidence of convergence for some outcomes such as the amount of credit available,

and divergence for other outcomes such as the credit score.

   We observe a similar pattern in the Section 8 group for those randomized at younger ages,

where most outcomes show convergence towards neighbors. In contrast to the Experimental group,

those randomized later in childhood and adulthood show some evidence of convergence among

delinquency outcomes such as judgements. Interestingly, those in the Section 8 group who were

randomized in adulthood reduce their amount past due so much that they exhibit much lower levels

of delinquency than their neighbors, resulting in them being farther away from the delinquency

outcomes of their neighbors than the control group.




  26
     Note that these estimates are adjusted for multiple comparisons using the method employed throughout the
paper.


                                                     51
                           Appendix C.           Data Appendix

   We present descriptive statistics about our matched dataset, which we use to examine the impact

of MTO on credit outcomes of participants, and the dataset of neighborhood characteristics, which

we use to explore mechanisms, in Tables A8 and A9. In the first column of these tables, we list

the variables that are used in the analysis. The second column provides a short definition of each

of these variables. In the third column, we report the number of observations we observe for these

variables. Note that the number of observations is different for payday loan outcomes, which we

observe for 2014 through 2017, than for most of our credit report outcomes, which we observe

through 2001 through 2017. In addition, some credit report variables are only available beginning

in 2007 (Judgement Amount and Tax Liens). The next five columns show the mean, standard

deviation, and 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the variable.




                                                52
                                                                               Figure A1. Convergence to Neighbors: Experimental Group

                                                                                                                      **           **
                                                                                                     **


                                                        0.04
        Less Like Neighbors ↔ More like Neighbors




                                                                    ***               **




                                                        0.00




                                                    −0.04




                                                                          mt
                                                                             .               ail.              re            nce         ent              t.             ail.              re            nce          ent              t.             ail.              re           nce          ent
                                                                        A                  Av              Sco            ala        aym               Am              Av              Sco           ala          aym               Am              Av              Sco          ala          aym
                                                                    dit                dit             dit           t. B          .P              dit             dit             dit            .B            .P              dit             dit             dit            .B           .P
                                                                Cre              C r e            C r e
                                                                                                                  To            Mo           C r e
                                                                                                                                                             C r e            Cr e
                                                                                                                                                                                              To t
                                                                                                                                                                                                            M o           C r e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C r e            Cr e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           To t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M o

                                                                                                                                                        Under 13 at RA        Age 13−17 at RA        Age 18+ at RA



                                                                                                                  (a) Credit Outcomes, Experimental Group
        Less Like Neighbors ↔ More like Neighbors




                                                    4




                                                    2




                                                    0
                                                                        ns                     s                                                            s                  s                                                       ns                s
                                                                     tio                    ent                 Du
                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                               Lie
                                                                                                                                   ns                  tio
                                                                                                                                                           n                ent              Du
                                                                                                                                                                                               e                   ns            tio                ent                   Du
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e                   ns
                                                                 llec                 gem                   t                                   llec                  gem                t                   Lie             llec                gem                  t                   Lie
                                                               Co                  Jud                  Pas                Tax               Co                 Jud                  Pas               Tax                Co                 Jud                  Pas               Tax
                                                                                                                                                    Under 13 at RA          Age 13−17 at RA        Age 18+ at RA



                                                                                                          (b) Delinquency Outcomes, Experimental Group


Note: These figures show the estimates of MTO participants’ convergence towards the outcomes of the residents of
their zip codes, with positive values indicating the MTO participants behave more like their neighbors and negative
values indicating they behave less like their neighbors. See text for more details. Significance levels: *=10 percent;
**=5 percent; ***=1 percent.




                                                                                                                                                                         53
                                                                                                Figure A2. Convergence to Neighbors: Section 8 Group



                                                                0.05
                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                               *
                   Less Like Neighbors ↔ More like Neighbors




                                                                              *                  *

                                                                0.00




                                                               −0.05




                                                               −0.10


                                                                                   mt
                                                                                       .               ail.              re            nce         ent              t.             ail.              re            nce          ent              t.             ail.              re           nce          ent
                                                                                 A                   Av              Sco            ala        aym               Am              Av              Sco           ala          aym               Am              Av              Sco          ala          aym
                                                                             dit                 dit             dit           t. B          .P              dit             dit             dit            .B            .P              dit             dit             dit            .B           .P
                                                                         Cre               C r e            C r e
                                                                                                                            To            Mo           C r e
                                                                                                                                                                       C r e            Cr e
                                                                                                                                                                                                        To t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M o           C r e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C r e            Cr e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     To t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M o

                                                                                                                                                                Under 13 at RA         Age 13−17 at RA         Age 18+ at RA



                                                                                                                                   (a) Credit Outcomes, Section 8 Group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             **




                                                          6
        Less Like Neighbors ↔ More like Neighbors




                                                          4




                                                          2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *



                                                          0
                                                                             tio
                                                                                  ns                  nts               ue                  ns               tio
                                                                                                                                                                 n   s              nts                 e                 ns
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ns          ent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s                 e              * iens
                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                     tD                  Lie                                       e                  Du              Lie                                                         Du
                                                                         llec                   gem              Pas                                     llec                  gem            Pas
                                                                                                                                                                                                  t                                   llec                 g em           Pas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t                    L
                                                                       Co                   Jud                                    Tax                Co                 Jud                                    Tax                Co                   Jud                                  Tax
                                                                                                                                                            Under 13 at RA         Age 13−17 at RA          Age 18+ at RA



                                                                                                                        (b) Delinquency Outcomes, Section 8 Group


Note: These figures show the estimates of MTO participants’ convergence towards the outcomes of the residents of
their zip codes, with positive values indicating the MTO participants behave more like their neighbors and negative
values indicating they behave less like their neighbors. See text for more details. Significance levels: *=10 percent;
**=5 percent; ***=1 percent.




                                                                                                                                                                                  54
Figure A3. The Impact of Neighborhood on Outcomes at Age 24+, by Age at Random Assignment
                    0.2




                                                                                                      0.02
                                              *
                    0.1
Effect Size (TOT)




                                                                                  Effect Size (TOT)
                                **




                                                                                                      −0.02
                    0.0




                                                                                                      −0.06
                    −0.1




                                                            *


                                                                                                      −0.10
                    −0.2




                           Under age 10   Age 10−12    Age 13−15     Age 16−18                                 Under age 10   Age 10−12    Age 13−15     Age 16−18

                                          Age at Random Assignment                                                            Age at Random Assignment


                           (a) Credit Index, Experimental Group                                        (b) Delinquency Index, Experimental Group
                    0.2




                                                                                                      0.02
                    0.1
Effect Size (TOT)




                                                                                  Effect Size (TOT)




                                **
                                                                                                      −0.02
                    0.0




                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                      −0.06




                                              *             *
                    −0.1




                                                                                                      −0.10
                    −0.2




                           Under age 10   Age 10−12    Age 13−15     Age 16−18

                                          Age at Random Assignment                                                            Age at Random Assignment


                             (c) Credit Index, Section 8 Group                                                (d) Delinquency Index, Section 8 Group



Note: These figures show the TOT estimate of being randomized to each voucher arm at different ages. See text for
more details. Significance levels: *=10 percent; **=5 percent; ***=1 percent.




                                                                                 55
Figure A4. The Impact of Neighborhood by Age Observed in Credit Record (Blue=Under 13 at
Random Assignment; Green=Age 13-17 at Random Assignment)
                    0.05 0.10 0.15




                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                    *
                                                                                    ●                                                                     ●
                                                    ***
                                                     ●




                                                                                                                 0.00
                                                                     **
                                                                     ●                                                    ●
                                     ***                                                                                              ● ●
Effect Size (TOT)




                                                                                             Effect Size (TOT)
                                      ●                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                         ●




                                                                                                                 −0.05
                                                                                                                                                      ●


                                                     ●
                    −0.05




                                                                                                                 −0.10
                                     **
                                     ●                               *
                                                                     ●

                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                    ●
                    −0.15




                                                                                                                 −0.15
                               Age 18−21         Age 22−24       Age 25−27       Age 28+                             Age 18−21    Age 22−24       Age 25−27       Age 28+

                                                   Age Observed in Credit Data                                                      Age Observed in Credit Data


                                     (a) Credit Index, Experimental Group                                         (b) Delinquency Index, Experimental Group
                    0.05




                                                                                                                 0.05




                                     **
                                     ●
                                                     *
                                                     ●
                                          ●                          ●

                                                         ●                                                                            ●
                    0.00




                                                                                                                 0.00
Effect Size (TOT)




                                                                                             Effect Size (TOT)




                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                              ●

                                                                                                                                          ●           ●
                                                                                    ●


                                                                                                                                                                     ● ●
                    −0.05




                                                                                                                 −0.05




                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                         **
                                                                                                                                                          **
                                                                                        ●
                    −0.10




                                                                                                                 −0.10




                               Age 20−22         Age 23−25       Age 26−28       Age 29+                             Age 20−22    Age 23−25       Age 26−28       Age 29+

                                                   Age Observed in Credit Data                                                      Age Observed in Credit Data


                                          (c) Credit Index, Section 8 Group                                              (d) Delinquency Index, Section 8 Group



Note: These figures show the TOT estimate of being randomized to each voucher arm as young (blue) or older (green)
children at different ages in adulthood. See text for more details. Significance levels: *=10 percent; **=5 percent;
***=1 percent.




                                                                                            56
Table A1 Match Rate Across Treatment Arms and Covariate Balance among Matched Sample


                                                Control Group Mean      Experimental v Control      Section 8 v Control
 Match Quality
 Linked to Credit Data                                  0.767                     0.003                     0.006
                                                                                 (0.009)                   (0.009)
 # Years Observed in Credit Data                         8.55                     0.153                     0.109
                                                                                 (0.145)                   (0.154)
 # Years Observed: Under 13 at RA                        6.23                     -0.02                      0.06
                                                                                 (0.153)                   (0.165)
 Number of MTO participants Linked                      3406                      4360                      3192


 Baseline Characteristics
 Household Head Completed GED                           0.175                     -0.0154                 -0.00737
                                                                                 (0.0166)                 (0.0203)
 Household Head Completed High School                   0.394                   0.000375                    0.0280
                                                                                 (0.0216)                 (0.0265)
 Household Head never married                           0.380                      0.0146                  -0.0172
                                                                                 (0.0207)                 (0.0248)
 Household Head had teenage birth                       0.260                     0.00415                  0.00927
                                                                                 (0.0189)                 (0.0234)
 Household victims of crime prior to MTO                0.429                      0.0229                 -0.00395
                                                                                 (0.0211)                 (0.0230)
 Household Head Employed                                0.267                     0.00318                  0.00706
                                                                                 (0.0195)                 (0.0238)
 Household Head gets AFDC/TANF                          0.782                      0.0132                  0.00461
                                                                                 (0.0168)                 (0.0180)
 Household Head Female                                  0.913                     -0.0119                  -0.0120
                                                                                 (0.0131)                 (0.0135)
 Household Head African American                        0.700                     0.00637                 -0.0341*
                                                                                 (0.0173)                 (0.0201)
 Household Head Hispanic                                0.283                    -0.00963                  0.0216
                                                                                 (0.0175)                 (0.0201)
 Move to get away from gangs or drugs                   0.782                    -0.00239                  -0.0197
                                                                                 (0.0175)                 (0.0196)
 Child susp./expelled in past 2 yrs.                   0.0685                     0.00965                 -0.00372
                                                                                (0.00801)                (0.00823)

Note: These summary statistics are baseline characteristics among individuals matched with a credit report only.
This table presents only a sample of the full set of available covariates; see the appendix for the complete set of
covariates.




                                                        57
      Table A2 Effect of MTO on Credit Outcomes, Adults and Children (ITT estimates)


                                Credit Index   Credit Score    Credit Limit    Total Balance    Monthly Payment    Credit Avail
                                   (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)                 (6)

 Children: < 13 years at RA
 Experimental v Control         0.0423***      5.670**        425.0***        2224**           23.55**            341.0**
                                 (0.000)       (0.023)         (0.010)        (0.004)          (0.004)            (0.015)
                                               [0.023]         [0.010]        [0.004]          [0.018]            [0.018]
 Section 8 v Control             0.0244*        -0.159         256.4*          1588*            18.43*             257.2*
                                 (0.062)       (0.958)         (0.080)        (0.042)          (0.045)            (0.072)
                                               [0.958]         [0.081]        [0.093]          [0.093]            [0.072]
 Control Group Mean

 Observations                     46851         46851          46851          46851            46851               46851

 Children: 13-17 at RA
 Experimental v Control          -0.0223        -5.263         -323.1          -538.4           1.799              -287.6
                                 (0.273)       (0.130)        (0.249)         (0.714)          (0.904)            (0.118)
                                               [0.224]        [0.249]         [0.714]          [0.904]            [0.194]
 Section 8 v Control            -0.00849         4.002         -41.19          -1352            -12.74             -136.6
                                 (0.699)       (0.305)        (0.881)         (0.363)          (0.358)            (0.592)
                                               [0.541]        [0.881]         [0.541]          [0.358]            [0.592]
 Control Group Mean

 Observations                     25942         25942          25942          25942            25942               25942

 Adults at RA
 Experimental v Control          0.0163         -0.971         469.0           -698.8           -1.394             444.4
                                 (0.499)       (0.685)        (0.115)         (0.657)          (0.935)            (0.158)
                                               [0.685]        [0.240]         [0.657]          [0.935]            [0.280]
 Section 8 v Control             0.00204         3.317         357.6           -2505            -13.34             165.2
                                 (0.793)       (0.193)        (0.205)         (0.106)          (0.387)            (0.278)
                                               [0.193]        [0.309]         [0.236]          [0.387]            [0.278]
 Control Group Mean

 Observations                     63410         63410          63410          63410            63410               63410


Note: This table reports the difference in means for recipients of Experimental or Section 8 vouchers relative to the
control group. The mean of the outcome variable in the control group is reported at the bottom of each respective
column. Per comparison p-values are reported in parentheses, and family-wise error rate adjusted p-values are
reported in square brackets under each estimate. See text for more details. Significance levels: *=10 percent; **=5
percent; ***=1 percent




                                                         58
   Table A3 Effect of MTO on Delinquency Outcomes, Adults and Children (ITT estimates)


                                     Delinquency Index     30 Days Past Due    Tax Liens    Judgment Amount      Collections
                                         (1)                  (2)               (3)          (4)                 (5)

 Panel A: Age < 13 years at RA
 Experimental v Control               -0.0179*              34.51              -125.0       -6.409               -220.2
                                       (0.057)             (0.457)            (0.117)      (0.921)              (0.228)
                                                           [0.457]            [0.321]      [0.921]              [0.321]
 Section 8 v Control                  -0.00648              122.9              -89.81       72.64                -172.3
                                       (0.469)             (0.191)            (0.151)      (0.547)              (0.256)
                                                           [0.476]            [0.476]      [0.547]              [0.256]
 Control Group Mean

 Observations                           46851                 46851            46851       42654                 46851

 Panel B: Ages 13-17 years at RA
 Experimental v Control               -0.00477              -58.10             -24.64       -96.90               67.18
                                       (0.580)             (0.674)            (0.527)      (0.554)              (0.431)
                                                           [0.674]            [0.527]      [0.784]              [0.784]
 Section 8 v Control                 -0.0258***             -246.6             -26.49       -281.4               -143.5
                                       (0.005)             (0.106)            (0.147)      (0.114)              (0.417)
                                                           [0.190]            [0.147]      [0.145]              [0.417]
 Control Group Mean

 Observations                           25942                 25942            25942       18206                 25942

 Panel C: Adults at RA
 Experimental v Control                0.00353               -84.55            77.86        -188.0               105.6
                                       (0.718)              (0.477)           (0.056)      (0.348)              (0.158)
                                                            [0.477]           [0.204]      [0.348]              [0.368]
 Section 8 v Control                 -0.0216***            -218.9**           -66.24*      -183.8*               0.367
                                       (0.002)              (0.024)           (0.050)      (0.014)              (0.996)
                                                            [0.024]           [0.072]      [0.070]              [0.996]
 Control Group Mean

 Observations                           63410                 63410            63410       41661                 63410


Note: This table reports the difference in means for recipients of Experimental or Section 8 vouchers relative to the
control group. The mean of the outcome variable in the control group is reported at the bottom of each respective
column. Per comparison p-values are reported in parentheses, and family-wise error rate adjusted p-values are
reported in square brackets under each estimate. See text for more details. Significance levels: *=10 percent; **=5
percent; ***=1 percent




                                                         59
     Table A4 Effect of MTO on Payday Outcomes, Adults and Children (ITT estimates)


                                Payday Index     Payday Amt      Internet Amt    Storefront Amt    Payday Inquiries
                                   (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)               (5)

 Children: < 13 years at RA
 Experimental v Control          0.000582          -1.649         1.159           -2.809          0.00964
                                  (0.956)         (0.718)        (0.611)         (0.456)          (0.158)
                                                  [0.718]        [0.611]         [0.708]          [0.453]
 Section 8 v Control            -0.0229***       -11.28**       -3.809**        -7.475**          0.00202
                                  (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.017)         (0.028)          (0.844)
                                                  [0.010]        [0.017]         [0.041]          [0.844]
 Control Group Mean                                 22.11         9.946           12.17            0.0857

 Observations                      23204           23204         23204           23204             23204

 Children: 13-17 years at RA
 Experimental v Control           -0.0215          -5.728        -7.852          2.124             -0.0160
                                  (0.694)         (0.862)       (0.049)         (0.618)            (0.989)
                                                  [0.862]       [0.100]         [0.721]            [0.989]
 Section 8 v Control             -0.000378          5.633        -2.776          8.409             -0.0310
                                  (0.626)         (1.000)       (0.591)         (0.827)            (0.563)
                                                  [1.000]       [0.883]         [0.827]            [0.883]
 Control Group Mean                                 19.93         17.13          2.803              0.146

 Observations                      7716            7716          7716            7716               7716

 Adults: 18+ at RA
 Experimental v Control          -0.00410          -0.801        -2.623          1.822            -0.000647
                                  (0.148)         (0.338)       (0.098)         (0.675)            (0.308)
                                                   [0.530]      [0.152]         [0.675]             [0.308]
 Section 8 v Control             -0.00527        -0.000826       -0.873          0.872             -0.0183
                                  (0.987)         (0.548)       (0.765)         (0.209)            (0.069)
                                                   [0.548]      [0.765]         [0.283]             [0.257]
 Control Group Mean                                 14.58         7.077          7.503               0.105

 Observations                      17628           17628         17628           17628             17628


Note: This table reports the difference in means for recipients of Experimental or Section 8 vouchers relative to the
control group. The mean of the outcome variable in the control group is reported at the bottom of each respective
column. Per comparison p-values are reported in parentheses, and family-wise error rate adjusted p-values are
reported in square brackets under each estimate. See text for more details. Significance levels: *=10 percent; **=5
percent; ***=1 percent




                                                           60
                  Table A5 Component Effects of Neighborhood Peer Credit Index


                                Credit Index   Credit Score     Credit Limit   Total Balance   Monthly Payment     Credit Avail
                                    (1)            (1)              (2)             (2)              (3)               (3)

 Children: < 13 years at RA
 Experimental v Control           0.281***       11.76***         2323***        8971***           79.10***             1947***
                                  (0.0547)        (2.677)         (452.4)         (1799)            (18.76)             (393.3)
 Section 8 v Control              0.189***       9.519***         1496***        5357***           43.73***             1347***
                                  (0.0458)        (2.465)         (365.2)         (1447)            (14.89)             (321.7)
 Control Group Mean                               606.02          6681.74        27199.98           718.78              5769.84

 Observations                      41615           41615           41615          41615             41615                41615

 Children: 13-17 at RA
 Experimental v Control            0.146*          6.204           1263*          5210**             5.008                1093*
                                  (0.0825)        (4.395)         (676.6)         (2462)            (42.86)              (593.3)
 Section 8 v Control               0.0964          4.038           745.2          3787*              5.707                715.1
                                  (0.0691)        (3.665)         (562.4)         (2145)            (35.73)              (493.3)
 Control Group Mean                               607.47         19255.30        47722.99           571.95              14695.15

 Observations                      24216           24216           24216          24216             24216                24216

 Adults at RA
 Experimental v Control           0.260***       9.713***        2126***         9186***           77.20***             1777***
                                  (0.0547)        (2.827)         (456.4)         (1669)            (18.58)              (398.3)
 Section 8 v Control              0.126***       6.186***        1087***         3303***            24.75*              932.9***
                                  (0.0405)        (2.139)         (341.0)         (1218)            (13.67)              (297.7)
 Control Group Mean                               605.52         18597.90        46185.64           539.01              14176.95

 Observations                      59542           59542           59542          59542             59542                59542


Note: This table reports the difference in means for recipients of Experimental or Section 8 vouchers relative to the
control group. The mean of the outcome variable in the control group is reported at the bottom of each respective
column. Per comparison p-values are reported in parentheses, and family-wise error rate adjusted p-values are
reported in square brackets under each estimate. See text for more details. Significance levels: *=10 percent; **=5
percent; ***=1 percent




                                                           61
                Table A6 Component Effects of Neighborhood Peer Delinquency Index


                                Delinquency Index    30 Days Past Due     Tax Liens   Judgment Amount       Collections
                                       (1)                 (2)               (3)            (4)                 (5)

 Children: < 13 years at RA
 Experimental v Control               0.00349               -40.62        170.9***           72.63            -99.58**
                                     (0.0287)              (37.08)         (62.32)          (47.85)            (40.53)
 Section 8 v Control                 -0.00736               -47.11         100.3*           94.10**          -110.8***
                                     (0.0256)              (33.83)         (56.84)          (46.76)            (32.35)
 Control Group Mean                                        978.98          635.34            542.68            1328.20

 Observations                         41615                41615            41615            41615             41615

 Children: 13-17 at RA
 Experimental v Control               -0.0150               -27.60          47.27             20.91            -21.18
                                     (0.0426)              (47.98)         (103.7)          (89.43)           (59.53)
 Section 8 v Control                  -0.0334               -16.53          5.449            -15.84            -58.81
                                     (0.0330)              (40.32)         (80.81)          (61.08)           (46.07)
 Control Group Mean                                        926.54          628.99           521.55            1327.54

 Observations                         24216                24216            24216            24216             24216

 Adults at RA
 Experimental v Control              0.00615                -17.01          55.95            67.11             -23.68
                                     (0.0217)              (29.77)         (40.90)          (41.03)           (32.10)
 Section 8 v Control                  -0.0162             -48.51**          33.44           52.37*            -45.08*
                                     (0.0164)              (22.55)         (32.02)          (27.53)           (24.33)
 Control Group Mean                                        915.68          551.79           477.99            1279.16

 Observations                         59542                59542            59542            59542             59542


Note: This table reports the difference in means for recipients of Experimental or Section 8 vouchers relative to the
control group. The mean of the outcome variable in the control group is reported at the bottom of each respective
column. Per comparison p-values are reported in parentheses, and family-wise error rate adjusted p-values are
reported in square brackets under each estimate. See text for more details. Significance levels: *=10 percent; **=5
percent; ***=1 percent




                                                         62
             Table A7 TOT Effects of MTO on Bankruptcy and Mortgage Outcomes

                                                Any Mortgage        Mortgage Delinquency         Bankruptcy
     Children: Age < 13 years at RA
     Experimental v Control                        0.0222**                  0.00257                 0.00996
                                                    (0.0101)                (0.00292)              (0.00894)
     Section 8 v Control                            0.0142*                  0.00104                -0.00314
                                                   (0.00744)                (0.00220)              (0.00688)
     Observations                                    41615                    41615                   41615

     Children: Ages 13-17 years at RA
     Experimental v Control                        -0.00941                  -0.00149               -0.0121
                                                   (0.0183)                 (0.00644)              (0.0178)
     Section 8 v Control                            -0.0167                   0.00116              0.000858
                                                   (0.0142)                 (0.00513)              (0.0185)
     Observations                                    24216                     24216                 24216

     Adults: 18+ at RA
     Experimental v Control                        -0.00971                  0.00321               0.00988
                                                   (0.0183)                 (0.00785)              (0.0218)
     Section 8 v Control                            -0.0182                  -0.00292               0.0295
                                                   (0.0167)                 (0.00548)              (0.0192)
     Observations                                    59542                    59542                 59542


Note: This table reports the difference in means for recipients of Experimental or Section 8 vouchers relative to the
control group. The mean of the outcome variable in the control group is reported at the bottom of each respective
column. Per comparison p-values are reported in parentheses, and family-wise error rate adjusted p-values are
reported in square brackets under each estimate. See text for more details. Significance levels: *=10 percent; **=5
percent; ***=1 percent




                                                         63
                           Table A8 Summary Statistics: Primary Outcomes


        Variable                    Description                     Years     N       Mean        SD        p25      p50      p75

 Credit Index          Summary index of credit outcome          2001-2017   137721    0.016      0.786     -0.276   -0.217   0.025
                       components (positive = higher score
                       or greater credit use)
   Credit Score        Scores indicate borrower’s likeli-       2001-2017   137721    528.72     146.45     499      527      595
                       hood to be over 90 days delinquent
                       on loans (¡500 = deep subprime;
                       subprime = 500-600)
   Credit Limit        Total credit limit across all credit     2001-2017   137721   3013.98    9692.59      0        0       820
                       cards active on a borrower’s credit
                       report.
   Total Balance       Total balance across all accounts in-    2001-2017   137721   15168.50   56864.60     0        0      6810
                       cluding non-revolving accounts such
                       as mortgages, car loans, and student
                       loans.
   Monthly Payment     Total monthly payment on open            2001-2017   137721    218.49     539.42      0        0       205
                       trades reported in the last 6 months
   Credit Available    Total revolving credit available         2001-2017   137721   2030.20    7795.34      0        0       200

 Delinquency Index     Summary index of delinquency out-        2001-2017   137721    -0.011     0.430     -0.132   -0.101   -0.014
                       comes (negative = fewer delinquen-
                       cies)
   30 Days Past Due    Total amount past due on trades          2001-2017   137721    741.60    5116.51      0        0        0
                       presently 30 days delinquent re-
                       ported in the last 6 months
   Tax Liens           Total amount on unpaid public            2001-2017   137721    97.72     2137.37      0        0        0
                       record tax liens
   Judgement Amount    Total amount of debt that has been       2007-2017   103612    437.46    7026.70      0        0        0
                       taken to court including overdue
                       taxes and child support
   Collections         Total balance sent to 3rd party col-     2001-2017   137721   1829.51    5557.31      0       555     2134
                       lection agencies if lender cannot re-
                       cover overdue debt

 Payday Index          Summary index of credit outcome          2014-2017   49120     -0.007     0.582     -0.608   -0.608   -0.608
                       components (negative = less payday
                       debt)
   Payday Amount       Total balance across payday loans        2014-2017   49120     14.348    256.327      0        0        0

   Payday Internet     Total balance across internet pay-       2014-2017   49120     7.269     124.609      0        0        0
                       day loans

   Payday Storefront   Total   balance across payday loans      2014-2017   49120     7.079     124.609      0        0        0
                       taken   out in storefront
   Payday Inquiry      Total   balance across payday loans      2014-2017   49120     0.095      0.771       0        0        0
                       taken   out in storefront

Note: This table reports summary statistics for the primary outcomes in Tables II-IV of our main analysis. Data
sources for outcomes under the credit index and delinquency index are from Experian, and payday outcomes are from
a subsidiary of Experian, Clarity Services. Details on these data sources can be found in Section I of the main paper.
All data frequencies are annual, or aggregated to be annual for analysis. Note that if an individual is not matched to
a credit record in a particular year, those observations are considered missing. Note that payday loans are only used
by a small fraction of our sample (1-2%) but this reflects a similar fraction of use by the population of low income,
subprime borrowers as reported by the Survey of Consumer Finances. Thus, most borrowers in our sample take out
0 payday amounts. Furthermore as detailed in Section I, despite their broad coverage, the Clarity database may not
cover all payday loans taken out by borrowers if their underwriting services are not utilized by the lender.



                                                               64
                            Table A9 Summary Statistics: Neighborhood Outcomes


 Variable                                 Description                       Years     N       Mean        SD         p25        p50        p75

 Peer Credit Index            Summary z-score of average peer           2001-2017   126763    0.803      0.583      0.417      0.664      1.070
                              credit outcomes s.
    Peer Credit Score         Average credit scores of peer resi-       2001-2017   126763    607.95     41.65      576.81     603.44     634.35
                              dents across zipcodes MTO partici-
                              pants have lived in from 2001-2017.
    Peer Credit Limit         Average credit limits of peer resi-       2001-2017   126740   19566.63   7023.48    14544.02   18321.44   23223.75
                              dents across zipcodes MTO partic-
                              ipants have lived in from 2001-2017.
    Peer Total Balance        Average total balance of peer resi-       2001-2017   126740   14968.90   6098.84    10462.17   13797.47   18114.42
                              dents across zipcodes MTO partici-
                              pants have lived in from 2001-2017.
    Peer Monthly Payment      Average minimum monthly pay-              2001-2017   126763   47555.70   29570.61   26485.75   40898.76    61381
                              ment of peer residents across zip-
                              codes MTO participants have lived
                              in from 2001-2017.
    Peer Credit Available     Average additional credit available       2001-2017   126763    548.72     593.23     355.59     490.64     671.64
                              of peer residents across zipcodes
                              MTO participants have lived in
                              from 2001-2017.

 Peer Delinquency Index       Summary z-score of average peer           2001-2017   126763    0.033      0.159      -0.040     0.012      0.075
                              delinquency outcomes.
    Peer 30 Days Past Due     Average amount 30 days past due of        2001-2017   126763    978.98     812.42     369.12     776.77    1352.63
                              peer residents across zipcodes MTO
                              participants have lived in from 2001-
                              2017.
    Peer Tax Liens            Average overdue taxes owed of peer        2001-2017   126763    635.34    1530.55     151.63     355.49     693.23
                              residents across zipcodes MTO par-
                              ticipan
    Peer Judgement Amount     Average amounts held in court of          2007-2017   92668     542.68    1257.28     162.33     332.92     631.90
                              peer residents across zipcodes MTO
                              participants have lived in from 2007-
                              2017.
    Peer Collections          Average amount in 3rd party col-          2001-2017   126763   1328.20     776.30     802.57    1213.78    1740.58
                              lections of peer residents across zip-
                              codes MTO participants have lived
                              in from 2001-2017.

 Peer Expenditures            Average credit card expenditures of       2001-2017   126763   2800.38    1263.85    1914.46    2539.85    3474.11
                              peer residents across zipcodes MTO
                              participants have lived in from 2001-
                              2017.
 Peer Utilization             Average fraction of total credit uti-     2001-2017   126751    58.18       7.19      53.39      58.53      63.31
                              lized in last 6 months of peer resi-
                              dents across zipcodes MTO partici-
                              pants have lived in from 2001-2017.

 Banks                        Number of traditional banking insti-      2001-2017   137721   4.362007   5.74011       0          3          6
                              tutions across zipcodes MTO partic-
                              ipants have lived in from 2001-2017
 Payday Stores                Number of payday storefronts across       2001-2017   137721   1.529709   2.05981       0          1          2
                              zipcodes MTO participants have
                              lived in from 2001-2017

Note: This table reports summary statistics for the neighborhood outcomes in Table V of our main analysis. These
outcomes represent the average credit or delinquency behavior of residents in the zip codes MTO participants move
to from 2001 to 2017. Data sources for credit and delinquency neighborhood outcomes come from a 4 million random
sample of credit reports obtained from Experian. Data source for the number of banks and payday stores are from
Census Business Patterns.



                                                                       65
