                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      NEVERTHELESS SHE PERSISTED? GENDER PEER EFFECTS IN DOCTORAL
                            STEM PROGRAMS

                                         Valerie K. Bostwick
                                         Bruce A. Weinberg

                                        Working Paper 25028
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25028


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2018




We thank Joshua Hawley, Brendan Price, and Christopher Severen for valuable feedback on this project.
We also thank the participants in the OSU Applied Micro Seminar, the UC Davis Labor Seminar,
the Broom Center for Demography at UCSB, the IZA 2nd Workshop on Gender and Family Economics,
the Population Association of American 2018 Meeting, the Association for Education Finance and
Policy 2018 Meeting, and the Society of Labor Economists 2017 Meeting. We gratefully acknowledge
support from NIA, OBSSR, and NSF SciSIP through P01 AG039347; NSF EHR DGE 1348691, 1535399,
1760544; and the Ewing Marion Kauffman and Alfred P. Sloan Foundations. Weinberg was supported
on P01 AG039347 by the NBER directly and on a subaward from NBER to Ohio State. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Valerie K. Bostwick and Bruce A. Weinberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Nevertheless She Persisted? Gender Peer Effects in Doctoral STEM Programs
Valerie K. Bostwick and Bruce A. Weinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 25028
September 2018
JEL No. I23,J16,O3

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the effects of peer gender composition, a proxy for female-friendliness of environment, in
STEM doctoral programs on persistence and degree completion. Leveraging unique new data and
quasi-random variation in gender composition across cohorts within programs, we show that women
entering cohorts with no female peers are 11.9pp less likely to graduate within 6 years than their male
counterparts. A 1 sd increase in the percentage of female students differentially increases the probability
of on-time graduation for women by 4.6pp. These gender peer effects function primarily through changes
in the probability of dropping out in the first year of a Ph.D. program and are largest in programs that
are typically male-dominated.


Valerie K. Bostwick
Department of Economics
Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
vkbostwick@gmail.com

Bruce A. Weinberg
Department of Economics
Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weinberg.27@osu.edu
1        Introduction
      The underrepresentation of women in science, technology, engineering, and mathemat-
ics (STEM) fields starts as early as grade school and intensifies at each successive career
step so that men greatly outnumber women as scientists and engineers at senior levels. A
female-unfriendly climate is one cause of underrepresentation in STEM that resonates for
many female scientists. In a report on the lack of women in engineering, Corbett and Hill
(2015) summarize: “Stereotypes and biases lie at the core of the challenges facing women in
engineering and computing. Educational and workplace environments are dissuading women
who might otherwise succeed in these fields.” Unfortunately, the climate in these fields has
been difficult to quantify empirically and researchers have consequently struggled to estimate
the impact of environment on the gender gap in STEM.
      This paper studies the environment in STEM doctoral programs and the effect on gen-
der differences in Ph.D. persistence and completion. We provide a generalizable, quantitative
proxy for the climate towards women using peer gender composition. Specifically, we propose
that the gender composition of one’s peers within an incoming cohort of a particular doctoral
program functions as a measure of the female-friendliness of that cohort’s environment. We
then estimate the effect of within-program variation in cohort gender composition on the
gender gap in Ph.D. persistence and on-time graduation rates.
      This proxy has the advantage of implying a natural identification strategy. Specifically,
within a particular doctoral program at a given university, year-to-year changes in the gender
composition of each cohort are plausibly and, to some extent, testably exogenous (Hoxby
(2000) employs a similar strategy for grade-school students). This identification strategy
leverages the fact that there is uncertainty, both on the part of admissions and on the part
of potential doctoral students, as to the gender composition of each incoming cohort. While a
doctoral program’s admissions committee might target a specific gender mix and an incoming
student might know the average gender mix of past cohorts in a program, neither party can
fully anticipate the realized gender composition of an incoming cohort of students. This
provides a source of plausibly exogenous variation in students’ peer gender composition that
allows us to identify a causal effect on the gender gap in STEM Ph.D. outcomes. Note that
this approach might be applied to a variety of contexts wherein individuals are grouped into
well-defined cohorts of peers (e.g. firms that hire a new cohort of recent college graduates
every summer).
      In order to implement this strategy, we introduce a new dataset that links adminis-
trative transcript records from all public universities in the state of Ohio1 to data from the

    1
        The Ohio Longitudinal Data Archive is a project of the Ohio Education Research Center (oerc.osu.edu)

                                                      1
UMETRICS project, which provides information on the research environment (e.g. source,
timing, and duration of funding) for students who are supported by federal research grants.
In contrast to other datasets commonly-used to study doctoral students (e.g. the Survey
of Doctorate Recipients), which are restricted to Ph.D. completers, this administrative data
includes all incoming students in doctoral programs and allows for longitudinal observation
of program environments and drop-out behavior. Using this novel dataset, we are able to
identify a relevant peer group (incoming cohorts within programs)2 and analyze the effects
of peer gender composition on both Ph.D. persistence and completion. Furthermore, the de-
tailed trascript data and the links to UMETRICS allow us to investigate several important
mechanisms for our main findings.
      Utilizing the approach outlined above, we find that: (1) in cohorts with no female
peers, women are 11.9pp less likely to complete a Ph.D. within 6 years than their male
counterparts; (2) a 1 standard deviation increase in the share of female students in a cohort
differentially increases the probability of on-time graduation for women by 4.6pp; (3) these
effects function almost completely through changes in the probability of dropping out in
the first year of a Ph.D. program; and (4) these gender peer effects tend to be largest in
programs that are typically male-dominated. We further investigate whether these gender
peer effects might be due to differences in learning, competing, or securing financial support.
We find no evidence of any differences in financial support due to peer gender composition
and, although we find evidence of a small effect of cohort gender composition on grades,
the results largely indicate that climate is the mechanism driving the observed gender peer
effects.


2     Contribution & Literature Review
      This paper offers several significant contributions and adds to two areas of existing
research. Our findings contribute to the broad literature on the gender gap in STEM fields.
Importantly, we are one of the first papers to provide a measureable proxy for the female-
friendliness of a particular environment. In the literature studying doctoral student out-


and provides researchers with centralized access to administrative data. The OLDA is managed by The Ohio
State University’s Center for Human Resource Research (chrr.osu.edu) in collaboration with Ohio’s state
workforce and education agencies (ohioanalytics.gov), with those agencies providing oversight and funding.
For information on OLDA sponsors, see http://chrr.osu.edu/projects/ohio-longitudinal- data-archive.
    2
      Even in the more “lab-based” STEM fields, doctoral students are predominantly focused on course work
in the first year of these programs, making the incoming cohort a salient peer group. This is evident in the
detailed transcript data and the results in Section 5 are robust to the exclusion of those few students who
do not take a full first-year course load.

                                                     2
comes, we are one of the first papers to test for the presence of any type of peer effects.3
Doctoral students are an understudied group that is of particular interest in the context of
investigating the gender gap in STEM fields. They have made substantial investments and
demonstrated commitment to pursuing a STEM career and yet are still highly likely to drop
out (more than 30% of our sample drop out in the first 6 years of enrollment). We provide
the first causal evidence of gender peer effects among Ph.D. students.
       The existing literature on climate and female underrepresentation in STEM is limited
and has typically relied on descriptive survey results. However, these survey findings clearly
point to a negative impact of the workplace environment on female scientists persistence in
STEM fields.4 Fouad and Singh (2011) report that “One-in-three women left [engineering
jobs] because they did not like the workplace climate, their boss or the culture.” Other
studies find that, after controlling for both individual and occupation characteristics, women
were more likely to report being unsatisfied with their jobs (Lordan and Pischke, 2016)
and are more likely to leave the field entirely (Hunt, 2016) when the share of men in an
occupation/field is higher.
       These issues have been particularly salient in economics recently. New papers and
reports reveal that a toxic workplace culture may be contributing to female underrepresen-
tation (Lundberg et al., 2018; Wu, 2017) and that female economists face many systematic
barriers to success (Hengel, 2017; Mengel et al., 2017; Sarsons, 2017).5 Wu (2017) analyzes
comments from a well-known and anonymous online forum of economists and finds evidence
of negative gender stereotyping towards female economists and their research. This is one
of the few papers in the literature to quantify and provide concrete evidence of the negative
climate towards women in academia. Our paper builds upon this work by providing another
measure of climate and, importantly, by identifying and estimating the effect of climate on
the educational outcomes of female doctoral students.
       Ph.D. completion is a notably understudied outcome variable and very few papers have
investigated the gender gap in STEM doctoral degrees, likely due to a lack of longitudinal
data on students entering doctoral programs (Ceci et al., 2014). However, several studies have
found evidence of gender bias in graduate program admissions in STEM fields. Moss-Racusin
et al. (2012) and Milkman et al. (2015) each employ audit studies to reveal that STEM faculty
members rate applicants to graduate programs as significantly more competent and are more

   3
      One exception is a recent paper by Pezzoni et al. (2016) that finds no evidence of a correlation between
graduate students’ publication levels and the gender composition of research teams.
    4
      Corbett and Hill (2015) provide a comprehensive report on the underrepresentation of women in engi-
neering and the need for changes to college and workplace environments.
    5
      For a comprehensive overview of the current state of underrepresentation in economics and the exisiting
research on the causes of that underrepresentation, see Bayer and Rouse (2016).

                                                      3
likely to respond to email correspondence when a prospective student is assigned to a male
name.
      The majority of the research on the outcomes of Ph.D. students is in the education lit-
erature (Gardner et al., 2009; Nettles, 1990; Golde, 2005) with a smaller line in the economics
literature. Much of the education research focuses on mentoring (Clark et al., 2000; Hall
and Burns, 2009; Bell-Ellison and Dedrick, 2008; Main, 2014) and professional skills devel-
opment and socialization (Nerad, 2004; Golde and Dore, 2001). Early work in the economics
literature focuses on the relationship between financial support and Ph.D. completion. The
literature finds that financial support, and especially fellowships and research assistantships,
is highly correlated with Ph.D. completion (Abedi and Benkin, 1987; Ehrenberg and Mavros,
1995).
      Previous work that investigates the interaction between gender and doctoral success
has primarily focused on the impact of same-gender mentors. The findings on same-gender
mentorship are mixed. Both Neumark and Gardecki (1998) and Hilmer and Hilmer (2007)
find that female advisors have no effect on labor market outcomes for female doctoral students
in economics. However, Neumark and Gardecki (1998) do find evidence that female advisors
reduce the time spent in graduate school for female students and both Pezzoni et al. (2016)
and Gaule and Piacentini (2017) find that female doctoral students in STEM fields who have
female advisors are more successful in terms of publishing. Pezzoni et al. (2016) also use the
UMETRICS dataset to measure the gender composition of research teams at the California
Institute of Technology and find no evidence of a relationship with publication outcomes
for graduate students. While these studies provide very interesting descriptive results, our
paper focuses on identifying a causal relationship between the doctoral environment and the
gender gap in STEM Ph.D. persistence.
      Our approach is more similar to papers in the literature on undergraduate students,
which have focused on the effects of peer characteristics on the gender gap in STEM major
choice.6 Fischer (2017) studies classroom peers at a large public university and finds that
the presence of higher ability peers in an introductory STEM course has negative effect on
STEM major persistence for female students only. Anelli and Peri (2016) study high school
students in Italy and find that cohort gender composition has an effect on initial college
major choice for male students only. Specifically, the authors find that men are more likely
to choose ”predominantly male” majors when they are exposed to a higher share of male
peers in high school. Similarly, both Kugler et al. (2017) and Astorne-Figari and Speer

   6
     In another related paper that does not focus on STEM fields, Huntington-Klein and Rose (2018) study
West Point undergraduates who are randomly assigned to peer groups and find that women with more female
peers are more likely to persist at that institution.

                                                   4
(2017) find that the gender composition of majors is correlated with female students major
choice and that women are likely to switch out of male-dominated fields.


3       Data
      The data include two linked administrative sources. The Ohio Longitudinal Data
Archive (OLDA) provides administrative transcript records for all students attending public
colleges in Ohio between Summer/Fall 2005 and Spring 2016. This data includes student
demographics, a doctoral program identifier, degree completions, and course-level data on
enrollment and grades. The second source of data is provided by the UMETRICS project,
which contains the university payroll records on all individuals employed under federal re-
search grants at one university in Ohio. This data provides month-level information on
research grant employment over the period of June 2009 to June 2015 for all graduate stu-
dents at this university.
      Using the OLDA enrollment data, we construct a panel of students that encompasses
all individuals who first enrolled in a doctoral program at the main campus of any public
4-year university in Ohio7 in the Summer/Fall terms of 2005-2015.8 The enrollment data
combined with degree completions allow us to identify students who drop out and to measure
persistence to year 2, 3, etc. of the doctoral program.
      Each student’s doctoral program identifier code in OLDA is linked to a Classification of
Instructional Programs (CIP) code9 . We define a doctoral “program” to include all students
attending the same institution with the same enrollment CIP code10 and define a “cohort” to
be all students who first enrolled in a given program in the same year. Note that CIP codes
are more specific than broad fields such that, within a given field at the same institution
there may be multiple doctoral programs. For example, within the field of Chemistry the
same university may have three separate doctoral programs in General Chemistry, Polymer
Chemistry, and Chemical Physics. As our primary variable of interest is cohort gender
composition, we limit the sample by dropping those students who first enroll in a non-doctoral
graduate program and then transfer into a doctoral program at the same institution, as it is
not clear to which cohort they belong. If these dropped transfer students encompass more
    7
       We exclude students enrolled at the Medical University of Ohio and Youngstown State University due
to very small sample sizes.
     8
       We exclude students who first enroll in a Winter or Spring terms and treat students who first enroll in
the Summer term as having enrolled in the following Fall.
     9
       https://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/cipcode
    10
       We aggregate to the CIP code level because the university-provided program identifiers are not con-
sistently defined across school-years. However, our main results are robust to using the university program
codes to identify individual Ph.D. programs.

                                                      5
than 20% of the enrollment for a particular program (over all years), then we also drop that
program from the sample.11
       We impose three key restrictions in order to create the final estimation sample. First,
we restrict the data to those cohorts for whom we can observe 6 complete years of transcript
data: cohorts starting in 2005-2009. This is because our primary dependent variable for this
analysis is the probability of completing a Ph.D. within 6 years of initial enrollment. Second,
we exclude programs with very small cohort sizes from the sample. For each cohort in each
program we calculate the cohort size (# of students) and the percent of the cohort that is
female. For each program, we also calculate the average over all years (2005-2015) for both
of these variables. We then exclude from the sample all programs with an average cohort
size less than 10 students because very small programs may be structured in such a way that
a student’s incoming cohort is not the relevant peer group.12 Finally, we restrict the sample
to STEM programs.13
       The final “estimation sample” includes 2,541 student observations, grouped into an
unbalanced panel of 33 doctoral programs, representing 6 public universities. Table 1 pro-
vides a full list of these 33 programs and their corresponding CIP codes, CIP fields, and
summary statistics. Table 2 shows the calculated cohort characteristics for the estimation
sample in the top 2 panels, and for the full sample (including all years of the data 2005-2015,
non-STEM programs, and small programs) in the bottom panel for reference. In the esti-
mation sample, the average cohort size is approximately 17 students and the average cohort
is 38% female. Unsurprisingly, the full sample is comprised of smaller cohorts, on average,
than the estimation sample and is somewhat more female (due to including the non-STEM
programs). Table 2 also reveals a large amount of variation in cohort gender composition
across programs. While the average cohort is 38% female, the standard deviation is nearly
21pp. Within programs, the standard deviation of % cohort female is nearly 13pp and the
largest deviations from a program mean are -41pp and 30pp.
       In Section 5, we investigate whether our main findings are more salient in programs that
typically have a relatively high or low shares of female students. To do this, we calculate
for each program the average percent female across all years of the data (2005-2015) as
well as the median value of this average across all 33 programs in the estimation sample
(38.5% female). We then categorize programs with an average below this sample median
as “typically male” and programs with an average above the sample median as “typically
  11
      The main results reported in Section 5 are robust to including/excluding programs with more/fewer
transfer students. See Table 15.
   12
      The main results reported in Section 5 are robust to including/excluding programs with a smaller/larger
average cohort size. See Table 14.
   13
      As designated by the Ohio Department of Higher Education: https://www.ohiohighered.org/node/2104

                                                     6
female.” Student and cohort-level summary statistics for these two subsamples are provided
in Table 3. By dividing the sample in this way, we see that students in typically female
programs are more likely to graduate on-time and are less likely to be foreign-born. Cohorts
in typically female programs and typically male programs are very similar in size.
      In order to examine the relationships between cohort gender composition, the proba-
bility of receiving financial support via research funding, and Ph.D. persistence, we link the
estimation sample (expanded to include all cohorts 2005-2015) to the UMETRICS data for
the subset of students who attend one UMETRICS university. This allows us to observe
month-by-month employment for students paid by federal researching grants and to con-
struct indicator variables for obtaining research funding in each year of enrollment for each
student (i.e. employed for at least 28 days of the school year).
      Summary statistics for the main estimation sample and for the linked UMETRICS
sample are shown in Table 4. Note that the different time spans for the two linked data
sources mean that each of the funding indictor variables have a different set of cohorts as
the support. For example, research employment in year 1 of enrollment is observed only for
cohorts starting in 2009-2014, whereas funding in year 2 is observed for cohorts starting in
2008-2013. Table 4 shows that men and women in the estimation sample are quite similar
in terms of demographics, grades, and graduation rates. However, male students do seem
to have a higher probability of obtaining research employment in the first four years of
enrollment.


4    Empirical Strategy
     The primary empirical strategy is essentially a difference-in-differences approach, com-
paring women to men between highly-female cohorts and highly-male cohorts within a given
doctoral program. We estimate the following specification:

    P (Yipt = 1) =β1 F emalei + β2 HighlyF emalept + β3 F emalei ∗ HighlyF emalept        (S1)
                   + γ 0 Xipt + δZpt + Dp + Dt + ipt ,

where Yipt = 1 if student i, who first enrolled in program p in year t, completes a Ph.D.
within 6 years. The model includes individual-level covariates, Xipt , which are: age, age2 ,
race/ethnicity indicators, and a foreign student indicator variable. The variable Zpt measures
cohort size, while Dt and Dp are year and program fixed-effects, respectively.
     The primary variables of interest are: F emalei , an indicator for own gender; HighlyF emalept ,
which equals the percent of students entering into program p in year t (cohort pt) who are

                                                7
female; and the interaction term of those 2 variables. We test the robustness of our main
specification using several alternative measures of “highly female” cohorts including: the
number of women in the cohort; the ratio of women to men in the cohort; and an indicator
variable that equals 1 if the cohort has a fraction of female students that is above the mean
for that program (over all years 2005-2015).
       The coefficient β1 can be interpreted as the percentage point difference in on-time
graduation probabilities for women versus men in highly-male cohorts (cohorts where the
percent of female students is zero). The coefficient β2 indicates the difference in graduation
probabilities for men in highly-female cohorts versus men in highly-male cohorts. Finally, the
coefficient β3 is the differential effect on women versus men of being in a highly-female cohort.
The model is estimated using a Probit maximum likelihood estimator (Probit MLE),14 thus
all tables in Section 5 report the marginal effects corresponding to the descriptions above
and are evaluated at the mean of all covariates. Standard errors are clustered at the program
level.
       Identification of the model hinges on the assumption that, within a particular doctoral
program, year-to-year variation in cohort gender composition is quasi-random and not cor-
related with other unobservables influencing graduation rates for that cohort. An example
violation of this assumption might be the appointment of a new department chair who simul-
taneously puts an emphasis on recruiting more female doctoral students while also enacting
other policy changes that improve those new female students’ outcomes (but not those of
previously enrolled female students). Similarly, the hiring of a new female faculty member
who attracts more female graduate students and improves the outcomes of those students
might confound the interpretation of our estimates. A telling signal of this type of endogene-
ity would be any evidence of time trends in the cohort gender composition within programs.
In the absence of time trends, the influence of the new department chair or faculty member
would have to fluctuate year-to-year along with cohort gender composition in order to pose
a threat to identification.
       Figure 1 plots the percent female in each cohort by program for the years 2005-2015.
Each line in Figure 1 represents a program and the panels group those programs into broader
fields. In this figure it is clear that programs in some fields (e.g. Psychology and Biology)
tend to have higher percentages of female students, while fields such as Computer Engineering
and Physics have very low percentages of women in any given cohort. However, it is also
clear that there is considerable idiosyncratic variation in gender composition within programs
over time and there do not appear to be any overall or program-specific trends in gender
composition. Furthermore, an AR(1) model of gender composition with program and year
  14
       Results estimated using a linear probability model are qualitatively very similar. See Table 13.

                                                       8
fixed-effects reveals no evidence of path-dependence in this variable.15
      Figure 2 shows that cohort gender composition is also not significantly correlated with
the covariates included in model S1. In each panel, each point represents a cohort and the
x-axis measures the percent of the cohort that is female minus the average percent female
in the program over all years of the data. The y-axis in each panel represent a different
covariate, also demeaned at the program level. These variables include: cohort size, age,
foreign status, and an indicator for white race. Note that there does appear to be a negative
relationship between cohort age and percent female, however this is largely driven by one
outlier observation.16


5        Results
      Table 5 shows the marginal effects results of estimating model S1 described above. In
each column we apply a different definition of highly female cohorts. In column (1) we use
the preferred definition where the HighlyF emalept variable is measured as the percent of
students in the cohort who are female. These results show that there is a significant gender
gap in Ph.D. completion in cohorts with few women. Women in cohorts with no female peers
are 11.9pp less likely than their male peers to graduate within 6 years of initial enrollment.
However, in highly-female cohorts, that gap closes. For each additional 10% female students
in a cohort, men are 1.10pp less likely to graduate on-time (although this effect is statisti-
cally insignificant in most specifications) and the differential effect on women is 2.24pp (and
statistically significant at the 5% level). This indicates that the effect of an additional 10%
female students for a woman is a 1.14pp increase in the probability of graduating on-time.
Another way to interpret these results is that a 1 standard deviation (20.7pp) increase in the
share of female students increases the probability of on-time graduation for women relative
to men by 4.63pp.
      Columns (2)-(4) of Table 5 experiment with alternative definitions for highly female
cohorts. Column (2) measures highly female cohorts as the ratio of women to men in the
cohort. In column (3), we calculate the average over all years (2005-2015) of the percent
of women in each program and define the HighlyF emalept variable to be an indicator that
equals one if the percent of female students in year t is above the overall average for program
p. This measure incorporates the notion that program norms may be important in the

    15
     The Wald test statistic for the lagged % cohort female variable is -1.08.
    16
     The outlier observations is a cohort with an average age that is more than 13 standard deviations
above the mean. All results shown in Section 5 are also robust to including a control for cohort age and an
interaction between cohort age and the female indicator.

                                                    9
salience of gender composition effects. That is, a cohort with 40% women might seem
“highly female” in a typically male program (such as Physics) but that same level might
feel “highly male” in a program with a higher average gender balance (such as Psychology).
The results in both columns (2) and (3) are qualitatively very similar to the main findings in
column (1). They indicate that there is a gender gap in on-time Ph.D. completions among
students in highly male cohorts and that this gap is significantly diminished in cohorts with
more female peers.
       In column (4) of Table 5, we implement a count measure of gender composition and set
HighlyF emalept equal to the number of women in the cohort. Interestingly, these results
show no evidence of a linear effect of the number of women in a program on the probability
of Ph.D. completion for either gender. However this finding is not inconsistent with the main
results and merely indicates that the effect of an additional female peer interacts with the
cohort size (e.g. 1 additional female peer has a large effect in a small cohort and little-to-no
effect in a very large cohort). This interaction is better captured by the use of the percent
female measure in the main specification.
       As discussed above (and shown in Figure 1), there are some fields within the broad
category of STEM that have a much lower average level of female representation than other
fields. There is some evidence at the undergraduate level that these very male-dominated
majors drive the gender gap in STEM major attrition (Astorne-Figari and Speer, 2017).
We next explore whether our main findings are primarily driven by these “typically male”
programs with especially low fractions of female students. As described in Section 3, we
divide the main estimation sample into two subsamples and categorize programs with an
average percent female that is below the sample median (38.5%) as “typically male” and
programs with an average above the sample median as “typically female.”
       The results of estimating model S1 separately for these two subsamples are shown
in Table 6. These results indicate that the effect of cohort gender composition on Ph.D.
completion is driven largely by typically male programs. In these programs, the gender gap in
Ph.D. completion is even larger. Women are 15.8pp less likely than men to graduate on-time
in cohorts with no female peers and a 1 sd increase in the fraction of female peers differentially
increases the probability of on-time graduation by 8.82pp for women relative to men. The
results for typically female programs are similar, but looking across the specifications in
columns (1)-(4), the estimates for this sample are smaller in magnitude and not consistently
significant. Thus, it appears that the effect of peer gender on female Ph.D. success rates is
largely driven by those programs that have the highest rates of female underrepresentation
within the realm of STEM doctoral programs.
       We next explore the timing of the gender composition effect over the course of the first

                                               10
6 years of Ph.D. enrollment. Figure 3 shows the rates of enrollment, dropout, and graduation
for the main estimation sample by year of enrollment. This figure reveals that dropout occurs
primarily in the first 3 years of doctoral programs and that nearly 50% of students graduate
by the end of the 6th year. We model the effect of cohort gender composition on year-to-year
persistence rates in doctoral enrollment as,

           r
              = 1 =β1r F emalei + β2r HighlyF emalept + β3r F emalei ∗ HighlyF emalept
                 
       P Yipt                                                                                         (S2)
                   +γ r0 Xipt + δ r Zpt + Dtr + Dpr + ript ,

         r
where Yipt  = 1 if individual i is still enrolled (or has graduated) in the Fall term of program-
year r ∈ [2, 6]. All other variables are unchanged from model S1.
      Table 7 shows the marginal effects results of estimating model S2 using a Probit MLE.
The top panel is estimated using the full estimation sample. In Panels B and C, we esti-
mate model S2 using the typically male and typically female subsamples, respectively. In
this table (and all further tables) we show results using our preferred specification where
HighlyF emalept is defined as the percent of students in cohort pt who are female. Columns
(1)-(5) show the effect of cohort gender composition on the probability of not dropping out
before program-years 2-6, respectively. For example, in column (1) the dependent variable
is equal to one if student i who enrolled in program p in year t is either still enrolled or has
graduated with a Ph.D. at the start of the Fall term of the following year.
      These results indicate that nearly all of the gender composition effect is present by
the beginning of program-year 2. This is unsurprising given that the majority of drop out
occurs in the first program-year and that the cohort peer group should be most influential
in the first year when these students are primarily involved in coursework, rather than lab
research.17 Women in cohorts with no female peers are 10.2pp less likely to make it to the
second year of a doctoral program than their male peers. That is equivalent to saying that
women in cohorts with no female peers are 10.2pp more likely to dropout in the first year of
their Ph.D. program. A 1 sd increase in the share of female students decreases the dropout
rate for women relative to men by 3.68pp in the first year of Ph.D. enrollment. It is clear
from panels B and C that these persistence results are again being driven by the subsample
of typically male programs.




  17
      Note that these findings hold even within the subset of programs where students are admitted directly
to an advisor/lab and are robust to excluding those few students in the sample who do not enroll in a full
first-year course load.

                                                     11
5.1       Potential Mechanisms
      There are a number of potential explanations for our finding that women persist longer
and are more likely to complete programs when they have more female peers, some of which
we are able to explore empirically. An increase in the share of peers who are female might
benefit female students through improvements to performance in first year classes. A higher
share of female peers might also improve women’s chances of obtaining financial support on
faculty research grants. Finally, the share of women in a cohort might have an intangible
effect on the climate surrounding the students in that cohort, which increases female persis-
tence in a less measurable manner. We test for the first two mechanisms by analyzing the
effect of cohort gender composition on first year grades and on the probability of research
support and conclude that, while the share of women in a cohort does have a small effect on
female students’ grades, the majority of the effect on Ph.D. persistence and completions is
driven by an improvement to how female-friendly the climate is in a given cohort.
      We first investigate whether cohort gender composition has an effect on first year
performance. This might be an important mechanism for the gender peer effect if women are
better able to learn when surrounded by other women or when studying with other women.
There is also experimental evidence showing that women are less competitive, especially when
competing against men (Gneezy et al., 2003), so that women in cohorts with more women
may exert more effort studying and on assignments and exams. Both of these hypotheses
suggest that women should have higher grades in cohorts with more women. Symmetrically,
in cohorts with very few female peers, women would perform worse in first year courses,
leading to a higher probability of dropping out. This mechanism might be heightened by
a higher responsiveness to bad grades among women. Rask and Tiefenthaler (2008); Ost
(2010); Kugler et al. (2017) show that undergraduate women are more discouraged by low
grades than men when making the choice of undergraduate major. Relatedly, Stinebrickner
and Stinebrickner (2012) find that female undergraduates are more likely to update their
beliefs about own ability in response to bad grades and to subsequently drop out of college.
This issue has not been previously addressed at the doctoral level. If these findings carry
over to the graduate level, then women may be more discouraged (and less likely to persist)
due to lower first year grades in cohorts with very few female peers.
      We test for these learning and competition mechanisms by looking for an effect of cohort
gender composition on grades and by looking for a differential response to first year grades
across genders. For this analysis, we maximize our potential sample by including additional
cohorts of students who start their Ph.D. programs in 2010-2015.18 The raw distribution of

  18
       Including these additional cohorts for whom we observe less than 6 years of data should not influence

                                                     12
GPA at the end of the first term of enrollment for this expanded sample is shown in Figure
4 for men and women separately in both highly-male (left panel) and highly-female (right
panel) cohorts.19 Based on these unadjusted distributions it appears that there may be some
small closing of a gender grade gap at the top of the distribution in highly-female programs
but the visual differences are subtle. We estimate this more formally using the following
model,

            Yipt =β1 F emalei + β2 HighlyF emalept + β3 F emalei ∗ HighlyF emalept                        (S3)
                    + γ 0 Xipt + δZpt + Dt + Dp + ipt ,

where Yipt is a measure of individual i’s first year grades. We measure this alternately as
first term GPA or first year GPA. All other variables are unchanged from model S1. We
estimate this model with an Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimator.
       Column (1) of Table 8 shows the results of estimating model S3 with first term GPA as
the dependent variable. These estimates show that women in cohorts with no female peers
have first term GPAs that are 0.11 grade points lower than their male peers (on a 4-point
scale). At the sample mean of 3.53, this is equivalent to a 3% gender gap in first term GPA.
A 1 sd increase in the share of female students closes this gap by 0.04 grade points. Column
(2) shows a similar effect of gender composition on GPA at the end of the first year, but
column (3) indicates that the effect on first year grades is entirely captured by the first term
GPA.
       In Table 9, we estimate the models in S1 and S2 while allowing for a differential
relationship between GPA and Ph.D. completion and persistence by gender (by interacting
GPA with the F emalei indicator). In columns (1)-(2) the dependent variable is Ph.D.
completion in 6 years (model S1) and in columns (3)-(4) the dependent variable is an indicator
for remaining enrolled into the Fall of the second year of the Ph.D. program (as in column
(1) of Table 7). Although these results cannot be interpreted causally, they imply that, while
first year grades appear to be largely predictive of both Ph.D. completion and persistence,
female students’ outcomes are not more strongly related to grades than men’s. If anything,
the direction of the interaction term coefficients would indicate that female students are less
responsive to first year grades than male students.
       The estimates in Tables 8 and 9 indicate that peer gender composition has a small
effect on first term GPA such that women have worse grades than men in highly-male

our analysis of first year grades. This is particularly relevant because Table 7 shows that the effect of cohort
gender composition functions primarily through dropout decisions in the first year of enrollment.
   19
      In this figure, highly female cohorts are defined using the same indicator variable as applied in column
(3) of Tables 5 and 6.

                                                      13
cohorts. However, this effect can explain only a small portion of the overall impact of cohort
gender composition on Ph.D. persistence and completion. For example, a 1 sd increase in
the share of female peers closes the GPA gender gap by 0.04 grade points in the first term of
enrollment. The coefficients in column (1) of Table 9 show that a 1 point increase in GPA is
associated with an increase in the probability of on-time graduation by 29.4pp for men and
22.7pp for women.20 Thus, the grade effect of a 1 sd increase in the share of female students
is a differential increase in the female probability of on-time graduation of 1.15pp. This
accounts for, at most, a quarter of the total differential effect of peer gender composition
shown in Table 5.
      Another empirically testable mechanism by which cohort gender composition might
influence Ph.D. success is through a differential probability of obtaining research support.
Previous work has shown that financial support is highly correlated with Ph.D. comple-
tion (Abedi and Benkin, 1987; Ehrenberg and Mavros, 1995). Using the linked sample of
UMETRICS data on students supported through research projects, we first verify that this
correlation holds in our setting. We model this relationship by,

                    r
                       = 1 = β r F undingir−1 + γ r0 Xipt + δ r Zpt + Dtr + Dpr + ript ,
                          
                P Yipt                                                                                     (S4)

         r
where Yipt  = 1 if individual i remains enrolled (or has graduated) in the Fall of year r of the
doctoral program (r ∈ [2, 5]) and F undingir−1 = 1 if individual i receives federally-funded
research support during year r − 1 of the program. For example, when r = 2, β 2 measures
the correlation between receiving funding in the first year of a STEM doctoral program and
persisting to the 2nd year of the program. In this model, the vector Xipt includes gender
along with age, age2 , race/ethnicity indicators, and a foreign student indicator variable.
      In column (1) of Table 10, we estimate the relationship between being employed on a
federally-funded research grant for at least 28 days during the first year of enrollment and
the probability of remaining enrolled (or having graduated) in the Fall term of the second
program-year. Column (2) shows the relationship between employment in the second year
of enrollment, conditional on enrollment in the second year, and the probability of persisting
to the third year of the doctoral program. As expected, we find that obtaining research
funding is highly correlated with persistence at each year of the doctoral program. Table 11
shows the relationship between obtaining research support and the probability of on-time
graduation for STEM doctoral students. These results are less precise as there are very
few cohorts for whom we can observe both UMETRICS employment and 6-year graduation
   20
     Note that these two coefficients are likely biased upwards as unobserved ability is almost surely positively
correlated with both first term grades and on-time graduation. We can think of these as providing an upper
bound on the causal effect of GPA on Ph.D. completion.

                                                       14
rates.
      Given that research support appears to be strongly related to Ph.D. success, we next
investigate whether cohort gender composition has an effect on the probability of obtaining
research employment. If female students are more likely to obtain research funding in cohorts
with more female (and fewer male) peers, then funding could be an important mechanism in
explaining our main findings in Table 5. We model the relationship between cohort gender
composition and research support using model S2 where we change the dependent variable
to be equal to one only if individual i is employed on a federal research grant for at least
28 days during year r of enrollment in the doctoral program. The marginal effects results
of estimating this specification are shown in Table 12. These estimates provide no evidence
that peer gender composition has any effect on research funding in any year for either gender.
The marginal effects are small, inconsistent in sign, and statistically insignificant. Clearly,
these findings along with our main results do not support a research funding mechanism.
      Another set of potential explanations for our main findings focus on mentoring and the
gender mix of faculty. We have explored mentoring by relating completion and retention to
the gender composition of the cohort that entered one year earlier, under the assumption
that the older cohort interacts with the younger cohort. Our data show no effect of the
older cohort on completion or retention of the younger cohort.21 The gender mix of faculty
is an important factor and one that we plan to explore in future work, but given that our
estimates are identified from year-to-year fluctuations in the composition of cohorts and
given the relatively slow turnover of faculty, faculty composition seems to be an unlikely
explanation.
      The analysis in this section indicates that peer gender composition does not impact
students’ financial support through research funding and that there is only a small effect
of peer gender on first year grades. We estimate an upper bound showing that changes in
learning and\or effort (as they are reflected in grades) can account for at most one quarter
of the total effect of peer gender composition on Ph.D. completions. Having ruled out any
observable mechanisms, we are left to conclude that our measure of peer gender composition
is capturing the unobservable: changes in the climate of each cohort. This implies that
when cohort gender composition is particularly high, the intangible climate towards women
improves, thereby increasing female students’ persistence and on-time graduation. This
persistence occurs despite the fact that these women experience no change in the prospect
of financial support and only a marginal improvement in first year grades.


  21
    This may be because the interaction with older cohorts is more prevalent in later years of the program
when students are less likely to drop out.

                                                   15
6        Robustness Checks
       This section demonstrates the robustness of our main findings on the effects of cohort
gender composition on Ph.D. completion to a number of alternate specifications and alternate
samples. These robustness results are shown in Tables 13-15. We first show that our main
results are not sensitive to the use of a Probit MLE. In column (2) of Table 13 we estimate
the main specification in model S1 as a linear probability model using an OLS estimator.22
These estimates are very similar in both magnitude and precision to the main results.
       Next, we address the concern that 6 years may not be a sufficient time span to ac-
curately capture an effect on Ph.D. completions. In column (3), we re-estimate model S1
by replacing the dependent variable with an indicator for graduating within 7 years of ini-
tial enrollment. Despite the diminished sample size, these results are larger than our main
results and statistically significant, indicating that women in highly-male cohorts are not
merely delaying graduation to program-year 7. These results are consistent with those in
Table 7 showing that the majority of the peer gender effect is driven by dropping out in the
first year of enrollment.
       In columns (4)-(5) of Table 13, we implement alternate definitions of doctoral programs.
Recall that in the main estimation sample we define a doctoral program to include all students
attending the same institution with the same enrollment CIP code. In column (4), we
aggregate this definition up to include all students attending the same institution with the
same enrollment CIP field. Note that CIP fields are a much broader classification than CIP
codes. Under this classification, the effects of peer gender composition are both smaller and
more noisy, which is consistent with an attenuation bias associated with measurement error
(likely incurred by aggregating, for example, 5 different Biology CIP codes into 1 very large
“program”). However, in column (5) of Table 13, we instead disaggregate the CIP codes into
university-specific program identifiers and use these codes to define each program.23 These
results are very similar in both size and precision to the main results shown in column (1).
       In columns (6) and (7) of Table 13, we test whether our results hold in non-STEM
doctoral programs. In column (6) of Table 13 we include both STEM and non-STEM
programs (conditional on an average cohort size of more than 10 students) in the sample.
These results are largely similar to the main findings in column (1). In column (6), we limit
the sample to non-STEM programs only. Note that this alternate sample is quite small
because most non-STEM doctoral programs have average cohort sizes that are less than 10
students. The magnitudes of these results are consistent with the main findings, but the
    22
     Column (1) of Table 13 replicates the main findings in column (1) of Table 5 for reference.
    23
     We do not use these program identifiers in the main sample because they are not consistently defined
across all years of the sample.

                                                   16
estimates are very noisy (which is unsurprising, given the sample size). This suggests that
the effect of peer gender on Ph.D. success may not be limited to STEM programs.
      As noted above, in the main estimation sample, we limit the data to include only
programs with an average cohort size greater than 10. This was due to ex-ante concern that
the structure of very small programs might be quite different such that incoming cohorts
are not a relevant peer group. However, in Table 14 we replicate the main specification in
model S1 with alternate estimation samples excluding/including programs with higher/lower
average cohort sizes. Note that column (3) is a replication of the main findings in column (1)
of Table 5. These results show that the main findings are robust to the inclusion/exclusion
of smaller/larger programs.
      Recall that the main estimation sample excludes students who first enroll in a non-
doctoral graduate program and then transfer into a doctoral program at the same institution.
For those “transfer” students it is difficult to determine which cohort they belong to. We
also exclude all programs where these transfer students encompass more than 20% of total
enrollment. In the final robustness check shown in Table 15, we allow for programs with a
higher/lower percentage of transfer students than in the main estimation sample and show
that the main results are largely unchanged.


7    Conclusion
      The underrepresentation of women in STEM is a topic of great interest in economics
and public policy today. However, the factors affecting persistence in STEM fields are not
well-understood and our causal understanding is especially limited at the graduate education
level. We investigate one factor in the training process of STEM doctoral degrees, peer gender
composition, and find that it has a significant impact on the gap in Ph.D. completion rates
between men and women. Using year-to-year variation within doctoral programs in the
fraction of each cohort that is female, we find that women in cohorts with no female peers
are 11.9pp less likely to graduate within 6 years of initial enrollment than men. However,
a 1 sd increase in the share of female peers in a cohort increases the probability of on-time
graduation for women as compared to their male counterparts by 4.63pp.
      We find that this effect is largely driven by students in typically-male programs (with
less than 38.5% female student in the average cohort) and by dropout behavior in the first
year of enrollment. We investigate several potential mechanisms and find that peer gen-
der composition has a small effect on first term GPA (which explains only a quarter of the
overall gender peer effect on retention and completion) and no effect on the probability of
obtaining research funding. The small/null findings for these two channels suggest that our

                                             17
results largely cannot be explained by women learning or competing more successfully in
cohorts with more female peers. However, our findings are consistent with a climate mecha-
nism, through which more female peers create a female-friendly environment that encourages
women to persist in doctoral programs, despite having no significant effect on learning or
financial support. Taken together, these findings indicate that peer gender composition can
be a useful proxy for climate and that year-to-year variation in this measure can provide a
useful identification strategy for investigating gender gaps in outcomes. This strategy might
be applied to a number of different contexts where individuals are consistently grouped into
defined cohorts.




                                             18
References
Jamal Abedi and Ellen Benkin. The Effects of Students’ Academic, Financial, and Demo-
  graphic Variables on Time to the Doctorate. Research in Higher Education, 27(1):3–14,
  1987. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/40195800.

Massimo Anelli and Giovanni Peri. The Effects of High School Peers’ Gender on College
 Major, College Performance and Income. 2016.

Carmen Astorne-Figari and Jamin D Speer. Are Changes of Major Major Changes? The
  Roles of Grades, Gender, and Preferences in College Major Switching. 2017. URL http:
  //www.sole-jole.org/17322.pdf.

Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Elena Rouse. Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New
 Attack on an Old Problem. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(4):221–242, nov 2016.
 ISSN 0895-3309. doi: 10.1257/jep.30.4.221. URL http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/10.
 1257/jep.30.4.221.

Bethany A. Bell-Ellison and Robert F. Dedrick. What do Doctoral Students Value in
  their Ideal Mentor? Research in Higher Education, 49(6):555–567, sep 2008. ISSN
  0361-0365. doi: 10.1007/s11162-008-9085-8. URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
  s11162-008-9085-8.

Stephen J. Ceci, Donna K. Ginther, Shulamit Kahn, and Wendy M. Williams.
  Women in Academic Science: A Changing Landscape.      Psychological Science in
  the Public Interest, 15(3):75–141, dec 2014. ISSN 1529-1006.    doi: 10.1177/
  1529100614541236.    URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26172066http://
  journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1529100614541236.

Richard A. Clark, Sherry L. Harden, and W. Brad Johnson. Mentor Relationships in Clinical
  Psychology Doctoral Training: Results of a National Survey. Teaching of Psychology, 27
  (4):262–268, nov 2000. ISSN 0098-6283. doi: 10.1207/S15328023TOP2704 04. URL
  http://top.sagepub.com/lookup/doi/10.1207/S15328023TOP2704{_}04.

Christianne Corbett and Catherine Hill.    Solving the Equation-The Variables
 for Women’s Success in Engineering and Computing.     AAUW, 2015.     ISBN
 9781879922457. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.75.063427. URL http://www.aauw.org/
 resource/get-the-solving-the-equation-report/.



                                           19
Ronald G Ehrenberg and Panagiotis G Mavros. Do Doctoral Students’ Financial Support
  Patterns Affect Their Times-To-Degree and Completion Probabilities? The Journal of
  Human Resources, 30(3):581–609, 1995. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/146036.

Stefanie Fischer. The downside of good peers: How classroom composition differentially
  affects men’s and women’s STEM persistence. Labour Economics, 46:211–226, jun 2017.
  ISSN 09275371. doi: 10.1016/j.labeco.2017.02.003. URL http://linkinghub.elsevier.
  com/retrieve/pii/S0927537116303852.

Nadya A. Fouad and Romila Singh. Stemming the Tide: Why Women Leave Engineering.
  Technical report, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2011.

Susan K. Gardner, AE Austin, HD Calhoun, J Trevino, B Lisek, and M Hess. Con-
  ceptualizing Success in Doctoral Education: Perspectives of Faculty in Seven Dis-
  ciplines. The Review of Higher Education, 32(3):383–406, 2009. ISSN 1090-7009.
  doi: 10.1353/rhe.0.0075. URL http://muse.jhu.edu/content/crossref/journals/
  review{_}of{_}higher{_}education/v032/32.3.gardner.html.

Patrick Gaule and Mario Piacentini. An Advisor Like Me? Advisor Gender and Post-
  graduate Careers in Science. 2017. URL http://www.cerge-ei.cz/pdf/wp/Wp594.pdf.

U. Gneezy, M. Niederle, and A. Rustichini. Performance in Competitive Environments:
  Gender Differences. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3):1049–1074, aug 2003.
  ISSN 0033-5533. doi: 10.1162/00335530360698496. URL https://academic.oup.com/
  qje/article-lookup/doi/10.1162/00335530360698496.

Chris M. Golde. The Role of the Department and Discipline in Doctoral Student Attrition:
 Lessons from Four Departments. The Journal of Higher Education, 76(6):669—-700, 2005.

Chris M. Golde and Timothy M. Dore. At cross purposes: what the experiences of today’s
 doctoral students reveal about doctoral education. Technical report, 2001. URL https:
 //eric.ed.gov/?id=ED450628.

Leigh Hall and Leslie Burns. Identity Development and Mentoring in Doctoral Education.
  Harvard Educational Review, 79(1):49–70, apr 2009. ISSN 0017-8055. doi: 10.17763/
  haer.79.1.wr25486891279345. URL http://hepgjournals.org/doi/10.17763/haer.79.
  1.wr25486891279345.

Erin Hengel. Publishing while Female. Are women held to higher standards? Evidence from
  peer review. dec 2017. URL https://econpapers.repec.org/paper/camcamdae/1753.
  htm.

                                          20
Christiana Hilmer and Michael Hilmer. Women helping women, men helping women? Same-
 gender mentoring, initial job placements, and early career publishing success for economics
 PhDs. American Economic Review, 97(2):422–426, 2007. ISSN 00028282. doi: 10.1257/
 aer.97.2.422.

Caroline M Hoxby. Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race Variation.
  2000. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w7867.

Jennifer Hunt. Why Do Women Leave ScIence And EngIneering? ILR Review, 69(1):199–
  226, 2016. doi: 10.1177/0019793915594597. URL http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/
  pdf/10.1177/0019793915594597.

Nick Huntington-Klein and Elaina Rose. Gender Peer Effects in a Predominantly Male Envi-
  ronment : Evidence from West Point. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings,
  108:1–4, 2018.

Adriana D Kugler, Catherine H Tinsley, Olga Ukhaneva, George Akerlof, David Autor,
 Kirsten Butcher, David Figlio, Nicole Fortin, Donna Ginther, Claudia Goldin, Harry
 Holzer, Lisa Kahn, Shulamit Kahn, Victor Lavy, John Mayo, and Bruce Sacerdote.
 CHOICE OF MAJORS: ARE WOMEN REALLY DIFFERENT FROM MEN? Choice
 of Majors: Are Women Really Different from Men? 2017. URL http://www.nber.org/
 papers/w23735.

Grace Lordan and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. Does Rosie Like Riveting? Male and Female Occu-
  pational Choices. 2016. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w22495.

Shelly Lundberg, Jennifer Bennett Shinall, Jennifer Doleac, Kathryn J. Norlock, and
  Shereen G. Bingham. Reports from the American Economic Association’s Committee
  on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession. Technical report, 2018. URL
  https://www.aeaweb.org/content/file?id=6769.

J Main. Gender Homophily, Ph.D. Completion, and Time to Degree in the Humanities
  and Humanistic Social Sciences. The Review of Higher Education, 37(3):349–375, 2014.
  ISSN 1090-7009. doi: 10.1353/rhe.2014.0019. URL http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/
  rhe/summary/v037/37.3.main.html.

Friederike Mengel, Jan Sauermann, and Ulf Zölitz. Gender Bias in Teaching Evaluations.
  2017. URL www.iza.org.




                                            21
Katherine L. Milkman, Modupe Akinola, and Dolly Chugh. What happens before? A field
 experiment exploring how pay and representation differentially shape bias on the pathway
 into organizations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 100(6):1678–1712, nov 2015. ISSN
 1939-1854. doi: 10.1037/apl0000022. URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
 25867167http://doi.apa.org/getdoi.cfm?doi=10.1037/apl0000022.

Corinne A Moss-Racusin, John F Dovidio, Victoria L Brescoll, Mark J Graham,
  and Jo Handelsman.       Science faculty’s subtle gender biases favor male stu-
  dents.   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
  of America, 109(41):16474–9, oct 2012.        ISSN 1091-6490.     doi: 10.1073/
  pnas.1211286109. URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22988126http://www.
  pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC3478626.

Maresi Nerad. The PhD in the US: Criticisms, Facts, and Remedies. Higher Education
 Policy, 17(2):183–199, jun 2004. ISSN 0952-8733. doi: 10.1057/palgrave.hep.8300050.
 URL http://link.springer.com/10.1057/palgrave.hep.8300050.

Michael T. Nettles. Success in doctoral programs: Experiences of minority and white
 students. American Journal of Education, 98(4):494, aug 1990. ISSN 0195-6744. doi:
 10.1086/443974. URL http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/443974.

David Neumark and Rosella Gardecki. Women Helping Women ? Role Model and Mentoring
  Effects on Female Ph . D . Students in Economics. The Journal of Human Resources, 33
  (1):220–246, 1998. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/146320.

Ben Ost.        The role of peers and grades in determining major per-
  sistence in the sciences.         Economics of Education Review, 29:923–
  934,    2010.     doi:    10.1016/j.econedurev.2010.06.011. URL http://
  ac.els-cdn.com/S0272775710000762/1-s2.0-S0272775710000762-main.
  pdf?{_}tid=2fe9215a-26ca-11e7-967a-00000aab0f26{&}acdnat=
  1492803728{_}3720f277ca0608a330d214cf8e260ff3.

Michele Pezzoni, Jacques Mairesse, Paula Stephan, Julia Lane, G Burnett, and K Burnett.
 Gender and the Publication Output of Graduate Students: A Case Study. PLOS ONE,
 11(1):e0145146, jan 2016. ISSN 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145146. URL
 http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0145146.

Kevin Rask and Jill Tiefenthaler. The role of grade sensitivity in explaining the gen-
  der imbalance in undergraduate economics. Economics of Education Review, 27(6):

                                           22
  676–687, 2008. ISSN 02727757. doi: 10.1016/j.econedurev.2007.09.010. URL http:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0272775707001185.

Heather Sarsons. Recognition for Group Work: Gender Differences in Academia. American
  Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 107(5):141–145, 2017.

Todd Stinebrickner and Ralph Stinebrickner. Learning about Academic Ability and the
  College Dropout Decision. Journal of Labor Economics, 30(4):707–748, oct 2012. ISSN
  0734-306X. doi: 10.1086/666525. URL http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.
  1086/666525.

Alice H. Wu. Gender Stereotyping in Academia: Evidence from Economics Job Market
  Rumors Forum. dec 2017. URL https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=3051462.




                                         23
                                                                             Figure 1: Trends in Cohort Gender Composition By Field


                        Agricultural Science                                              Biological & Biomedical Science                                                   Chemical Engineering                                                                  Chemistry
      1                                                                        1                                                                          1                                                                         1
     0.9                                                                      0.9                                                                        0.9                                                                       0.9
     0.8                                                                      0.8                                                                        0.8                                                                       0.8
     0.7                                                                      0.7                                                                        0.7                                                                       0.7
     0.6                                                                      0.6                                                                        0.6                                                                       0.6
     0.5                                                                      0.5                                                                        0.5                                                                       0.5
     0.4                                                                      0.4                                                                        0.4                                                                       0.4
     0.3                                                                      0.3                                                                        0.3                                                                       0.3
     0.2                                                                      0.2                                                                        0.2                                                                       0.2
     0.1                                                                      0.1                                                                        0.1                                                                       0.1
      0                                                                        0                                                                          0                                                                         0




                       Computer Engineering                                                            Computer Science                                                                 Economics                                                    Electrical Engineering
      1                                                                        1                                                                          1                                                                         1
     0.9                                                                      0.9                                                                        0.9                                                                       0.9
     0.8                                                                      0.8                                                                        0.8                                                                       0.8
     0.7                                                                      0.7                                                                        0.7                                                                       0.7
     0.6                                                                      0.6                                                                        0.6                                                                       0.6
     0.5                                                                      0.5                                                                        0.5                                                                       0.5
     0.4                                                                      0.4                                                                        0.4                                                                       0.4
     0.3                                                                      0.3                                                                        0.3                                                                       0.3
     0.2                                                                      0.2                                                                        0.2                                                                       0.2
     0.1                                                                      0.1                                                                        0.1                                                                       0.1
      0                                                                        0                                                                          0                                                                         0




                             General Health                                                      Materials Engineering                                                     Mathematics & Statistics                                                        Other Engineering
                                                                                1
      1                                                                                                                                                   1                                                                         1
                                                                              0.9
     0.9                                                                                                                                                 0.9                                                                       0.9
                                                                              0.8
     0.8                                                                                                                                                 0.8                                                                       0.8
                                                                              0.7
     0.7                                                                                                                                                 0.7                                                                       0.7
     0.6                                                                      0.6                                                                        0.6                                                                       0.6
     0.5                                                                      0.5                                                                        0.5                                                                       0.5
     0.4                                                                      0.4                                                                        0.4                                                                       0.4
     0.3                                                                      0.3                                                                        0.3                                                                       0.3




24
     0.2                                                                      0.2                                                                        0.2                                                                       0.2
     0.1                                                                      0.1                                                                        0.1                                                                       0.1
      0                                                                                                                                                   0                                                                         0
                                                                                0



                              Other Health                                                                    Pharmacy                                                                   Physics                                                                  Psychology
      1                                                                        1                                                                          1                                                                         1
     0.9                                                                      0.9                                                                        0.9                                                                       0.9
     0.8                                                                      0.8                                                                        0.8                                                                       0.8
     0.7                                                                      0.7                                                                        0.7                                                                       0.7
     0.6                                                                      0.6                                                                        0.6                                                                       0.6
     0.5                                                                      0.5                                                                        0.5                                                                       0.5
     0.4                                                                      0.4                                                                        0.4                                                                       0.4
     0.3                                                                      0.3                                                                        0.3                                                                       0.3
     0.2                                                                      0.2                                                                        0.2                                                                       0.2
     0.1                                                                      0.1                                                                        0.1                                                                       0.1
      0                                                                        0                                                                          0                                                                         0
           F05   F06   F07   F08   F09   F10   F11   F12   F13   F14   F15          F05    F06   F07    F08    F09   F10   F11   F12   F13   F14   F15         F05   F06    F07   F08    F09   F10   F11   F12   F13   F14   F15         F05   F06   F07    F08    F09   F10   F11   F12   F13   F14   F15



     Each panel represents a CIP Field and each line within a panel represents a unique doctoral program in the main estimation sample. The x-axis measures incoming cohorts over
     time and the y-axis measures the share of each incoming cohort that is female.
 Figure 2: Correlation Between Cohort Gender Composition and Covariates (Demeaned)




In each panel above, a point represents a cohort within a program. The x-axis measures the percent of each
cohort that is female minus the average percent female in the program over all years of the data. The y-axis
in each panel represent a different covariate, also demeaned at the program level. Proceeding clockwise
from the top-left, these variables are: cohort size, age, an indicator for white race, and an indicator for
foreign-born. Each panel includes the estimated slope coefficient and corresponding p-value from a simple
linear regression of the demeaned y-variable on the demeaned cohort gender compositon.




                                                    25
               Figure 3: Dropout and Graduation Rates by Year of Enrollment




The x-axis measures the program-year. The y-axis indicates the fraction of students in the main estimation
sample belonging to each category (dropped out, graduated, or still enrolled) measured at the end of each
program-year.




                                                   26
                     Figure 4: Distribution of First Term Grades by Gender




The left panel shows the first term GPA distributions for all students in cohorts where the fraction female is
below the average for that program (“highly-male” cohorts). The right panel includes all students in cohorts
where the gender composition is above the average for that program (“highly-female” cohorts).




                                                     27
                                       Table 1: Summary Statistics by CIP Code

                                                                                                                               Avg Cohort   Avg %        # of
CIP Field                                                  CIP Code     CIP Code Subject Title                                    Size      Female   Institutions
Agricultural Science                                       10103        Agricultural Economics                                    15.1       44%           1
Biological and Biomedical Sciences                         260202       Biochemistry                                              15.8       44%           1
Biological and Biomedical Sciences                         260499       Cell/Cellular Biology and Anatomical Sciences, Other      20.1       57%           1
Biological and Biomedical Sciences                         260907       Cardiovascular Science                                    12.0       44%           1
Biological and Biomedical Sciences                         260911       Oncology and Cancer Biology                               10.7       67%           1
Biological and Biomedical Sciences                         269999       Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Other                 18.6       55%           2
Chemical Engineering                                       140701       Chemical Engineering                                      16.4       32%           1
Chemical Engineering                                       143201       Polymer/Plastics Engineering                              13.3       33%           1
Chemistry                                                  400501       Chemistry, General                                        23.9       39%           4
Chemistry                                                  400507       Polymer Chemistry                                         20.9       28%           1
Chemistry                                                  400599       Chemistry, Other                                          13.6       36%           1
Computer Engineering                                       140901       Computer Engineering, General                             26.8       16%           2
Computer Science                                           110101       Computer and Information Sciences, General                24.2       28%           1
Economics (Social Science)                                 450601       Economics, General                                        24.5       34%           1
Electrical, Electronics, and Communications Engineering    141001       Electrical and Electronics Engineering                    23.6       18%           2
General Health/Public Health                               512202       Environmental Health                                      12.9       62%           1
Materials Engineering                                      141801       Materials Engineering                                     17.9       24%           1
Mathematics and Statistics                                 270101       Mathematics, General                                      15.0       25%           2
Mathematics and Statistics                                 270501       Statistics, General                                       16.1       46%           1
Other Engineering                                          140501       Bioengineering and Biomedical Engineering                 10.8       39%           1
Other Health                                               511401       Medical Scientist                                         11.0       62%           1
Pharmacy                                                   512001       Pharmacy                                                  13.6       51%           1
Physics                                                    400801       Physics, General                                          25.3       23%           2
Psychology                                                 420101       Psychology, General                                       19.4       63%           2
CIP Codes highlighted in gray represent programs that are typically male (i.e. have an average % cohort female <= 38.5%)




                                                                           28
                Table 2: Cohort Characteristics

                                   Mean Std Dev Min Max
Estimation Sample (weighted by # students) N = 2, 541 students
STEM Field                            1        0      1     1
Cohort Size                        21.78    10.57     1    49
# Female in Cohort                  8.17    5.38      0    23
% Female in Cohort                  .381    .187      0     1
Ratio Female/Male                   .831     .848     0     7
       Estimation Sample (unweighted) N = 151 cohorts
STEM Field                            1        0      1     1
Cohort Size                        16.83    9.16      1    49
# Female in Cohort                  6.40    4.69      0    23
% Female in Cohort                  .383    .207      0     1
Ratio Female/Male                   .866     .955     0     7
          Full Sample (unweighted) N = 1, 529 cohorts
STEM Field                         .699     .459      0    1
Cohort Size                        7.60     7.68      1    80
# Female in Cohort                  3.31    3.25      0    28
% Female in Cohort                  .489    .305      0     1
Ratio Female/Male                   1.10     1.27     0    11




                              29
  Table 3: Summary Statistics By Typically Male/Female Programs




                      Typically Male Programs       Typically Female Programs
                        Mean          Std Dev          Mean          Std Dev
                        Student-Level Characteristics
Ph.D. in 6 Yrs           0.46           0.50            0.54           0.50
Age                     24.92           3.64           25.18           4.10
Foreign                  0.60           0.49            0.40           0.49
First Term GPA           3.56           0.41            3.49           0.45
Obs                        1,288 students                 1,253 students
                         Cohort-Level Characteristics
Cohort Size             16.95           8.45           16.71           9.88
% Female in Cohort       0.26           0.14            0.51           0.19
# Female in Cohort       4.43           2.89            8.40           5.31
Obs                          76 cohorts                     75 cohorts
Typically male programs are those that have an average cohort gender
composition <= 38.5% female. Typically female programs are those that have an
average cohort gender composition > 38.5% female.




                                  30
                       Table 4: Summary Statistics

                                           Male                  Female
                                 Mean        Std Dev     Mean         Std Dev
PhD in 6 Yrs                      0.49        0.500       0.50         0.500
Yrs to Graduate                  5.45         1.232      5.39          1.261
Drop Out (by end of 6 yrs)       0.30         0.460      0.31          0.461
Still Enrolled (by end of 6 yrs) 0.21         0.406      0.19          0.392
# Yrs Enrolled                    4.38        2.078       4.35         2.031
Age (Yr Enrolled - Birth Yr)     25.24        3.977      24.73         3.685
Foreign                          0.51         0.500      0.49          0.500
First Term GPA                    3.53        0.429       3.53         0.440
First Year GPA                    3.56        0.353       3.58         0.336
UMETRICS Variables:
Ever Research Funded Yrs 2-4        0.66      0.475       0.59        0.493
Research Funded Yr 1                0.29      0.455       0.26        0.437
Research Funded Yr 2                0.44      0.497       0.41        0.491
Research Funded Yr 3                0.57      0.495       0.55        0.498
Research Funded Yr 4                0.57      0.496       0.54        0.499
In main estimation sample: N = 1,574 for men and N = 967 for women.




                                     31
 Table 5: Effect of Cohort Gender Composition on Ph.D. Completion




                                      Complete Ph.D. within 6 Years
                                                     % Female >
                             % Female   Ratio F/M    program avg            # Female
                                (1)        (2)            (3)                  (4)
Female                       -0.119 ***      -0.081 **       -0.071 **       0.035
                              (.0449)         (.0353)         (.0290)        (.0673)
Highly Female Cohort         -0.110          -0.040 **       -0.041          0.001
                              (.1067)         (.0195)         (.0269)        (.0068)
Female*Highly Female          0.224 **        0.061 ***       0.082 *       -0.007
                              (.1002)         (.0206)         (.0443)        (.0083)
Obs                             2,541          2,541            2,541          2,541
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Reported estimates are marginal effects derived from a Probit MLE. Standard errors
in parentheses are clustered by program. All specifications include: cohort size, age,
age-squared, gender, foreign status, race/ethnicity indicators, year FEs, and program
FEs.




                                     32
Table 6: Effect of Cohort Gender Composition on Ph.D. Completion By Typically
Male/Female




                                                  Complete Ph.D. within 6 Years
                                                                    % Female >
                                     % Female        Ratio F/M      program avg      # Female
                                          (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)
                             Panel A: Typically Male Programs (N=1,287)
        Female                        -0.158 **       -0.118 **       -0.128 **      -0.112 *
                                       (.0675)         (.0500)         (.0528)        (.0587)
        Highly Female Cohort          -0.162          -0.080          -0.070 **      -0.002
                                       (.1109)         (.0605)         (.0298)        (.0080)
        Highly Female*Female           0.426 **        0.184 ***       0.150 **       0.013 *
                                       (.1865)         (.0700)         (.0609)        (.0078)
                            Panel B: Typically Female Programs (N=1,249)
        Female                        -0.185 *        -0.112 *        -0.041          0.130
                                       (.1109)         (.0677)         (.0401)        (.1039)
        Highly Female Cohort          -0.081          -0.032           0.009          0.005
                                       (.1839)         (.0271)         (.0419)        (.0102)
        Highly Female*Female           0.314 *         0.070 **        0.028         -0.014
                                       (.1838)         (.0305)         (.0728)        (.0102)
        * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
        Reported estimates are marginal effects derived from a Probit MLE. Standard errors
        in parentheses are clustered by program. All specifications include: cohort size, age,
        age-squared, gender, foreign status, race/ethnicity indicators, year FEs, and program
        FEs.




                                             33
          Table 7: Effect of Cohort Gender Composition on Ph.D. Persistence


                                                  Graduated or Still Enrolled in:
                               Year 2          Year 3        Year 4          Year 5          Year 6
                                (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
                                   Panel A: Full Estimation Sample
Female                        -0.102 **      -0.087 *       -0.105 *         -0.109 **      -0.101 *
                               (.0464)        (.0510)        (.0552)          (.0534)        (.0563)
% Cohort Female               -0.023         -0.010         -0.002           -0.062         -0.078
                               (.0747)        (.0781)        (.0796)          (.0961)        (.1030)
% Cohort Female*Female         0.178 **       0.136          0.149            0.155          0.148
                               (.0779)        (.0991)        (.1202)          (.1123)        (.1200)
Obs                             2,467          2,529          2,541            2,541          2,541
                                    Panel B: Typically Male Programs
Female                          -0.183 *        -0.186 **     -0.204 **       -0.141 *       -0.106
                                 (.0948)         (.0811)       (.0799)         (.0794)        (.0784)
% Cohort Female                 -0.218 **       -0.130        -0.158          -0.173         -0.216
                                 (.1068)         (.1164)       (.1302)         (.1461)        (.1557)
% Cohort Female*Female           0.512 **        0.478 **      0.534 **        0.336          0.234
                                 (.2001)         (.2173)       (.2501)         (.2441)        (.2334)
Obs                               1,287           1,287         1,287           1,287          1,287
                                   Panel C: Typically Female Programs
Female                          -0.041          -0.036        -0.085          -0.153         -0.137
                                 (.1104)         (.0823)       (.0922)         (.1198)        (.1103)
% Cohort Female                  0.103           0.033         0.041          -0.044         -0.018
                                 (.0754)         (.1018)       (.1174)         (.1474)        (.1434)
% Cohort Female*Female           0.023           0.028         0.078           0.196          0.176
                                 (.1074)         (.1262)       (.1583)         (.1877)        (.1766)
Obs                               1,179           1,241         1,253           1,253          1,253
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Reported estimates are marginal effects derived from a Probit MLE. Standard errors in parentheses
are clustered by program. All specifications include: cohort size, age, age-squared, gender, foreign
status, race/ethnicity indicators, year FEs, and program FEs.




                                                 34
      Table 8: Effect of Cohort Gender Composition on Grades




                             First Quarter
                                 GPA               First Year GPA
                                   (1)            (2)             (3)
Female                         -0.113 ***     -0.059 **        0.011
                                (.0337)        (.0256)         (.0104)
% Cohort Female                -0.120         -0.117          -0.046
                                (.0904)        (.1229)         (.0694)
% Cohort Female*Female          0.210 **       0.116 *        -0.017
                                (.0782)        (.0624)         (.0314)
First Quarter GPA                                              0.714 ***
                                                               (.0212)
Obs                             5,425           5,195           5,195
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by program. All
specifications include: cohort size, age, age-squared, gender, foreign
status, race/ethnicity indicators, year FEs, and program FEs.




                                  35
           Table 9: Differential Response to Grades By Gender




                                       PhD in 6 Yrs                    Persist to Yr 2
                                   (1)             (2)                (3)            (4)
First Q GPA                     0.294 ***                          0.098 ***
                                (.0483)                            (.0158)
First Q GPA*Female             -0.067                             -0.002
                                (.0531)                            (.0189)
First Yr GPA                                   0.446 ***                           0.110 ***
                                               (.0527)                             (.0145)
First Yr GPA*Female                           -0.056                              -0.014
                                               (.0649)                             (.0190)
Female                          0.009          0.000                -0.090         0.004
                                (.0160)        (.0003)               (.1162)       (.0241)
% Cohort Female                -0.122         -0.088                -0.043        -0.017
                                (.1120)        (.1121)               (.0407)       (.0329)
% Cohort Female*Female          0.189 *        0.180 *               0.115 ***     0.087 ***
                                (.1023)        (.1020)               (.0427)       (.0311)
Obs                              2,541          2,394                 5,021         4,799
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Reported estimates are marginal effects derived from a Probit MLE. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by program. All specifications include: cohort size, age, age-
squared, gender, foreign status, race/ethnicity indicators, year FEs, and program FEs.




                                         36
Table 10: Correlation Between Research Funding and Ph.D. Persistence




                                               Graduated or Still Enrolled in:
                                 Year 2           Year 3           Year 4        Year 5
                                  (1)               (2)             (3)           (4)
Research Funded in Year 1        0.041 ***
                                 (.0122)
Research Funded in Year 2                          0.070 ***
                                                   (.0132)
Research Funded in Year 3                                         0.069 ***
                                                                  (.0153)
Research Funded in Year 4                                                        0.036 ***
                                                                                 (.0054)
Obs                                1,983           1,918          1,766          1,437
Cohorts in Sample                  09-14           08-13          07-12          06-11
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Reported estimates are marginal effects derived from a Probit MLE. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by program. All specifications include: cohort size, age, age-
squared, gender, foreign status, race/ethnicity indicators, year FEs, and program FEs.




                                          37
Table 11: Correlation Between Research Funding and Ph.D. Completion




                                                    Complete Ph.D. within 6 Years
                                         (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
Ever Research Funded Years 2-4         0.241 ***
                                       (.0559)
Research Funded in Year 2                               0.110
                                                        (.0981)
Research Funded in Year 3                                             0.099 **
                                                                      (.0422)
Research Funded in Year 4                                                            0.017
                                                                                     (.0387)
Obs                                        617             587           821            978
Cohorts in Sample                         08-09           08-09         07-09          06-09
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Reported estimates are marginal effects derived from a Probit MLE. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by program. All specifications include: cohort size, age, age-squared,
gender, foreign status, race/ethnicity indicators, year FEs, and program FEs.




                                               38
  Table 12: Effect of Cohort Gender Composition on Receiving Funding




                                 Ever
                               Research
                             Funded Years                  Receive Research Funding in:
                                  2-4           Year 1        Year 2         Year 3           Year 4
                                     (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
Female                           -0.095 *       0.013          -0.052          0.052          -0.036
                                  (.0541)       (.0371)         (.0518)        (.0847)         (.0977)
% Cohort Female                  -0.066         0.070           0.068          0.142          -0.041
                                  (.1124)       (.1159)         (.1470)        (.1150)         (.1744)
% Cohort Female*Female            0.161        -0.074           0.070         -0.143           0.139
                                  (.1602)       (.0939)         (.1141)        (.1711)         (.2318)
Obs                                1,362         1,989           1,922          1,745           1,554
Cohorts in Sample                  08-11         09-14           08-13          07-12           06-11
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Reported estimates are marginal effects derived from a Probit MLE. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by program. All specifications include: cohort size, age, age-squared, gender, foreign status,
race/ethnicity indicators, year FEs, and program FEs.




                                              39
                                                      Table 13: Robustness Checks


                                    Main                          Ph.D in        Define Programs Using:        STEM &        Non-STEM
                                 Specification      LPM            7 Yrs         CIP Field    Prgm Code       Non-STEM         Only
                                     (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)             (6)            (7)
     Female                         -0.119 ***     -0.107 **      -0.164 ***     -0.064         -0.131 **      -0.121 ***     -0.179
                                     (.0449)        (.0420)        (.0578)        (.0444)        (.0542)        (.0425)        (.1365)
     % Cohort Female                -0.110         -0.089         -0.121         -0.082         -0.173         -0.146         -0.419 *
                                     (.1067)        (.0986)        (.1079)        (.0906)        (.1243)        (.0991)        (.2457)
     % Cohort Female*Female          0.224 **       0.195 **       0.328 ***      0.132 *        0.247 **       0.233 **       0.344
                                     (.1002)        (.0940)        (.1106)        (.0794)        (.1176)        (.0931)        (.3256)
     Obs                               2,541           2,541         2,015         3,414           2,448           2,898           357
     # Programs                          33              33            32            34              52              40             7
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




40
     Reported estimates in columns (1) and (3)-(7) are marginal effects derived from a Probit MLE. Estimates in column (2) are obtained
     via OLS. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by program. All specifications include: cohort size, age, age-squared, gender,
     foreign status, race/ethnicity indicators, year FEs, and program FEs.
             Table 14: Robustness Checks - Drop Small Programs




                                                Drop Programs with Avg Cohort Size
                                  <8             <9           < 10          < 11               < 12
                                  (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)                (5)
Female                         -0.091 **       -0.115 ***     -0.119 ***      -0.135 ***     -0.134 ***
                                (.0431)         (.0440)        (.0449)         (.0458)        (.0477)
% Cohort Female                -0.098          -0.122         -0.110          -0.174 *       -0.159
                                (.0925)         (.0991)        (.1067)         (.0978)        (.1061)
% Cohort Female*Female          0.177 **        0.229 ***      0.224 **        0.229 **       0.215 *
                                (.0853)         (.0879)        (.1002)         (.1025)        (.1179)
Obs                               3,176         2,946            2,541          2,372          2,243
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Reported estimates are marginal effects derived from a Probit MLE. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by program. All specifications include: cohort size, age, age-squared, gender, foreign status,
race/ethnicity indicators, year FEs, and program FEs.




                                              41
         Table 15: Robustness Checks - Drop High-Transfer Programs




                                             Drop Programs with % Transfer Students
                               >= 10%         >= 15%       >= 20%         >= 25%             >= 30%
                                 (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)                (5)
Female                         -0.120 **      -0.116 **       -0.119 ***     -0.109 **       -0.122 ***
                                (.0556)        (.0517)         (.0449)        (.0439)         (.0427)
% Cohort Female                -0.135         -0.102          -0.110         -0.109          -0.136
                                (.1210)        (.1114)         (.1067)        (.1058)         (.1067)
% Cohort Female*Female          0.222 *        0.214 *         0.224 **       0.209 **        0.233 **
                                (.1161)        (.1096)         (.1002)        (.1007)         (.0987)
Obs                               2,106         2,362           2,541          2,623           2,718
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Reported estimates are marginal effects derived from a Probit MLE. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by program. All specifications include: cohort size, age, age-squared, gender, foreign status,
race/ethnicity indicators, year FEs, and program FEs.




                                              42
