NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDERSTANDING JOINT RETIREMENT
Pierre-Carl Michaud
Arthur van Soest
Luc Bissonnette
Working Paper 25030
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25030

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

We acknowledge financial support from the National Institute of Aging (NIA) and the Netherlands
Scientific Organization of Scientific Research (NWO). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛¸
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Pierre-Carl Michaud, Arthur van Soest, and Luc Bissonnette. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Understanding Joint Retirement
Pierre-Carl Michaud, Arthur van Soest, and Luc Bissonnette
NBER Working Paper No. 25030
September 2018
JEL No. C81,D13,J26
ABSTRACT
Evidence from different sources shows that spouses' retirement decisions are correlated.
Retirement policies affecting individuals in couples are therefore also likely to affect behavior of
their spouses. It is therefore important to account for joint features in modeling retirement. This
paper studies a structural collective model of labor supply and retirement of both partners in a
couple with interdependent preferences, imperfect knowledge of preferences of the spouse, and
subjective expectations about the future. We propose a novel method to estimate preferences and
the intra-household bargaining process, which relies on stated preferences data collected in the
Health and Retirement Study. Respondents were asked to choose between hypothetical retirement
trajectories describing the retirement ages and replacement rates of both spouses from three
perspectives: considering their own preferences only, the preferences of their spouse only, or the
most likely decision for the household. With these data, all model parameters are identified and
potential sources of joint retirement can be disentangled. We find that males misperceive their
wives' preferences, overestimating their disutility of work. Our estimates correct for this bias.
They suggest that correlation in unobserved heterogeneity components of the partners' marginal
utility of leisure explains a large share of joint retirement decisions. We also find significant
positive complementarities in leisure, but this explains a much smaller part of joint retirement.
Pierre-Carl Michaud
HEC Montréal
3000 Côte-Sainte-Catherine Road
Montréal (Québec), Canada H3T 2A7
and NBER
pierre-carl.michaud@hec.ca
Arthur van Soest
Tilburg University
P.O. Box 90153
5000 LE Tilburg
The Netherlands
and Netspar
a.h.o.vansoest@uvt.nl

Luc Bissonnette
Universite Laval
Pavillon J.-A.-DeSève 1025
avenue des Sciences-Humaines
Quebec G1V0A6
Canada
luc.bissonnette@ecn.ulaval.ca

1 Introduction
Population aging has led to a debate on the labor force participation of older workers, increasing the need for understanding retirement decisions and their sensitivity for policy measures.
Earlier studies often only focus on the retirement behavior of males, due to the fact that
women often left the labor market long before reaching retirement age. Since the labor force
participation rate of women has grown substantially over the last decades, understanding
their retirement decisions has gained importance.

Moreover, there is clear evidence that

the retirement decisions within couples are interdependent, with a signicant proportion of
spouses retiring at approximately the same time, irrespective of their age dierence (joint
retirement). Hurd (1989) already pointed out that between 20 and 30 percent of all couples
retire within one year of each other. Since then, a new line of research has emerged aimed
at analyzing and understanding the retirement behavior of couples.

Empirical evidence of

joint retirement decisions has been documented for several cohorts and countries, including
Blau (1998) (Retirement History Study), Gustman and Steinmeier (2000) (National Longitudinal Survey of Mature Women), Gustman and Steinmeier (2004) and Casanova Rivas (2010)
(Health and Retirement Study), Banks et al. (2007) (English Longitudinal Study of Ageing),
and Hospido and Zamarro (2014) (Survey of Health Ageing and Retirement in Europe).
There are several potential links between spouses' retirement decisions that may explain
joint retirement. The rst one operates through the household budget constraint (see Blau
(1998); Casanova Rivas (2010)). Casanova Rivas (2010) shows that under certain conditions,
the fact that resources are shared can increase the probability of joint retirement. In addition, the spouse allowance in the US old age social security benet system creates nancial
incentives that explain coordination in retirement dates (see McCarty (1990)). The second
channel originates from preferences: It is plausible that spouses enjoy spending leisure time
together so that the marginal utility of retirement increases when the partner is also retired

2

(complementarities in leisure, leading to a causal eect of the retirement of one spouse on
retirement of the other spouse; see Gustman and Steinmeier (2000, 2004, 2009), Stancanelli
and van Soest (2016) or Michaud and Vermeulen (2011)). The third channel is the correlation
in spouses' (unobserved) tastes for leisure (See Gustman and Steinmeier (2000, 2004)) that
can be due to assortative matching. The literature has not come to a clear conclusion on the
relative importance of these three channels, but does conclude that ignoring joint retirement
may severely underestimate the overall impact of reforms in retirement policy. For example,
Coile (2004) nds that neglecting the spill-over eect on the behavior of the spouse may
underestimate the overall impact of a typical policy by 13% to 20%.
To model joint behavior, the collective model empirically outperforms the neo-classical
unitary model assuming that each household behaves as a single decision maker, both for consumption and labor supply behavior (Fortin and Lacroix (1997), Bourguignon et al. (1993),
Cherchye et al. (2009)). The collective model (Chiappori (1988)) starts from the basic assumption that in a multi-person household, household members have their own utility functions
but cooperate in some bargaining process that results in a Pareto-ecient allocation. The assumption of cooperation seems quite natural, given that spouses interact very often.

1 Several

studies found support for the collective model in the sense that its theoretical implications
cannot be rejected when tested on multi-person household data (Chiappori et al. (2002),
Cherchye et al. (2009)). Yet, some assumptions of that model remain untested. In particular,
it is assumed that each spouse knows the preferences of the other spouse and therefore can
correctly pick a Pareto optimal outcome. To the best of our knowledge, no study has tested
this assumption.
A major challenge of the collective model is the identication of parameters in a realistic
context with externalities and public goods. Additional identifying assumptions are usually

1

Gustman and Steinmeier (2000) and several follow-up studies estimate a structural retirement model of
joint retirement assuming noncooperative behavior and Nash bargaining.

3

needed in order to estimate the model and test its validity.

Chiappori (1988, 1992) shows

that if preferences are egoistic, the usual data on actual household choices are enough to
identify the sharing rule up to a constant. The assumption of egoistic preference, however,
is rather restrictive in the context of retirement, since it means that the marginal rate of
substitution (MRS) between own leisure and consumption remains the same regardless of
the spouse's labor supply and therefore does not allow for complementarities (externalities)
of leisure activities - one of the possible explanations for joint retirement.

Many activities

such as taking meals or traveling on holidays will usually be more enjoyable when they can
be done together with the spouse. A natural assumption for older couples is therefore that
the marginal utility of own leisure depends on leisure of the spouse, that is, preferences are
interdependent (See Gustman and Steinmeier (2000, 2004, 2009); Michaud and Vermeulen
(2011)).

Michaud and Vermeulen (2011) allow for complementarities in leisure, identifying

the model by making use of panel data with couples and individuals who became a widow(er)
in the observation period, along with the assumption that an individual's preferences can only
change after the death of the spouse.
Models of joint retirement behavior also typically assume that expectations regarding
the future are rational (Blau, 1998; Gustman and Steinmeier, 2000). A large literature has
studied how expectations regarding mortality, health and other risks deviate from rational
expectations in the general population and these deviations are predictive of behavior (Hurd,
2009). Manski (2004) argues that direct measurement of expectations and their inclusion in
behavioral models is desirable in order to make inferences about preferences. Yet, we know
of no application of collective models which uses subjective expectations on risks (longevity,
disability, etc).
The main contribution of the current paper is to provide a novel approach to obtain identication of a general version of the collective model for labor supply and retirement in a context
that allows for subjective (and not necessarily rational) expectations and imperfect knowledge

4

of preferences of the spouse. Specic to this model is that it avoids imposing restrictions on
individual preferences such as egoistic preferences: externalities and public goods are both
allowed to enter the individual utility functions. The paper solves the identication problem
by using stated preferences (SP) data, aimed at directly identifying the main components of
the model. Survey respondents were oered several pairs of simplied retirement trajectories.
They were asked to choose between two trajectories three times: rst only accounting for
their own preferences, then using only their spouse's preferences, and nally they were asked
what would be the most likely choice of their household, accounting for both individuals'
preferences as well as the decision-making process in their household.

As in Kapteyn and

Kooreman (1992), the rich SP data directly helps to estimate the individual utility functions
and demand for leisure equations that can be used to identify all preference parameters. The
answers to the question on the most likely choice in the household then identies the household decision process and, in particular, the weights of both partner's utility functions for the
household choice.
The method of Stated Preferences has been commonly used in marketing and transportation sciences for many years (see, e.g., Louviere et al. (2000)), and is gaining ground in
economics since Barsky et al. (1997) and Revelt and Train (1998). Elsayed et al. (2018) and
Van Soest and Vonkova (2014) apply stated preferences to labor supply and retirement decisions of individuals. The latter motivate the use of SP data from the fact that they want
to analyze preferences for plans that do not yet exist (e.g., retirement after the mandatory
retirement age). Moreover, it is often not clear which alternative retirement scenarios workers
can choose in real life, when not only the rules of their pension plan but also limited exibility of their employer may restrict their actual choice set in ways that remain unobserved in
the data. Moreover, the actual choice set depends on labor market history and is therefore
potentially endogenous to the individual's labor supply preferences. Stated preference data
allow for a design where choice opportunities are exactly known, and variation in choices is

5

substantial and by construction exogenous to preferences. In the current study, an additional
strong argument for using SP data is that, as discussed above, with revealed preferences only,
not all the parameters of interest can be identied.
The SP data are collected for a subsample of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS).
They are used to estimate a stylized structural model of labor supply and retirement of both
partners.

Our main ndings are the following.

We nd that males have a biased view of

their wives' labour supply preferences, overestimating their disutility of work.

We correct

for this bias in the model. We nd signicant complementarities in leisure and unobserved
heterogeneity in determining joint retirement. The dierence between the male and female's
wage rate signicantly aects the bargaining weights, conrming that the unitary model is
rejected against the collective model. Simulations based upon the estimates (that corrects for
the biased perception of partner preferences) suggest that correlation in unobserved heterogeneity components of the two partner's marginal utility of leisure can explain a large share
(almost half ) of joint retirement decisions. We also nd signicant positive complementarities
in leisure, but this explains a much smaller part of joint retirement.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 uses a simple example to
illustrate the idea of identication in a stylized collective model. Section 3 describes the sample
and our SP data. The empirical specication of the structural collective model is discussed
in Section 4. The estimation results are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 presents the results
of some simulation exercises, validating the SP data by comparing simulated retirement ages
with data on expected retirement ages of the same individuals, and then using counterfactual
simulations to indicate how complementarities in leisure and correlation between preferences
of the two partners contribute to joint retirement outcomes. Section 7 concludes.

6

2 Identication: A Simple Illustration
We consider a simple example of a static (one time period) collective labor supply model
for couples consisting of a man (m) and a woman (f ). For

j 's

j = m, f , lj

denotes individual

leisure. We work with one aggregate consumption good with price normalized to 1; its

amount is denoted by

c.

Consumption is assumed to be public, in the sense that it gives

utility to both spouses. The time endowment for each individual is denoted by
rates are

wm

and

income given by

wf

and

y

is the household's non-labor income.

Y = (wm + wf )T + y .

are represented by a utility function

Y

where

z

The wage

represents full household

In the general framework, individual

Uj (lm , lf , c; z)

T.

j 's

preferences

is a vector of taste shifters.

Under the assumption of the collective model that the couple reaches a Pareto-ecient
equilibrium (Chiappori (1988)), there exists a weighting factor

λ

such that

(lm , lf , c)

solves

the following maximization problem:

max λUm + (1 − λ)Uf

(lm ,lf ,c)

(1)

subject to the budget constraint

c + wm lm + wf lf ≤ Y

The weight

λ can be a function of wm , wf , y

and other variables

(2)

d (called the distribution

factors).
This general collective model cannot be identied from the usual data on labor supply of
both partners and consumption. Identication relies on additional assumptions such as some
type of separability restrictions (see Chiappori (1988, 1992)). For example, identication can
be achieved if preferences are assumed to depend on consumption and own leisure only, and
not on leisure of the partner. As we discussed before, such egoistic preferences are restrictive,

7

especially for older couples. In this paper, we will therefore not impose such an assumption
and allow for interdependent preferences instead of imposing egoistic preferences.
More generally, we avoid any additional assumptions but instead collect additional data
to identify the model. To illustrate this idea, we will use a simple example. The arguments of
each utility function are

q = (lm , lf , c)

and we normalize

T

to 1. We assume that preferences

can be represented by a Stone-Geary type direct utility function, with constant returns to
scale and zero subsistence levels:

um (q) = αm ln lm + αf ln lf + (1 − αm − αf )lnc

(3)

uf (q) = βm ln lm + βf ln lf + (1 − βm − βf )lnc

(4)

The collective model implies that the household bargaining process results in a Pareto
ecient allocation, solving

max uj (q) = λum (q) + (1 − λ)uf (q)
q

(5)

subject to the budget constraint

c + wm lm + wf lf ≤ Y

(6)

It is straightforward to show that this gives the following demands for leisure:

wm lm = (λαm + (1 − λ)βm )Y

(7)

wf lf = (λαf + (1 − λ)βf )Y

(8)

Let us consider the case where the bargaining weights do not depend on wage rates or

8

non-labor income

y,

and the weight of the husband is given by

λ = γ0 + d0 γ

(9)

The equations for male and female leisure can then be written as:

wm lm = (d0 γ(αm − βm ) + γ0 + βm )Y

(10)

wf lf = (d0 γ(αf − βf ) + γ0 + βf )Y

(11)

It is easy to see that the parameters in these equations are not identied if only actual
behavior (c, lm , lf , wm , wf , z ) is observed  It is necessary to x (for example)
scale of the vector

γ.

γ0

and the

Kapteyn and Kooreman (1992) emphasize the same problem in a static

labor supply model. They propose to use stated preferences on desired working hours by each
individual to identify all the parameters. Our approach will be similar in spirit  we collect
and use stated preference data that help identication. In our example, suppose respondents
report how many hours respondents would like to work themselves and how many hours they
would like their partner to work, accounting for their own preferences only and not for those
of their spouse. For males, this would be the outcome of the collective model in the case of
male dictatorship (

λ = 1);

for females, it would correspond to female dictatorship (

λ = 0).

The information provided by male respondents can be used to estimate the parameters
and

αf

αm

of the male utility function, using the two leisure demand equations

wm lm = αm Y

(12)

wf lf = αf Y

(13)

Similarly, he information for female respondents can be used to estimate the parameters

9

βm

and

βf

of the female utility function, using the equations

wm lm = βm Y

(14)

wf lf = βf Y

(15)

Finally, if we have data on actual labor supply (as in Kooreman and Kapteyn (1990)) or
ask the respondents to also report the most likely actual outcome for the household, it is easy
to see from (10) and (11) that the bargaining the parameters (γ0 ,
particular, this also identies the intercept

γ0

γ)

are also identied. In

which is not identied in the collective models

of Chiappori (1988, 1992); Chiappori et al. (2002). This intercept is needed to interpret the
estimation results in terms of the bargaining power of each partner.
The example shows that stated preferences on what individuals in couples would do if
they were the only decision makers, that is, in case of male or female dictatorship, lead to
information to identify parameters in the collective model that cannot be identied by revealed
preferences alone.

In this paper, we exploit this idea in the context of an inter-temporal

(multiple time periods) model explaining retirement decisions.

We will use information on

survey respondents' stated choices among dierent hypothetical joint retirement trajectories
(retirement ages and corresponding earnings and pension income for both partners) based on
their own preferences and based upon their spouses' preferences. To identify the bargaining
weight, we will then also use the answers to the question on the most likely outcome for the
couple.

10

3 Data
2 of the Health

Our module of SP questions was included in the 2011 Internet Survey (2011-IS)

and Retirement Study (HRS). The HRS is an ongoing longitudinal biennial socio-economic
survey of the U.S. population aged 50 years and older and their spouses, conducted by the
Institute for Survey Research at the University of Michigan. The 2011-IS is developed jointly
by the HRS, the Survey Research Center (SRC) and the Institute for Social Research (ISR)
at the University of Michigan, and the RAND Corporation.

It is the fth in a series of

surveys administrated over the Internet to a sub-sample of HRS respondents with Internet
access in years where the HRS respondents do not get the regular HRS interviews.

Over

the years, the HRS Internet has had many experimental question modules covering a large
variety of topics including, for example, subjective probabilities (Delavande and Rohwedder,
2008), early childhood health histories (Smith, 2011), health literacy (Levy et al., 2015), and
household nancial assets (Couper et al., 2013).
In the subsample selected for the questions on joint retirement, we only selected respondents in couples who were doing paid work themselves or whose partner did paid work. The
number of respondents participating was 779, but we only use the observations where both
respondent and spouse were younger than 62. This is because scenarios were phrased dierently in other cases and because we want to use expected work limiting health problems as a
covariate. Moreover, we removed some observations with missing information on important
variables (subjective survival probabilities, whether the respondent or their partner has a
work limiting health problem, the probability that they will have such a problem at age 62,
job satisfaction; missing wage rates were imputed). This leaves a nal sample of 604 couples,
with 280 male and 324 female respondents.

Table 1
2

Link: http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/index.php?p=shownews3x1&hfyle=news319

11

Summary statistics of the explanatory variables for the male and female partners in the
households of the 604 survey respondents in our nal sample are given in Table 1. The average
ages of males and females are 56.4 and 54.5 years, respectively. The age dierence between
spouses has a standard deviation of 4.72 and an interquartile range of 4 years. Almost the
same fraction of males and females have a college degree (44% of men and 42% of women).
Satisfaction with the current job is included in the model since it may aect the marginal
utility of leisure (as opposed to working). The fraction of men and women who are satised
(or very satised) with their job is almost the same (75%). Males somewhat less often report
to have a work limiting health problem (7% versus 9%).

On the other hand, the average

subjective probability of a work limitation at age 62 is very similar for both genders (40%
and 39%). Since subjective survival probabilities until age 75 depend on current age, Table 1
does not present the reported probabilities themselves, but their ratio to the (gender specic)
objective survival probabilities according to Human Mortality Database (www.mortality.org).
Males earn higher hourly wages than females.

Accordingly, the log of the wage ratio

(male's wage rate divided by female's wage rate), which is used in the model as a determinant
of within household bargaining power, has a positive mean of 0.242 and substantial variation
around this mean, with a standard deviation 0.753 and an interquartile range of 0.908.
We designed six hypothetical and stylized retirement trajectories. All the scenarios are
in terms of income-hours combinations for both partners over the remaining part of the life
cycle after the respondent has reached a given age. All scenarios are designed to be realistic,
in the sense that they are broadly similar to the choice opportunities individuals and couples
can encounter in real life. Respondents were explicitly asked to assume that their employers

3

will cooperate with each scenario.

Figure 1
3

For the complete questionnaire, see pp. 391417 of
http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/modules/meta/2011/internet/qnaire/online/net2011qnaire.pdf

12

Figure 1 gives a screen shot of an example of a retirement trajectory of the couple, i.e., both
for the respondent (top panel) and the respondent's partner (bottom panel). The respondent's
remaining life time from age 62 was divided into three periods: 62-65, 65-68, and beyond 68.
This remains the same for all scenarios; these ages were chosen since transition rates into
retirement tend to peak at these ages. For the partner, we use the same division in calendar
time. In Figure 1, the partner is two years younger than the respondent, so if the respondent
is, for example, in the age bracket 6568, then the partner is (roughly) in the age bracket
6366.
Initial hours of work were always set to the respondent's and partner's actual working hours
before (partial) retirement (40 hours per week for both respondent and partner in Figure 1).
Once they are fully retired, individuals get a pension corresponding to a proportion of their
last earnings (Replacement Rate (RR). During partial retirement, their disposable income is
a combination of earnings and pension. On the screen, we present the corresponding total
replacement rate (disposable income during partial or full retirement as a fraction of preretirement disposable income). In the example of Figure 1, the respondent retires partially
at age 65, reducing working hours from 40 to 24 per week, with a total replacement rate of
100% (earnings plus partial pension). The respondent fully retires at age 68, after which the
replacement rate is 75%.

The respondent's partner reties at age 63 (when the respondent

turns 65), with a replacement rate of 75%. There is no partial retirement for the partner.
Variation in replacement rates was created by randomly varying them across the sample.
More precisely, respondents are divided into ve groups indicated by
Group

G5

got the highest RRs in all scenarios, group

G4

G1 , G2 , G3 , G4

and

G5 .

got the second highest RRs, etc.

Since the design of the scenarios takes account of the respondent's actual age as well as the
age dierence, couples with dierent actual ages and a dierent age dierence will receive
dierent retirement with adjusted replacement rates. In Table 2, we illustrate the dierent
scenarios, using the example of a male respondent and his spouse who are both 55 years old

13

and who both work 40 hours per week. The table shows the retirement plans presented to
the respondent in the survey, with its (partial and full) retirement ages and the replacement
rates for the ve dierent groups.

Scenarios 1, 2, 3 and 6 have abrupt retirement of both

partners. In Scenario 1, the male respondent retires earlier (age 65) than the wife (age 68),
in scenario 2 it is the other way around (ages 62 and 68). Scenario 4 has partial retirement of
the respondent, who works part-time from age 62 until 65. Working part-time always means
working 60% of preretirement hours.
65 until age 68.

In scenario 5, the partner works part-time from age

During partial retirement, the replacement rate is always 100%; after full

retirement, replacement rates are randomly assigned through the group assignment G1G5,
as shown in the table. If, unlike in the example of Table 2, the age dierence is not zero, the
(partial) retirement ages and RRs for the partner change accordingly.

Table 2
In order to stimulate respondents to think of the pros and cons of each scenario before
asking them to make choices, respondents were rst asked to rate every scenario separately on
an ordinal scale. These ratings will not be used in the empirical analysis; they merely serve
to familiarize the respondents with all the scenarios. The reason is that in a similar SP experiment for individual retirement trajectories, Van Soest and Vonkova (2014) used both rating
and choice data but found that stated ratings were very noisy, giving much less information
than the stated choices. Choice questions come after these ratings. Respondents were asked
to indicate a preference between the two scenarios in each of three pairs: scenario 2 versus
scenario 4, scenario 5 versus scenario 2, and scenario 3 versus scenario 6. For each of these
three choice sets comparing two scenarios, three questions were asked:

I:

Considering your own preferences and not those of your partner, which would you

prefer?
14

II :

Considering your partner's preferences and not those of yourself, what do you think
your partner would prefer?
III : If, as a couple, you would have to decide jointly on choosing between these scenarios,
what would be the most likely outcome?
In total, we have three pairs with three choices each. As we previously mentioned, the three
dierent types of questions are important for identication of the collective model. Questions

I

and

II

allow us to elicit the preference parameters of males' and females' individual utility

functions, while question

III

is informative on the parameters driving the bargaining weights

of husband and wife.

Table 3
Table 3 presents descriptive statistics for the nine stated choice questions.

Each row

represents one question; each of the three blocks has the three questions for a given choice
set. In the rst block where the choice is between scenarios S2 and S4, both husbands and
wives tend to prefer S4 over S2 from all three perspectives. S2 was chosen more often by female
than by male respondents. From Table 2 we know that S4 focuses on gradual retirement of
the respondent while S2 has early retirement, while there is no dierence for the partner.
Female respondents more often than male respondents to stop working completely at age 62
than to continue working part-time, even if not working at all leads to less income.

This

is in line with the notion that women have a lower preference to do paid work. The same
explanation can be given for the dierence between rows 1 and 2: A larger preference is given
to early retirement when respondents answer the question using the wife's preferences than
when using the husband's preferences. As expected, the choice fractions from the perspective
of the household as a whole are generally in between the fractions from the male's and female's
perspective.

15

For the second choice situation, both male and female respondents tend to choose S5
over S2.

Again, females tend to prefer S2 more often than males, in line with the notion

that females tend to have lower labour supply than men.

Note that both S4 and S5 have

partial retirement for either the respondent (S4) or the spouse (S5).

A preference for S4

or S5 therefore also implies a preference for partial retirement, in line with what Van Soest
and Vonkova (2014) and Elsayed et al. (2018) found using Dutch SP data and analyzing
individual preferences. For example, Van Soest and Vonkova (2014) analyzed four types of
hypothetical retirement scenarios - standard retirement, late retirement, early retirement and
partial retirement and found that if more exibility is added in the form of gradual retirement
with an actuarially fair partial pension, almost two thirds would opt for gradual retirement.
For the last SP question, females and particularly males tend to choose S6 (standard
retirement for both) over S3 (late retirement for both) from all three perspectives. As expected
given the previous results, late retirement is particularly unpopular among female respondents.
Looking at the table as a whole, we can conclude that both male and female respondents tend
to make similar choices regardless of the perspectives they are supposed to choose from  the
dierences across choice situations are much larger than the dierences across perspectives
for a given choice situation.

4 Empirical specication
As described in Section 3, the respondents need to choose between dierent retirement trajectories for the couple. We assume that for a respondent
utility

j
Uiq

of the joint retirement trajectory

j
Uiq
=

1
X
d=0

pd

q

100
X

j = m, f

in couple

i,

total lifetime

has the following additively separable form:

j
ρt−62 Pr(t|62)Uiqt,d

t=62

16

(16)

Here

j
Uiqt,d

is the utility at age

probability of survival till age

t

t

with work limitation status

given survival until age 62,

4 and

work limitations after age 62,

ρ

is the discount factor.

pd

d ∈ {0, 1}, Pr(t|62)

is the

is the probability of having

Both health and survival risk

are taken from respondents' responses. The survival probabilities are constructed adjusting
general life tables for men and women upward or downward, using subjective probabilities of
living until age 75 reported in the HRS for the respondent and the spouse.

5 The summation

is from age 62 for the respondent since all of our SP scenarios start from respondent age 62.
For the spouse, we use the same intertemporally additive specication, but the summation is
adjusted for the age dierence between respondent and spouse, in line with how we designed
the scenarios.

For example, if the partner is two years younger than the respondent, the

summation for the partner is from partner's age 60.
Since scenarios are presented in terms of income rather than expenditures, we also work
within period utility functions in terms of income rather than expenditure. In other words, we
abstract from saving and consumption smoothing, as in Van Soest and Vonkova (2014). The
within period utility functions

j
Uiqt

are assumed to have the following modied Cobb-Douglas

specications:

f
f
m
m
m
Uiqt
= αim ln liqt
+ αf ln liqt
+ αc lnciqt + αmf ln liqt
ln liqt

(17)

f
f
f
m
m
Uiqt
= β m ln liqt
+ βif ln liqt
+ β c lnciqt + β mf ln liqt
ln liqt

(18)

α
m
αim = xm
i ψ + ηi

(19)

βif = xfi ψ β + νif

(20)

4

Ideally, this probability should depend on t but the data only contain the probability at age 62.
Let the objective life table survival rate to age t be so (t) = exp(−Λo (t)) where Λo (t) is the integrated
hazard and we assume the subjective survival rate to age t, ss (t) = exp(−ψΛo (t)). We use both subjective
and objective point estimates to nd ψ for each respondent. We then reconstruct the subjective survival curve
using the integrated hazard of the life-table survival curve.
5

17

j

Here liqt and

ciqt

j 's

denote partner

leisure and household (public) consumption, respec-

tively. Utility depends on own leisure, the spouse's leisure, consumption and the interaction
of the two leisure terms.

xji

are vectors of taste shifters, capturing observed heterogeneity

(age, health indicators, education, etc).
unobserved heterogeneity terms;

ηim

αim

and

νif

and

βif

are linear combinations of observed and

are the unobserved heterogeneity terms, which

m

vary across households but are xed over time. We use a bivariate normal distribution of (ηi ,

νif )

with parameters to be estimated, allowing the two random coecients to be correlated.

A positive correlation would capture the fact that men and women with similar preferences
for leisure are more likely to become partners (assortative matching on the marriage market). All other preference parameters (αc , βc , αmf , βmf , ρ) are assumed to be the same for all
couples in the sample.
It is clear that this specication allows for externalities in leisure: utility depends upon
leisure of the partner. In particular, the interaction terms imply that marginal utility of own
leisure varies with leisure of the partner. If there are complementarities in leisure,

β mf

αmf

and

will be positive  implying that the marginal utility of leisure increases with leisure of

spouse.
The bargaining weight of males is given by

λ(p; δ).

We use the following logistic transfor-

mation to guarantee that the weight is bounded between 0 and 1:

λ(p; δ) =
For simplicity, we assume that
intercept.

p

exp(p0 δ)
1 + exp(p0 δ)

(21)

only includes the log wage ratio (ln(wm /wf ) and an

We expect a positive eect of

ln(wm /wf )

on

λ

since this implies that a higher

relative wage of the husband compared to the wife gives the husband a better bargaining
position.

The intercept is also of interest, since it reects the bargaining position if both

partners have the same wage rate.

18

To account for optimization errors, general extreme value Type 1 (GEV(1)) iid error terms

f
m
iq , iq

and

jiq

are added. For questions of type

choice question, the scenario

q

I

for males and type

II

for females in every

is chosen that maximizes:

m
+ m
Viqm = Uiq
iq

Similarly, for questions of type

I

for females and of type

(22)

II

for males, the scenario

q

is

chosen that maximizes:

f
Viqf = Uiq
+ fiq

For questions of type

III ,

respondents choose the retirement scenario

(23)

q

that maximizes:

f
m
Viqj = λUiq
+ (1 − λ)Uiq
+ jiq

Given the specication of

αim

βif ,

and

(24)

our model can be estimated as a random coecient

model. Because optimization errors are independent of each other, the conditional likelihood
contribution of respondent

i

given unobserved (and observed) heterogeneity terms can be

written as a product of the probabilities

Pis

of the observed choices in questions

s = 1, . . . , S .

Each of these probabilities is a simple binary logit probability.
The parameters determining the distribution of the unobserved heterogeneity terms (the

K

mass points and their probabilities

pk )

are estimated jointly with the other parameters

6 The exact (unconditional) likelihood to be maximized

using maximum simulated likelihood.
has the form:

6

Parameters that are transformations of the probabilities are estimated to guarantee that probabilities are
positive and add up to unity.

19

L=

n Z∞ Y
S
Y

Pis (ηim , νif )fΣ (ηim , νif )d(ηim , νif )

(25)

i=1−∞ s=1
Here
terms

fΣ (ηim , νif )

(ηim , νif ),

denotes the bivariate normal density of the unobserved heterogeneity

characterized by a covariance matrix

Σ

(and mean (0,0)). This likelihood is

approximated, replacing, for each couple i, the integral, which is an expectation over
by a simulated mean of

R

draws.

(ηim , νif ),

7

5 Estimation Results
Table 4 gives the estimates of our benchmark collective retirement model.

The rst part

presents the inuence of taste shifters on the marginal utility of an individual's leisure. The
marginal utility of leisure increases with age, in line with the idea that keeping taste shifters
and nancial incentives constant, individuals prefer to reduce work eort when they get older.
This is consistent with existing ndings, such as Michaud and Vermeulen (2011).

Table 4
We tried several health indicators (cf. Table 1), and the best t was obtained with the
dummy for health limitations. The signicantly positive estimates indicate that individuals
with health problems have a higher disutility of paid work than those without health problems,
as we would expect. We do not nd signicant dierences in the marginal disutility of work
with education or satisfaction with the current job. The positive (but insignicant) estimates
for men are somewhat surprising, since they would imply a higher disutility of work for men
who are satised with their job.

7

following standard practice, these draws are transformed standard normal draws, using the Cholesky
decomposition of Σ. We use Halton draws to reduce simulation variance and use R = 50; see, e.g., Train
(2009).

20

The nal taste shifter we included is denoted as spouse responded. For men, it is equal
to 1 if the respondent is the wife; for women it is equal to 1 if the husband responded to
the survey. If the respondent was perfectly aware of the partner's preferences, the parameter
on this covariate would be zero.
signicant for women.

Point estimates are positive, insignicant for men, but

This provides evidence that on average, men have a biased view of

the preferences of their wives.

They overestimate their wives' marginal utility of leisure,

and will therefore more often choose scenarios with earlier retirement of the wife than their
wives themselves choose.

In the simulations we perform in the next sections, we will take

out this information bias. This is all based on the assumption that individuals know their
own preferences perfectly well, so that inconsistencies between their own and their partner's
reported preferences must be due to a biased perception of partner preferences.
One of the main features of this model is that preference are not egoistic and we allow
externalities in leisure, reected in the parameters
parameters on leisure spouse in Table 4. Both

αmf

αmf

and
and

β mf
β mf

in equations 17 and 18, the
are positive and signicant,

conrming the notion that joint leisure activities imply that the marginal utility of own leisure
increases if the spouse also has more leisure. Similar evidence can be found in, for example,
Gustman and Steinmeier (2000) and Michaud and Vermeulen (2011). This result also suggests
that the assumption of egoistic preferences, ignoring possible externalities in leisure, may lead
to incorrect results. This problem may of course be specic to the context of retirement and
older couples, it is not necessarily an issue for labour supply of prime age men and women.
In the next section, we will use simulations based upon our estimates to illustrate how much
of joint retirement in the data is explained by the estimated importance of complementarity
of leisure.
The marginal utility of consumption is positive and signicant for men as well as women
(parameters

αc

and

β c ).

The marginal utility of leisure (also accounting for the unobserved

heterogeneity term) is positive in the majority of cases for both males and females, but not

21

always. Particularly at younger ages, a substantial fraction of men and women have negative
marginal utility of leisure, reecting the fact that there is a group of respondents who never
choose early retirement.
The parameter

δ2

for the log wage ratio in the bargaining weight

λ (equation 21 in Section

4) is marginally signicant (t-value 1.67), implying that a higher wage rate relative to the
wage rate of the partner increases the individual's Pareto weight and bargaining power. This
also implies that the standard unitary model (implying that the household utility function
in equation 24 should be independent of the wage rates) is (marginally) rejected against the
more general collective alternative. This is in line with most ndings in the collective model
literature. In our setting, we can also identity the constant

δ1 .

The estimate is positive but

very small and not signicant. This means that if both spouses earn equal wages, they tend
to have almost the same bargaining power (0.503 for the husband, 0.497 for the wife). If the
wage rate of the husband is twice that of the wife, the estimates of

δ1

and

δ2

imply that the

husband's Pareto bargaining weight is approximately 0.592.
Both discount factors are estimated to be larger than 1. This is much larger than what
is found in studies that do not explicitly incorporate survival probabilities, but similar to the
discount rates found by French (2005). Like we do, he separately incorporates mortality risk
and nds discount rate estimates varying from 0.981 to 1.04, suggesting much more patience
than typically assumed or found when ignoring mortality.
The model has two unobserved heterogeneity terms, the random components of the coefcients

αm

and

βf .

Both are signicant, and they are almost perfectly correlated, with an

8 This implies a

estimated correlation coecient of 0.995, not signicantly dierent from 1.

strong positive correlation between husband's and wife's preferences for leisure. One plausible

8
The covariance matrix is estimated as a function of three auxiliary parameters using a Cholesky decomposition, modelling νif in 20 as a linear combination of ηim in 19 and a component independent of ηim . The
parameter σ(ηim ) and the parameter determining how much νif is related to ηim are both strongly signicant,
but the parameter driving the independent component of νif is small and insignicant (t-value 0.5).

22

explanation is assortative matching on the marriage market (men and women who get married
tend to have similar preferences), another possibility is that the preferences of husbands and
wives in these older couples (one of the two is at least age 50) have converged over time. In
the simulation exercises of the next section, we analyze to which extent this correlation can
explain joint retirement.
We estimated several alternative specications that are less general than the baseline
model presented in Table 4. Table 5 shows how these alternative specications compare to
the baseline in terms of log likelihood. Since each of the alternative models is nested in the
baseline model, they can also be compared to the baseline model using a formal likelihood
ratio test on one or two parameter restrictions.

The LR test statistic is presented in the

second column of the table. This shows that all the alternatives are rejected against the more
general baseline. Even the unitary model is clearly rejected against the baseline model, with
a p-value of 0.018; for the other models, the p-values are much smaller still.

Table 5
Detailed results for the other models can be found in the appendix. In general we nd
that, even if the restrictions imposed in the alternative models are clearly rejected by the
tests, imposing these restrictions does not have large eects on the estimates of the other
parameters. For example, the correlation between unobserved heterogeneity terms is always
close to one (except when restricted to zero) and the discount factors are always above 1
(except when set to 0.95). The coecient on the log wage rate ratio varies somewhat more,
from 0.391 to 0.533, with t-value between 1.33 and 1.84.

23

6 Simulations: Validation, explaining joint retirement, and nancial incentives
The parameter estimates provide strong evidence of both complementarity of leisure and
correlation between labour supply preferences of husband and wife.

The main purpose of

this section is to perform some simulations to illustrate how much complementarity of leisure
and correlated preferences contribute to explaining joint retirement. The simulation setup is
similar to the policy simulations in Van Soest and Vonkova (2014), but for couples instead
of individuals, and focusing on explaining joint retirement rather than gradual retirement or
measuring the eects of nancial incentives. The simulations let households choose among
stylized retirement scenarios similar to the ones presented in our stated preference questions.
This implies that we do not consider a third possible explanation of joint retirement: joint
features in the system of taxes and benets.

In our simulation set up, household income

in each time period is simply the sum of the husband's and the wife's earnings and old age
pensions, without any joint feature like the spouse allowance or health insurance through the
partner's employment.
In the simulations, we do not consider gradual or partial retirement and thus allow for
abrupt retirement only.
reverse retirement.
70.

Moreover, retirement is treated as an absorbing state, there is no

We assume males and females can both retire at any age from 60 to

This gives 121 potential outcomes for the household.

In the baseline simulation, the

replacement rate for each individual is set to 60% if the individual retires at age 65.

It is

adjusted upward with 8%per year if the individual retires later (a delayed retirement credit
of 8% per year) and reduced by 6% per year if the individual retires earlier (an actuarial
reduction factor of 0.94).

9

9

These adjustments make the reward for later retirement and the penalty for earlier retirement roughly
actuarially fair.

24

Our model implies that the probability of choosing a given cell depends on observed taste
shifters, wage rates, estimated parameters, and the unobserved heterogeneity terms. Taste
shifters and wage rates are taken from the data and parameter estimates are taken from
Table 4. Each couples unobserved heterogeneity components

ηim

and

νif

are estimated as the

posterior means, updating the estimated bivariate prior distribution with the observed choices
in the data. For each couple, we then use these posterior means and all the other information
to compute expected retirement ages of both partners.

Figure 2
A contour plot of the resulting distribution of retirement ages is sketched in Figure 2. The
modal cell is approximately age 62 for both, but the distribution is spread out and strongly
right skewed, particularly for males (whose marginal utility of leisure is, according to the
estimates, characterized by substantially more unobserved heterogeneity than the marginal
utility of leisure for women). The contour plot also shows a positive correlation between the
retirement ages of both spouses.

External validation
According to the baseline simulation with the given, stylized, choice opportunities, the average
retirement age is 65.73 for men and 63.83 for women. It is hard to compare these numbers
with average retirement ages in actual data, since real life choice opportunities will almost
certainly deviate from the 121 points stylized choice sets used in the simulations. To validate
our stated preference data, we can, however, compare our expected retirement ages for each
couple to the expected retirement ages reported by the same individuals in the HRS (wave
2010; the answer to the question when do you think you will stop working?).
Figure 3 presents the results We nd a clear positive and signicant relation between the
simulated retirement ages according to our model and the expected retirement ages in the

25

HRS data. This is what we expect if our SP data are valid: individuals with a preference for
early retirement retire earlier according to our SP data and the model based upon these data,
and also indicate a lower expected retirement age.

The R-squared of the linear regression

is 0.21 for men and 0.25 for women. This indicates that the correlation is far from perfect,
due to, among other things, the fact that the choice sets respondents use may very well
dier from the stylized choice sets in the simulations, and noise in both the simulated and
the reported expected retirement ages. Still, the fact that our SP data help to predict the
expected retirement ages reported in the HRS shows the usefulness of the SP data in addition
to revealed preferences, particularly in the context of serious identication issues that we have
in the collective model (cf. Section 2).

Explaining joint retirement
Figure 2 does not say much about joint retirement yet, since the two spouses may have dierent
ages  Joint retirement means retirement at (approximately) the same calendar time, not at
the same age. Accounting for the age dierence between partners, however, can easily compute
the dierence in calendar time between the expected time of retirement of husband and wife.
We refer to this as the retirement

distance.

We will consider the distribution of

distance,

but if we want a percentage of couple who retire jointly, we have to be more specic. We will
dene joint retirement as the event that

distance

is at most one in absolute value. This is a

rather broad denition, allowing one year of dierence between the two retirement ages.
The top row of Table 6 shows that with the given choice sets, the model predicts that

10 . Figure 4 illustrates the joint

33.6% of couples retire jointly according to this denition.

retirement decisions further, presenting a contour plot in terms of the simulated distance to
retirement for husbands and wives at the time of the survey. The shaded green area reects

10

Gustman and Steinmeier (2000), who assumed couples attain a noncooperative Nash equilibrium and
predicted that over 11% of couples retire at the same time. Our number cannot be compared to theirs, since
they use a completely dierent framework and denition

26

joint retirement outcomes, and the gure clearly shows that this area covers a range where
the density of simulated retirement ages is relatively high (the distribution is unimodal with
the largest density at approximately (10,6); lighter contour lines indicate higher density).
The remaining rows of Table 6 show how the percentage of joint retirement changes in
a counterfactual simulation where one of the potential explanations for joint retirement is
taken out. The row Shuing wages shows what happens if randomly reassign the males'
and females' wage rates in the sample to the couples in the sample.

This takes out one

source of correlation due to observed heterogeneity: males' and females' wage rates are now
independent of each other (but also independent of all the taste shifters).

As expected,

average simulated retirement ages of men and women hardly change compared to the baseline
simulation.

The simulated probability of joint retirement is, somewhat surprisingly, even

larger than according to the baseline simulation. This suggests that the positive correlation
in husbands' and wives' wage rates (0.056 in the data) does not explain joint retirement. This
is also illustrated in Figure 5. The blue line in this gure gives the baseline simulation of the
distribution of

distance

The orange line is the distribution according to the counterfactual

simulation with wages reshued, giving somewhat more joint retirement

−1 ≤ distance ≤ 1)

than the baseline.
The third row in Table 6 eliminates the correlation between the two unobserved heterogeneity terms.

Here we use unobserved heterogeneity terms with the same variances as in

the baseline simulation, but with zero correlation coecient. This makes quite a dierence,
since the estimated correlation used in the baseline simulation is 0.995. Joint retirement drops
dramatically, from 33.6% to 17.7% according to our broad denition.

In other words, cor-

related labour supply preferences, due to assortative matching or convergence in preferences
over time, can explain almost half of all joint retirement decisions. This is much higher than
what is found in Gustman and Steinmeier (2000, 2004).
The nal counter-factual simulation in Table 6 focuses on the role of complementarities

27

in leisure.

In this simulation, we xed the spouse's leisure in the individual utility func-

tion to the average level in the sample, so that the individual's marginal utility of leisure
no longer depends on the partner's leisure. This simulation gives a somewhat smaller probability of joint retirement: 30.4% instead of 33.6% in Table 7 (broad denition). It implies
that complementarity in leisure can explain almost 10% ((33.6-30.2)/33.6)100%) of all joint
retirement decisions. See also the red curve in Figure 5, which has less density around 0 than
the blue baseline curve. This result is similar to that of Casanova Rivas (2010), who, using
a stochastic dynamic optimization model, found that leisure complementarities account for
13% of observed joint retirement.

Our simulations results therefore lead to the conclusion

that unobserved heterogeneity plays an much more important role than complementarities in
leisure. Stancanelli and van Soest (2016) use a double regression discontinuity approach to
investigate joint leisure before and after retirement.

Their results also suggest that leisure

complementarities are not the main driver of joint retirement.

Joint retirement and nancial incentives
Table 7 illustrates how sensitive individual and joint retirement decisions are for the nancial
incentives, even if these incentives do not directly create joint features in the budget restrictions. The top row reproduces the baseline simulation already discussed above. The second
row shows what happens if there is no actuarial penalty on retiring earlier and no reward
for retiring later. This reduces incentives to work and therefore lead to earlier retirement for
both partners. Retirement ages will be much more concentrated in the range 60-65, implying
that more couples retire in the same year or adjacent years.

11 Accordingly, joint retirement

(according to our broad denition) increases from 33.6% in the baseline simulation to 43.5%
in the no penalty simulation. The high penalty simulation is essentially the opposite of

11

Not everyone retires at the earliest possible age, since wages are higher than pensions and because,
according to our estimates, a substantial group of individuals has negative marginal utility of leisure at early
retirement ages (partly due to the large unobserved heterogeneity component).

28

the no penalty case. Rewards for later retirement are higher than in the baseline situation
(see notes to the table for details), and individuals are stimulated to retire later. The average
retirement ages of men and women increases, but the distribution of retirement ages is also
more spread out, so that fewer couples retire at approximately the same time. Accordingly,
the percentage retiring at most one year from each other drops from 33.6% to 27.6%.
The nal two rows concern what is sometimes called the income or pension wealth eect
on retirement (cf. Van Soest and Vonkova (2014)). Without changing rewards for earlier or
later retirement compared to the baseline, pensions are made less (low generosity) or more
(high generosity), irrespective of the chosen retirement rate, so that total pension wealth
and life-cycle income are lower or higher than in the baseline simulation. If leisure is a normal
good, lowering life-cycle income (low generosity) leads to more labour supply, i.e., later
retirement. This is indeed what the table shows for both spouses, although the eects are not
very large, considering the substantial reduction in replacement rates (from 60% to 40% when
retiring at age 65. Accordingly, like in the high penalty simulation, retirement ages are more
spread out and joint retirement becomes less likely. The nal row (high generosity) gives
essentially the opposite eect: higher pensions lead to earlier retirement, more concentrated
around the early ages. Joint retirement increases from 33.6% to 36.2%.
All in all, the bottom panel of the table shows that apart from complementarities in leisure
and correlation in preferences, the characteristics of the choice set (the budget opportunities)
are an important determinant of the fraction of couples retiring jointly, even if pension income
is not explicitly linked to the retirement age of the partner.

7 Conclusion
The collective model is valuable tool to describe the behaviour of multi-person households,
outperforming the unitary model which assumes that the household acts as a single utility-

29

maximizing agent. On the other hand, estimating a collective model requires a lot from the
data, and revealed preference data alone are typically insucient without additional assumptions. Furthermore, it typically involves making strong assumptions regarding expectations
and knowledge of preferences within the couple. In this paper, we consider a collective model
of labour supply and retirement of couples that allows for subjective expectations and misperceptions of spouse preferences. We show that additional assumptions can be avoided when
stated preference data are used instead of revealed preference data.

Asking survey ques-

tions on choices between dierent hypothetical retirement scenarios made from three dierent
perspectives, own preferences, partner preferences, and most likely outcome for the couple,
leads to a natural way of identifying preference parameters as well as parameters driving the
household decision.
Stated preferences have been successfully applied to study individual retirement decisions.
We acknowledge that the stated preference questions for couples are more challenging than
those for individuals, particularly since we also ask respondents to make decisions using the
preferences of their spouse.

Indeed we nd that male respondents have a systematically

biased view of their wives' labour supply preferences, overestimating their disutility of doing
paid work. We incorporate this bias in our model and correct for it when explaining joint
retirement.

We then validate our SP data and the structural model by comparing model

predictions with expected retirement ages directly reported by the same individuals. We nd
that the SP data have substantial predictive power: individuals who prefer later retirement
according to the stated preference model, also tend to report a later expected age of retirement.
Our estimates of the structural model give plausible results. In line with the literature,
the neo-classical unitary model is rejected and a higher relative wage rate increase bargaining
power within the couple. If wage rates of husband and wife are equal, we do not nd evidence
of dierences in bargaining power. We nd signicant evidence of (positive) complementarities in both partners' leisure and we nd very strong evidence of a positive correlation between

30

partners' labour supply preferences. Our simulations suggest that correlation between preferences explain a much larger part of joint retirement than complementarities in leisure. On the
other hand, the percentage of couples retiring jointly also strongly depends on budget opportunities (pension levels and accruals), even if there is no explicit link between an individual's
pension and the partner's labour supply or retirement decision. Our simulation results should
therefore interpreted as a qualitative illustration only, the magnitudes of the eects will be
dierent if we use people's actual choice sets instead of the stylized scenarios in our current
analysis. Yet, this papers shows that the collective model is perfectly suited to allow for a
realistic representation of household behavior in a context with subjective expectations and
imperfect knowledge of preferences.

References
Banks, J., Blundell, R., and Casanova Rivas, M. (2007). The dynamics of retirement behavior
in couples: Reduced-form evidence from England and the US. Mimeo, University College
London.

Barsky, R. B., Kimball, M. S., Juster, F. T., and Shapiro, M. D. (1997). Preference parameters
and behavioral heterogeneity:
survey.

An experimental approach in the health and retirement

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112:537  579.

Blau, D. M. (1998). Labor force dynamics of older married couples.

Journal of Labor Eco-

nomics, 16(3):595629.
Bourguignon, F., Browning, M., Chiappori, P.-A., and Lechene, V. (1993).

Intra house-

hold allocation of consumption: A model and some evidence from French data.

d'Economie et de Statistique, 29:137156.

31

Annales

Casanova Rivas, M. (2010). Happy together: A structural model of couples joint retirement
choices. Unpublished Manuscript, Department of Economics, UCLA, Los Angeles.

Cherchye, L., De Rock, B., and Vermeulen, F. (2009).

Opening the black box of intra-

household decision making: Theory and nonparametric empirical tests of general collective
consumption models.

Journal of Political Economy, 117(6):10741104.

Chiappori, P.-A. (1988). Rational household labor supply.

Econometrica, 56(1):6390.

Chiappori, P.-A. (1992). Collective labor supply and welfare.

Journal of Political Economy,

100(3):437467.

Chiappori, P.-A., Fortin, B., and Lacroix, G. (2002). Marriage market, divorce legislation,
and household labor supply.

Journal of Political Economy, 110(1):3772.

Coile, C. (2004). Retirement incentives and couples' retirement decisions.

Topics in Economic

Analysis & Policy, 4(1):Article 17.
Couper, M. P., Ofstedal, M. B., and Lee, S. (2013). Encouraging record use for nancial asset
questions in a web survey.

Journal of Survey Statistics and Methodology, 1(2):171182.

Delavande, A. and Rohwedder, S. (2008). Eliciting subjective probabilities in internet surveys.

Public Opinion Quarterly, 72(5):866  891.
Elsayed, A., de Grip, A., Fouarge, D., and Montizaan, R. (2018). Gradual retirement, nancial
incentives, and labour supply of older workers: Evidence from a stated preference analysis.

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 150:277294.
Fortin, B. and Lacroix, G. (1997). A test of the unitary and collective models of household
labour supply.

The Economic Journal, 107(443):933955.

32

French, E. (2005). The eects of health, wealth, and wages on labour supply and retirement
behaviour.

The Review of Economic Studies, 72(2):395427.

Gustman, A. L. and Steinmeier, T. (2009). Integrating retirement models. NBER Working
Paper No. 15607, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gustman, A. L. and Steinmeier, T. L. (2000). Retirement in dual-career families: a structural
model.

Journal of Labor Economics, 18(3):503545.

Gustman, A. L. and Steinmeier, T. L. (2004). Social security, pensions and retirement behaviour within the family.

Journal of Applied Econometrics, 19(6):723737.

Hospido, L. and Zamarro, G. (2014). Retirement patterns of couples in Europe.

IZA Journal

of European Labor Studies, 3(12):118.
Hurd, M. D. (1989). The joint retirement decision of husbands and wives.

Social Security

Bulletin, 54(1):2932.
Hurd, M. D. (2009). Subjective probabilities in household surveys.

Annual Review of Eco-

nomics, 1(1):543562.
Kapteyn, A. and Kooreman, P. (1992). Household labor supply: What kind of data can tell
us how many decision makers there are?

Kooreman, P. and Kapteyn, A. (1990).

European Economic Review, 36(2):365371.
On the empirical implementation of some game

theoretic models of household labor supply.

Journal of Human Resources, 25(4):584598.

Levy, H., Janke, A. T., and Langa, K. M. (2015). Health literacy and the digital divide among
older Americans.

Journal of General Internal Medicine, 30(3):284289.

Louviere, J. J., Hensher, D. A., and Swait, J. D. (2000).

and Applications. Cambridge University Press.
33

Stated Choice Methods: Analysis

Manski, C. F. (2004). Measuring expectations.

Econometrica, 72(5):13291376.

McCarty, T. A. (1990). The eect of social security on married women's labor force participation.

National Tax Journal, 43(1):95110.

Michaud, P.-C. and Vermeulen, F. (2011). A collective labor supply model with complementarities in leisure: Identication and estimation by means of panel data.

Labour Economics,

18(2):159167.

Revelt, D. and Train, K. (1998). Mixed logit with repeated choices: Households' choices of
appliance eciency level.

The Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(4):647657.

Smith, J. P. (2011). Reconstructing childhood health histories.

Demography, 46(2):387403.

Stancanelli, E. G. F. and van Soest, A. (2016). Partners' Leisure Time Truly Together upon
Retirement.

IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 5(12).

Train, K. (2009).

Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University Press.

Van Soest, A. and Vonkova, H. (2014).

How sensitive are retirement decisions to nancial

incentives? a stated preference analysis.

Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29(2):246264.

34

Figures

Figure 1:

Screen Shot of Stated-preference Scenario

Expected Retirement Age Wife

69
68
67
66
65
64
63
62
61
60

Figure 2:

60

61

62
63
64
65
66
67
Expected Retirement Age Husband

68

69

Simulated Distribution of Retirement Ages, Baseline Model

35

80

80

expected retirement age (HRS)

expected retirement age (HRS)

85

75
70
65
60
y=0.19x+52.05: R 2=0.21

55
60

65
70
75
expected retirement age (Model)

80

75
70
65
60
55

y=0.31x+44.97: R 2=0.25
55

60
65
70
75
expected retirement age (Model)

(a) Males

Simulated Retirement Ages and Expected Retirement Ages in HRS

Expected Distance (yrs) to Retirement Wife

Figure 3:

Figure 4:

(b) Females

20.0
17.5
15.0
12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
0.0

2.5
5.0
7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5
Expected Distance (yrs) to Retirement Husband

20.0

Distribution of Simulated Distance to Retirement Husbands and Wives:

Shaded area represents distances that are at most one 1 year apart.

36

80

0.12
0.10

Baseline
Shuffling Wages
Shuffling UH
No Complementarity

density

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
−15

−10

−5
0
5
difference in distance to retirement

10

15

Figure 5: Simulated Distributions of Dierence between Timing of Retirement of
Husband and Wife.

37

Tables
wives
mean
age

husbands
sd

mean

sd
4.18

54.54

4.49

56.38

any health limitations

0.09

0.28

0.07

0.25

college educated

0.42

0.49

0.44

0.50

job satisfaction
hourly wage

0.75

0.43

0.75

0.43

25.22

53.69

31.07

31.81

prov lives to 75 (relative to life-table)

0.93

0.25

0.97

0.32

probability has health limitations at age 62

0.39

0.26

0.40

0.27

Observations

604

Table 1:

Summary Statistics Explanatory Variables:

604
Missing wages are imputed using

OLS predictions from previous wages, age and education. Job satisfaction determined using
whether respondent is satised or very satised with job. Subjective survival probabilities to
age 75 reported as a ratio of the life-table probability by age and sex.

Retirement Age
Scenario

Male

Female

G1

G2

G3

G4

G5

1

65

2

62

68

50 60

55 65

60 70

65 75

70 80

65

40 40

45 45

50 50

55 55

60 60

3

68

4

62 (P) 65

68

60 50

65 55

70 60

75 65

80 70

65

50 40

55 45

60 50

65 55

5

70 60

68

65 (P) 68

70 60

75 65

80 70

85 75

90 80

6

65

65

50 50

55 55

60 60

65 65

70 70

Description of Retirement Scenarios in SP Questions by Randomized
Group using an Example: In Scenario 4 and 5, P refers to partial retirement. If the

Table 2:

respondents or the spouses partially retire, their disposable incomes do not change.

Their

working hours reduce by 40 percent. Respondents were randomly assigned to one of the ve
groups

G1 , G2 , G3 , G4 , G5 ,

with dierent replacement rates in all scenarios. The rst element

in each group column gives the RR of the respondent while the second gives the RR of the
spouse.

38

Female respondents
Made for

Male respondents

Scenario 2

Scenario 4

Skipped

Scenario 2

Scenario 4

Skipped

Males

0.324

0.568

0.108

0.296

0.632

0.071

Females

0.367

0.512

0.120

0.357

0.564

0.079

Both

0.349

0.531

0.120

0.296

0.629

0.075

Scenario 5

Scenario 2

Skipped

Scenario 5

Scenario 2

Skipped

Males

0.454

0.420

0.127

0.518

0.389

0.093

Females

0.469

0.401

0.130

0.471

0.436

0.093

Both

0.478

0.392

0.130

0.511

0.400

0.089

Scenario 3

Scenario 6

Skipped

Scenario 3

Scenario 6

Skipped

Males

0.293

0.571

0.136

0.425

0.493

0.082

Females

0.312

0.534

0.154

0.436

0.479

0.086

Both

0.306

0.549

0.145

0.443

0.464

0.093

Observations
Table 3:

324

280

Proportion of Choices Made by Males and Females:

Fraction of respondents

(column) who have chosen a particular scenario (three choice situations) for either one of the
spouses, or both (rows).

In the rst choice situation, respondents chose between scenarios

2 and 4 (they could skip), the second, between scenarios 5 and 2 and nally in the third,
between scenarios 3 and 6.

39

Males

Females

αim

βif

-1.686

-0.738

(0.476)

(0.353)

Own leisure
constant
age

0.434

0.472

(0.065)

(0.085)

health limitations

1.609

1.411

(0.581)

(0.502)

0.168

-0.198

(0.294)

(0.238)

0.188

0.986

(0.350)

(0.357)

college
spouse responded
satised job

0.095

-0.209

(0.348)

(0.258)

leisure spouse

0.134

0.080

(0.023)

(0.022)

αc

βc

Consumption

0.154

0.115

(0.037)

(0.037)

ρm

ρf

1.030

1.018

(0.010)

(0.013)

Discount factors

λ

Weights
Constant

0.014
0.330

log( wwmf )

0.517
0.308

Heterogeneity
Std.Dev
Correlation

log L
Table 4:

Parameter Estimates:

ηim

νif

2.801

1.931

0.995
-2818.3

Maximum likelihood estimates and standard errors for the

collective model with subjective survival expectations.

40

Loglikehood Value

LR Statistic

-2818.345

0.000

Baseline

Table 5:

Fixed Discount Rates (2)

-2846.720

56.749

No Correlation UH (1)

-2899.353

162.016

No Complementarity (2)

-2855.766

74.843

Unitary (1)

-2821.128

5.567

Loglikelihood Ratio Test Statistics for Restricted Models:

number of re-

strictions in parenthesis. The critical value at the 5% level for 1 restriction is 3.84 and 5.99
for two restrictions.

Ret Age Males

Ret Age Females

Fraction Joint

Baseline

65.728

63.830

0.336

Shuing Wages

65.629

63.804

0.369

Shuing UH

65.765

63.892

0.177

No Complementarity

66.142

64.472

0.304

Simulated Retirement Ages and Fraction Retiring at Most One Year from
Each Other: Explaining Joint Retirement
Table 6:

Ret Age Males

Ret Age Females

Fraction Retiring Jointly

65.728

63.830

0.336

No Penalty

63.759

62.244

0.435

High Penalty

66.478

64.399

0.276

Low Generosity

66.155

64.095

0.267

High Generosity

65.453

63.603

0.362

Baseline

Simulated Retirement Ages and Fraction Retiring at Most One Year from
Each Other: Financial Incentives: The High Penality scenario refers to an Actuarial
Table 7:

Reduction Factor of 9% and Delayed Retirement Credit of 11% (compared to 6% and 8% in
the baseline). The low generosity scenario refers to a replacement rate of 40% while the high
generosity scenario refers to a replacement rate of 80%

41

8 Appendix: Estimation Results Alternative Specications
Own leisure
constant

Males

Females

αim

βif

-3.001

-1.027

(0.904)

(0.691)

0.697

0.907

(0.111)

(0.126)

age
health limitations

2.946

2.528

(1.023)

(0.945)

college

0.359

-0.443

(0.555)

(0.467)

spouse responded

0.440

1.753

(0.687)

(0.641)

0.208

-0.612

(0.689)

(0.511)

0.310

0.168

(0.038)

(0.033)

αc

βc

0.666

0.429

(0.056)

(0.042)

ρm

ρf

0.950

0.950

(0.000)

(0.000)

satised job
leisure spouse
Consumption

Discount factors

λ

Weights
Constant

0.006
0.328

log( wwmf )

0.521
0.294

Heterogeneity
Std.Dev
Correlation

log L
Table 8:

ηim

νif

5.179

3.763

0.999
-2846.7

Parameter Estimates with Fixed Discount Factors:

Maximum likelihood

estimates and standard errors for the collective model with subjective survival expectations.

42

Males

Females

αim

βif

-1.534

-0.842

(0.479)

(0.378)

0.400

0.445

(0.059)

(0.081)

Own leisure
constant
age
health limitations

1.480

1.268

(0.607)

(0.495)

college

0.219

-0.076

(0.299)

(0.228)

0.223

0.807

(0.352)

(0.339)

0.129

-0.220

(0.342)

(0.262)

spouse responded
satised job
leisure spouse

0.119

0.075

(0.021)

(0.021)

αc

βc

0.127

0.094

(0.031)

(0.031)

ρm

ρf

1.039

1.026

(0.010)

(0.012)

Consumption

Discount factors

λ

Weights
Constant

0.092
0.335

log( wwmf )

0.391
0.291

Heterogeneity
Std.Dev
Correlation

log L
Table 9:

ηim

νif

2.689

1.760

0.000
-2899.4

Parameter Estimates without Correlation in Unobserved Heterogeneity:

Maximum likelihood estimates and standard errors for the collective model.

43

Males

Females

αim

βif

-1.217

-0.433

(0.401)

(0.297)

0.455

0.457

(0.068)

(0.081)

Own leisure
constant
age
health limitations

1.360

1.242

(0.523)

(0.447)

college

0.094

-0.190

(0.257)

(0.211)

0.543

1.170

(0.304)

(0.323)

0.123

-0.152

(0.305)

(0.226)

spouse responded
satised job
leisure spouse

0.000

0.000

(0.000)

(0.000)

αc

βc

0.068

0.064

(0.021)

(0.021)

ρm

ρf

1.045

1.030

(0.012)

(0.013)

Consumption

Discount factors

λ

Weights
Constant

-0.064
0.320

log( wwmf )

0.533
0.290

Heterogeneity
Std.Dev
Correlation

log L
Table 10:

ηim

νif

2.462

1.719

0.996
-2855.8

Parameter Estimates without Complementarity in Leisure:

likelihood estimates and standard errors for the collective model.

44

Maximum

Males

Females

αim

βif

-1.633

-0.761

(0.479)

(0.354)

0.440

0.476

(0.066)

(0.087)

Own leisure
constant
age
health limitations

1.602

1.400

(0.580)

(0.502)

college

0.189

-0.190

(0.295)

(0.240)

0.172

0.955

(0.353)

(0.357)

0.031

-0.200

(0.351)

(0.260)

spouse responded
satised job
leisure spouse

0.132

0.083

(0.022)

(0.022)

αc

βc

0.152

0.116

(0.037)

(0.037)

ρm

ρf

1.031

1.018

(0.010)

(0.013)

Consumption

Discount factors

λ

Weights
Constant

0.054
0.314

log( wwmf )

0.000
0.000

Heterogeneity
Std.Dev
Correlation

log L
Table 11:

ηim

νif

2.817

1.944

0.995
-2821.1

Parameter Estimates of Unitary Model:

standard errors

45

Maximum likelihood estimates and

