                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          GLOBAL TRENDS IN INTEREST RATES

                                      Marco Del Negro
                                     Domenico Giannone
                                      Marc P. Giannoni
                                      Andrea Tambalotti

                                      Working Paper 25039
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25039


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




We are grateful to Carlo Favero, Stefano Neri, and Ken West for their thoughtful feedback, to
Ozge Akinci, Giancarlo Corsetti, Stefano Eusepi, Paolo Pesenti, and several other New York Fed
economists for very helpful suggestions, and to Brandyn Bok for outstanding research assistance.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
position of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Dallas, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Marco Del Negro, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tambalotti.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Trends in Interest Rates
Marco Del Negro, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tambalotti
NBER Working Paper No. 25039
September 2018
JEL No. E43,E44,F31,G12

                                           ABSTRACT

The trend in the world real interest rate for safe and liquid assets fluctuated close to 2 percent for
more than a century, but has dropped significantly over the past three decades. This decline has
been common among advanced economies, as trends in real interest rates across countries have
converged over this period. It was driven by an increase in the convenience yield for safety and
liquidity and by lower global economic growth.


Marco Del Negro                                          Marc P. Giannoni
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                         Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
Research and Statistics Group                            Research Department
33 Liberty Street, 3rd Floor                             2200 N Pearl St.
New York, NY 10045                                       Dallas, TX 75201
marco.delnegro@ny.frb.org                                United States
                                                         mpgiannoni@gmail.com
Domenico Giannone
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                         Andrea Tambalotti
Research and Statistics Group                            Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street, 3rd Floor                             Research and Statistics Group
New York, NY 10045                                       33 Liberty Street, 3rd Floor
dgiannon2@gmail.com                                      New York, NY 10045
                                                         a.tambalotti@gmail.com




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25039
                                                                                              1


1    Introduction

Ten years after the most acute phase of the financial crisis, the world economy remains
mired in a low-interest-rate environment. At the time of this writing, the nominal yields on
ten-year government bonds are below 3 percent in the United States, a bit above 1 percent
in the U.K., around 40 basis points in Germany, and essentially zero in Japan. How unusual
is this situation from a historical perspective? What role do global factors play in depressing
interest rates? Does this phenomenon reflect only headwinds still emanating from the global
financial crisis that will eventually dissipate, or is it connected to secular developments that
partly predate the Great Recession?

    To address these questions, we study the joint dynamics of short- and long-term interest
rates, inflation, and consumption for seven now-advanced economies since 1870. We do so
through a flexible time-series model—a vector autoregression (VAR) with common trends.
This econometric tool allows us to use economic theory to model and interpret the long-run
relationships across variables, while remaining agnostic on whether these restrictions hold at
other frequencies. For example, the absence of arbitrage opportunities in the long-run implies
that we can interpret the estimated common trend in real interest rates across countries as
the trend in the world real interest rate. The same theoretical framework also suggests a
decomposition of this trend into some of its potential drivers, such as global consumption
growth.

    The interest rates in our data set are on either government securities or close substitutes,
which are relatively safe and liquid compared to other privately issued assets. Therefore, we
allow the convenience yield for safety and liquidity offered by these “safe” assets to play a
role in driving the international cross section of returns. To measure this convenience yield,
the empirical analysis also includes Moody’s Baa corporate bond yield for the United States,
as in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012). Under certain assumptions, which we
will discuss, this information is sufficient to capture the long-run effect of convenience on
the world interest rate. This approach is similar to the one we pursued in Del Negro et al.
(2017), though that paper focused only on U.S. data over a much shorter sample.

    Four main results emerge from our empirical analysis. First, the estimated trend in the
world real interest rate is stable around values a bit below 2 percent through the 1940s. It
rises gradually after World War II, to a peak close to 2.5 percent around 1980, but it has been
declining ever since, dipping to about 0.5 percent in 2016, the last available year of data.
The exact level of this trend is surrounded by substantial uncertainty, but the drop over the
                                                                                                          2


last few decades is precisely estimated. A decline of this magnitude is unprecedented in our
sample. It did not even occur during the Great Depression in the 1930s.

       Second, the trend in the world interest rate since the late 1970s essentially coincides
with that of the U.S. In other words, the U.S. trend is the global trend over the past four
decades. In fact, this has been increasingly the case for almost all other countries in our
sample: idiosyncratic trends have been vanishing since the late 1970s. This convergence
in cross-country interest rates is arguably the result of growing integration in international
asset markets.1

       Third, the trend decline in the world real interest rate over the last few decades is driven
to a significant extent by an increase in convenience yields, which points to a growing imbal-
ance between the global demand for safety and liquidity and its supply. This contribution
is especially concentrated in the period since the mid-1990s, supporting the view that the
Asian financial crisis of 1997 and the Russian default in 1998, with the ensuing collapse of
LTCM, were key turning points in the emergence of global imbalances (e.g., Bernanke, 2005;
Bernanke et al., 2011; Caballero and Krishnamurthy, 2009; Caballero, 2010; Caballero and
Farhi, 2014; Caballero et al., 2015; Gourinchas and Rey, 2016; Hall, 2016; Caballero et al.,
2017; Caballero, 2018).

       Fourth, a global decline in the growth rate of per-capita consumption, possibly linked to
demographic shifts, is a further notable factor pushing global real rates lower. Its contribu-
tion is comparable in magnitude to that of the convenience yield since 1980, but only about
half as important over the last twenty years (and less precisely estimated).

       An important implication of these findings is that the persistent macroeconomic head-
winds emanating from the financial crisis, including the effects of the extraordinary policies
that were put in place to combat it, are far from being the only cause of the low-interest-rate
environment. Longer-standing secular forces connected with a decline in economic growth
since the early 1980s and the rise of convenience yields since the late 1990s also appear to
be crucial culprits, even though these trends might have been exacerbated by the crisis. In
fact, Caballero (2018) observes that the causality might run the other way, from the global
safe asset imbalances that emerged in the late 1990s, depressing safe returns, to the financial
fragility and macroeconomic turbulence that have afflicted the world economy since then.
   1
       Our finding of a “global trend” in real interest rates overshadowing country-specific trends presents
interesting similarities with the findings of recent literature that emphasizes the emergence of a “global
cycle”—or global factor—explaining a very large share of the variance in returns of risky assets around the
world (e.g., Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2015; Gerko and Rey, 2017).
                                                                                                               3


Furthermore, the global nature of the drivers of low interest rates limits the extent to which
national policies can address the problem.

       This paper is connected to several strands of the literature. The steady decline in real
interest rates over the past few decades has been at the center of the academic and policy
debate at least since the mid-2000s, when Bernanke (2005) suggested that a global saving glut
might be holding down interest rates around the world. Following the Great Recession and
slow subsequent recovery, secular stagnation became one of the most popular explanations
for this phenomenon, as argued most prominently by Summers (2014).2 In an attempt to
shed light on this debate, a number of empirical papers have investigated the drivers of
secular movements in real interest rates. Lunsford and West (2017), for instance, study long
time-series for the United States. They find that demographic factors are robustly correlated
with real interest rates, while productivity growth is not.3

       A concept that has proved useful in the analysis of the causes of low interest rates is
the natural real rate of interest, or r∗ , which Laubach and Williams (2016) define as “the
real short-term interest rate consistent with the economy operating at its full potential once
transitory shocks to aggregate supply or demand have abated.” Estimates of r∗ therefore
focus on the underlying, secular drivers of the movements in interest rates, abstracting from
shorter-term influences such as those related to the stance of monetary policy. In Del Negro
et al. (2017), we discuss in some detail the theoretical and empirical connections between the
concept of r∗ proposed by Laubach and Williams (2003), the one obtained in DSGE models
with nominal rigidities, and the type of low-frequency movements in real interest rates that
are the focus of this paper.4

       Compared to Del Negro et al. (2017), where we restrict attention to U.S. data since the
1960s, this paper significantly widens the scope of the analysis by including data from seven
advanced economies dating back to 1870. Aside from generating evidence on the trends in
interest rates for a wider set of countries, this paper identifies an explicitly global component
in the secular movements of international interest rates, creating a direct connection with
   2
       Eggertsson et al. (2017) provide a quantitative evaluation of the factors leading to secular stagnation in
a calibrated overlapping-generations model.
   3
     Other recent work stressing the role of demographics in the movements of interest rates includes Aksoy
et al. (2015), Favero et al. (2016), Carvalho et al. (2016), Gagnon et al. (2016), and Ferrero et al. (2017).
   4
     Recent work estimating variants of r∗ with data from the United States includes Justiniano and Primiceri
(2010), Barsky et al. (2014), Curdia et al. (2015), Kiley (2015), Lubik and Matthes (2015), Pescatori and
Turunen (2015), Christensen and Rudebusch (2016), Crump et al. (2016), Johannsen and Mertens (2016),
and Koenig and Armen (2017). Yellen (2015) and Williams (2018) discuss its monetary policy implications.
                                                                                                            4


several hypotheses on the origin of the low-interest-rate environment based on worldwide
forces, such as Bernanke’s saving glut hypothesis.

       Holston et al. (2017) estimate r∗ using international data, in their case for the U.S.,
Canada, the euro area, and the U.K. since 1961. Different from our approach, though, their
estimates do not account explicitly for the global dimension of r∗ , treating each country as a
closed economy.5 The work of Hamilton et al. (2016) and Borio et al. (2017) is also related
to ours, as they study the potential drivers of r∗ using data from the 1800s for a number of
countries. However, neither of these papers explicitly takes into account the comovement in
interest rates across countries, which is the focus of our analysis.6 Gourinchas and Rey (2018)
take a more explicitly global perspective in studying the connection between real returns,
consumption, and wealth over long spans of time. They apply a present-value approach to
data for the aggregate of the G4 economies, which they treat as a closed world economy.

       Jordà et al. (2017a) broaden the historical analysis to include the rate of return on
stocks and housing together with those on short- and long-term bonds for 16 countries.
They measure global trends using decadal moving averages, which are then averaged across
countries. As we do, they find that global safe interest rates have been declining since the
mid-1980s, while risky returns have been roughly stable over this period, consistent with the
safety trap hypothesis. However, they identify even more pronounced declines in the safe rate
in the period comprising the two world wars. This result contrasts with our finding that the
trend in the world real interest rate was relatively stable over this period. The source of this
discrepancy is that, unlike moving averages, our trend-cycle decomposition attributes much
of the decline in rates in the interwar period to cyclical fluctuations. We argue that decadal
moving averages conflate trends with cyclical variations. A further difference between the
two approaches is that we use no-arbitrage arguments to explicitly define the trend in the
world real interest rate as the common component of the trends in real rates across countries,
rather than as a simple cross-sectional average.7

       The theoretical framework described in Section 3, from which we deduce restrictions on
the long-run behavior of global real rates and their drivers, is based on the vast literature
   5
       Neri and Gerali (2017) estimate and compare the natural rate of interest in two closed-economy DSGE
models for the U.S. and the euro area.
  6
    Hamilton et al. (2016) extract trends country by country. Borio et al. (2017) run a panel regression of
long-term interest rates across countries on a number of possible drivers, but their approach ignores dynamics
and hence the distinction between trend and cycle as well as their comovement across countries.
   7
     King and Low (2014a) also define the “world” real interest rate more informally as a weighted average
across countries, as did Barro and Sala-i Martin (1990) in a much earlier paper.
                                                                                                               5


in international economics on the connection between interest rates, inflation, and exchange
rates across countries. This work has mostly focused on testing interest rate and purchasing
power parity conditions, and on investigating the possible sources of their failures. Engel
(2014) surveys the part of this literature that deals with the relationship (or lack thereof)
between exchange rates and interest rate differentials—the so-called uncovered interest rate
parity (UIP). Unlike our paper, most of this literature estimates this relationship without
distinguishing between fluctuations at different frequencies, even though assumptions on
the long-run behavior of some of the variables are often maintained in the analysis. Engel
(2016) is a prominent recent example of this approach. He uses a vector auto-correction
model (VECM) that embeds long-run restrictions to study possible sources of deviation
from UIP.

       A related strand of literature has focused on the long-run relationship between exchange
rates, prices, and productivity, following Froot and Rogoff (1995). More recent work in
this vein is by Chong et al. (2010) who model the joint dynamics of nominal interest rates,
inflation, exchange rates, and economic growth for a panel of 21 countries spanning data
since 1973. While their results focus on the cointegration between the level of the real
exchange rate and relative productivity between countries, which they interpret as evidence
of a Balassa-Samuelson effect, their findings are consistent with our maintained assumption
that the growth rate of the real exchange rate is stationary, even though its level might not
be.8

       Finally, we contribute to the fast-growing literature on the role of convenience yields
in depressing the returns of safe assets (e.g., Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012;
Greenwood and Vayanos, 2014; Greenwood et al., 2015; Nagel, 2016). Several recent papers
highlight the role of convenience yields in the international context. Valchev (2017) presents
a general equilibrium model linking international convenience yields with monetary and
fiscal policy. The resulting endogenous fluctuations in convenience yields can account for
the predictability of excess returns of foreign over domestic bonds at various horizons first
discovered by Engel (2016).9 Jiang et al. (2018) discuss the role of various international
   8
       Also related is the work on pass-through of exchange rate movements into prices as summarized by
Burstein and Gopinath (2014), as well as the time-series literature that applies factor analysis to international
data sets for inflation (e.g., Ciccarelli and Mojon, 2010) or interest rates (e.g., Diebold et al., 2008; Coroneo
et al., 2018; Nikolaou and Modugno, 2009). Chin et al. (2018) study long-term international interest rate
comovement in the context of a DSGE model.
  9
    Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017) similarly stress the role of international asset demand shocks in driving the
exchange rate disconnect and the observed UIP violations. Those shocks, which they microfound in a general
                                                                                                            6


investor preferences for the safety and liquidity of bonds issued by different countries in
driving potential violations of covered interest rate parity. They show that the convenience
yield that foreign investors derive from holding U.S. Treasuries accounts for up to 25 percent
of the quarterly movements in the dollar exchange rate over the past thirty years.10 Du
et al. (2017) measure the difference in the convenience yields between U.S. Treasuries and
the bonds of other sovereigns, which they call the U.S. Treasury premium. They find that,
at medium- and long-term maturities, this premium rose significantly during the financial
crisis, but has since disappeared. At shorter maturities, to the contrary, the premium remains
positive around levels similar to those observed before the financial crisis.

    Our results are closely in line with this literature in stressing the important role of
convenience yields in driving international returns. They are complementary because we
focus on the contribution of these factors in driving the international comovement of interest
rates at low frequencies, and over a much longer span of time. Therefore, we can explicitly
address the question of how the global dimension of the demand for safety and liquidity has
shaped the secular decline in real rates around the world over the past few decades, which
also allows us to make contact with the large literature on r∗ discussed above.

    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the VAR with common
trends that we use in the empirical analysis. Section 3 lays out the theory from which we
derive long-run restrictions for the joint behavior of real interest rates across countries. This
theory also provides us with a well-defined notion of a global interest rate trend. Section 4
presents the empirical results. Section 5 concludes.



2     Econometric Framework

The empirical model is a VAR with common trends. It is essentially the same as that used in
Del Negro et al. (2017) down to the specification and parameterization of the priors. It is a
state-space model estimated with Bayesian methods, which we use to perform a multivariate
equilibrium model with limits to arbitrage, can also be thought of as reflecting asymmetric preferences for
the safety of bonds from different countries.
  10
     Du et al. (2018) extensively document that significant failures of CIP have persisted since the financial
crisis. They attribute them to imbalances in the demand for saving and investment across currencies,
interacted with the increased cost of financial intermediation.
                                                                                                            7


trend-cycle decomposition.11 Its measurement equation is given by

                                                 yt = Λȳt + ỹt ,                                        (1)

where yt is an n × 1 vector of observables, ȳt is a τ × 1 vector of trends, and ỹt is an n × 1
vector of stationary components. Λ(λ) is a n × τ matrix of loadings, which is restricted using
economic theory and depends on the vector of parameters λ. If the number of common
trends τ is smaller than the number of variables n, then the observables are cointegrated (in
this case, the decomposition between trends and cycles in (1) coincides with the Stock and
Watson (1988) representation of a cointegrated system). We do not confine ourselves to this
case and also consider situations where τ > n, which arise since we have both global and
country-specific trends.

       Both ȳt and ỹt are latent and evolve according to a random walk and a VAR, respectively:

                                                 ȳt = ȳt−1 + et ,                                       (2)

                                                  Φ(L)ỹt = εt ,                                          (3)
                        p
                        X
where Φ(L) = I −              Φl Ll and the Φl ’s are n × n matrices. The (τ + n) × 1 vector of shocks
                        l=1
(e0t , ε0t )0 is independently and identically distributed according to
                                      !               !             !!
                                   et              0τ       Σe 0
                                        ∼N              ,               ,                                 (4)
                                   εt              0n        0 Σε

with the Σ. ’s being conforming positive definite matrices, and where N (., .) denotes the mul-
tivariate Gaussian distribution.12 Equations (2) and (3) represent the transition equations in
the state-space model. The initial conditions ȳ0 and ỹ0:−p+1 = (ỹ00 , .., ỹ−p+1
                                                                               0
                                                                                    )0 are distributed
according to
                                ȳ0 ∼ N (y 0 , V 0 ), ỹ0:−p+1 ∼ N (0, V (Φ, Σε )),                       (5)

where V (Φ, Σε ) is the unconditional variance of ỹ0:−p+1 implied by (3). Very importantly
for this application, the procedure straightforwardly accommodates missing observations
and can be scaled up to VARs of relatively large dimensions. Section A in the Appendix
  11
       This is essentially the VAR model of Villani (2009), except that his deterministic trend is replaced by
the stochastic trend (2). Very related approaches have been used by Kozicki and Tinsley (2012), Crump et
al. (2016), Johannsen and Mertens (2016), and Hasenzagl et al. (2017).
   12
      The shocks affecting the trend and the cycle are assumed to be orthogonal. In the parlance of Watson
(1986), our model features an “independent trend/cycle decomposition”).
                                                                                                               8


describes the Gibbs sampler, which takes advantage of the Durbin and Koopman (2002)
“fast simulation smoother.” All results are based on 10,000 simulations, of which we discard
the first 5,000 as burn-in draws.

       The priors for the VAR coefficients Φ = (Φ1 , . . . , Φp )0 and the covariance matrices Σε
and Σe have standard form, namely

  p(ϕ|Σε ) = N (vec(Φ), Σε ⊗ Ω)I(ϕ), p(Σε ) = IW(κε , (κε + n + 1)Σε ),
                                                                   p(Σe ) = IW(κe , (κe + τ + 1)Σe ), (6)

where ϕ = vec(Φ), I(ϕ) is an indicator function which is equal to zero if the VAR is explosive
(some of the roots of Φ(L) are less than one) and to one otherwise, IW(κ, (κ + n + 1)Σ)
denotes the inverse Wishart distribution with mode Σ and κ degrees of freedom. The prior
for λ is given by p(λ), the product of independent Gaussian distributions for each element
of the vector λ.

       The prior for the VAR parameters ϕ is a standard Minnesota prior with the hyperpa-
rameter for the overall tightness equal to the commonly used value of 0.2 (see Giannone et
al., 2015), except that of course the prior for the “own-lag” parameter is centered at zero
rather than one, as we are describing stationary processes. The prior for the covariance Σε
of the innovations to the cycles ỹt , is a relatively diffuse inverse Wishart distribution with
just enough degrees of freedom (κε = n + 2) to have a well-defined prior mean, which is set
to be a diagonal matrix. The square root of these diagonal elements is set to 2, except for
the inflation cycle. Its prior mean is set to 4, to reflect the belief that nominal cycles might
be more volatile than the other cycles.13

       We use a conservative prior implying limited time variations of the trends—the same
approach taken in Del Negro et al. (2017). Specifically, we set the prior for Σe , the variance-
covariance matrix of the innovations to all (common and country-specific) trends ȳt , to have
a mode equal to a diagonal matrix with elements equal to 1/100 for all the real trends. This
prior implies that the expected change in the trend over one century has a standard deviation
equal to 1 percent (all the variables are measured in percentage points). In different models,
we will decompose the trend of the world real interest rate into subcomponents, such as
the convenience yield and the stochastic discount factor. We set the prior such that the
  13
       This is the only difference relative to Del Negro et al. (2017) in terms of prior specification, where the
square roots of the diagonal elements were half the size used here. This difference is driven by the need to
accommodate the higher cyclical volatility in the interwar period.
                                                                                             9


standard deviation of the innovation of the total is always the same and, at each level of
disaggregation, all subcomponents contribute equally. For the inflation trends, we use a
value equal to 1/50—which implies that expected change in the trend over half a century
has a standard deviation equal to one. In addition, these priors are quite tight, as we set
the degree of freedom κe = 100.

    Turning to the initial conditions, for the world trends we use the same priors as in Del
Negro et al. (2017). The expected values are calibrated to target expected initial values
of 0.50 for the real rate, 2 for inflation, 1 for the term spread, 1 for the convenience yield,
and 1.5 for consumption growth. The standard deviation for the initial conditions is set
to 2 for the world inflation trend and 1 for all the others. The initial conditions for the
country-specific trends have mean zero and standard deviations equal to half the value of
the corresponding world counterparts.



3     Some Theory

This section introduces a simple theoretical framework that guides the specification of the
long-run relationships imposed on the time-series models estimated in Section 4. This frame-
work is based on standard asset-pricing ideas, as captured by a set of international Euler
equations augmented to allow for the presence of convenience yield factors. These factors
reflect the money-like convenience services offered by assets with special safety and liquidity
characteristics—safe assets, for short—such as U.S. Treasury bonds. In equilibrium, the
willingness of investors to pay for these services gives rise to a wedge between the return
on safe assets on the one hand and that on securities with the same pecuniary payoffs,
but no such special attributes, on the other. In the international context, the presence of
convenience yield differentials between assets denominated in different currencies, and/or
originating in different economies, also gives rise to deviations from the usual interest rate
parity conditions, as recently discussed by Valchev (2017), Jiang et al. (2018), and Engel
(2014).


3.1       International Arbitrage with Convenience Yields

Consider investors based in two different economies—say, the U.S. and the EU for concretenes—
trading safe and liquid one-period bonds denominated in dollars ($) and in euros (e). Call
                                                                                                        10


Rt$ the net nominal yield on the former—a three-month U.S. Treasury bill. If Mt+1
                                                                              US
                                                                                  is the
marginal rate of substitution between consumption today and tomorrow for a U.S. investor
—the U.S. stochastic discount factor (SDF)—and Pt$ is the dollar price of that consumption,
the pricing equation for the bill is
                       "                                                                 #
                             US              US              $                     Pt$
                       Et   Mt+1 (1   +   CYt+1 )(1   +   CYt+1 )(1   +   Rt$ )     $
                                                                                             = 1.       (7)
                                                                                  Pt+1

                 US          $
The term (1 + CYt+1 )(1 + CYt+1 ) represents the convenience yield associated with U.S.
Treasuries from the perspective of a U.S. investor. We model this convenience yield as
                                                        US
having two components. The first one, denoted by 1 + CYt+1 , stems from the way U.S.
investors evaluate the money-like convenience services provided by any asset (hence the U S
superscript). As such, this discount is independent of the currency and the country in which
the asset is issued. If U.S. investors have a special motive for holding safe assets in their
portfolios, perhaps because of regulatory requirements that uniquely apply to them, the
demand generated by these requirements will tend to depress the returns of those securities,
regardless of their origin.

    The second source of convenience, denoted by 1 + CYt$ , stems from asset-specific char-
acteristics, such as the currency of denomination (hence the $ superscript), and it is inde-
pendent from who holds the asset. If international investors gain utility from holding U.S.
Treasuries, perhaps because they value dollar liquidity or because they put special faith in
the U.S. government’s ability to repay its obligations, Treasuries will trade at a premium
compared to similar assets originating elsewhere.

    The equation that captures how U.S. investors price safe and liquid European bonds
denominated in euros helps further clarify the distinction between the two sources of conve-
nience we have in mind. This equation is
                   "                                                                         #
                                                 e              St+1 Pt$
                  Et     US
                        Mt+1         US
                             (1 + CYt+1 )(1 + CYt+1 )(1 + Rte )       $
                                                                                                 = 1,   (8)
                                                                 St Pt+1

where Rte is the net return on the safe and liquid euro bond and St+1 is the nominal exchange
rate that converts that euro return into dollars, so that an increase in S represents a dollar
depreciation. We assume that the convenience of European safe assets also has two compo-
nents. The first one is the same as that found in U.S. Treasuries, since arbitrage implies that
                                                                                  US
the same marginal investor is applying her taste for safety and liquidity (1 + CYt+1 ) to both
                                   e
assets. The second component (1+CYt+1 ) instead is specific to the euro bond. It captures
                                                                                                           11


the fact that the convenience services offered by this bond to any investor are likely to be
different from those of U.S. Treasuries.14
       If the joint second moments of the variables that enter the Euler equations have no
trend, we can generate useful long run restrictions from these equations by focusing on a
first-order approximation. This approximation results in a modified uncovered interest rate
parity (UIP) condition of the form

                                    Rt$ = Rte + Et [∆st+1 ] + cyte − cyt$ ,                               (9)

                                                                          i
where st ≡ log St is the log nominal exchange rate and cyti ≡ Et log(1+CYt+1 ) is the expected
net convenience yield for either country or currency i.15 Although our empirical strategy
relies on this linear approximation to hold in the long-run, we make no assumptions on its
accuracy at any other frequency. This equation shows that the standard UIP in terms of
safe rate of returns does not hold when euro and dollar assets generate different levels of
convenience for investors. An increase in the relative convenience of dollar assets depresses
their rate of return compared to that of euro assets, even if the dollar is not expected to
appreciate. Equivalently, the dollar appreciates on impact if dollar assets become more
desirable, even if the safe interest rate differential remains unchanged. On the contrary, if all
safe assets were created equal, their interest rates would be lower than those on comparable
assets that do not offer the same money-like services, but this effect would be symmetric
across countries and currencies, therefore preserving UIP.
       We can also write the first-order approximation of the two pricing equations for dollar
and euro assets as

                           Rt$ − Et πt+1
                                    $ 
                                          = mUt S − cytU S − cyt$                                        (10)
                           Rte − Et πt+1
                                     e 
                                          + Et [∆qt+1 ] = mUt S − cytU S − cyte ,                        (11)

where πti ≡ log(Pt+1
                  i
                     /Pti ) is inflation, mit ≡ −Et log Mt+1
                                                         i
                                                            
                                                               is the negative of the expected
growth rate of marginal utility, or the return on bonds that do not provide convenience
  14
       This decomposition of the convenience yield into independent investor and asset-specific components is
fairly flexible, but it does rule out the possibility that EU and U.S. investors might value the money-like
services of $ and e safe assets differently. For such an asymmetric preference to be sustained in equilibrium,
though, U.S. and EU investors would need to have other offsetting reasons to hold both assets in their
portfolios, such as different exposures to exchange rate risk, as discussed by Jiang et al. (2018). We do
not consider this possibility in our subsequent analysis because we are mainly interested in the long run
implications of the theory.
  15
     We are also using the approximation R ≈ log(1 + R).
                                                                                             12


services, and qt ≡ ln(St Pte /Pt$ ) is the log real exchange rate. These equations highlight the
factor structure in real interest rates implied by international arbitrage, once those returns
are expressed in common consumption units. The fact that the same marginal investor prices
both bonds implies that their returns share a common component, given by mUt S − cytU S . In
addition, the presence of asset-specific convenience yields introduces a wedge between the
two interest rates in the form of an idiosyncratic component. This factor structure forms
the basis for our empirical analysis of the trends in global interest rates in the next section.

    Equations (10) and (11) focus on asset/currency/country-specific convenience yields as
sources of UIP violations. A vast literature has documented failures of UIP stemming from
many other deviations from the very simple assumptions that lead to these equations. The
most notable among these assumptions is the effective risk neutrality of investors implied by
the log-linear approximation of the Euler equations. If we moved to higher-order approxi-
mations, heteroskedasticity in the joint distribution of the marginal utility of consumption,
the convenience yields, and the exchange rate would result in the addition of several terms
to equations (10) and (11), reflecting the presence of time-varying risk. Some of these terms,
such as the covariance between the SDF and the exchange rate, would be country-specific
and hence give rise to deviations from UIP. When looking at trends in the data, we do not
take movements in these second moments into account, since we assume them to be sta-
tionary. If they are not, however, their effect will still be captured by the country-specific
convenience yields.

    So far, we have assumed that U.S. investors are the marginal asset buyers in our economy.
What would happen if the EU investors priced them instead? In that case, the Euler
equations would become

                      Rt$ − Et πt+1
                               $ 
                                     − Et [∆qt+1 ] = mEU
                                                      t  − cytEU − cyt$
                                  Rte − Et πt+1
                                            e 
                                                   = mEU
                                                      t  − cytEU − cyte ,

which yield the same modified UIP condition as before, but also the further restriction

                          mUt S − cytU S = mEU
                                            t  − cytEU + Et [∆qt+1 ] .                     (12)

Adding the pricing equations for the assets that do not offer any convenience service, we also
obtain
                                  mUt S = mEU
                                           t  + Et [∆qt+1 ] ,

which together with equation (12) implies cytU S = cytEU .
                                                                                                             13


       These restrictions have an intuitive interpretation. International arbitrage implies the
existence of a unique stochastic discount factor that prices all assets once their returns are
expressed in common consumption units and adjusted for the convenience yields that they
carry. With risk neutrality, which is implied by the first-order approximation to the Euler
equations considered above, the global discount factor can be represented interchangeably as
the growth rate of the marginal utility of either U.S. or EU investors. Therefore, the answer
to the question posed in the previous paragraph is that, under our maintained assumptions,
the “identity” of the investors that price the assets is irrelevant in the long run.16

       An important implication of the existence of this global SDF is that only common factors
across countries matter for adjusted returns. In the consumption-based asset-pricing model
discussed in Section 4.3, this consideration in turn implies that only global growth can be a
priced factor. Allowing for country-specific loadings on this common factor—or for country-
specific trends in consumption in the return equations, as it might be tempting to do if
approaching the problem from a purely statistical perspective—would imply a violation of
arbitrage in the long run.


3.2        Long-Run Implications

We conclude this section by explicitly writing the factor model for the trends in nominal
interest rates across countries implied by equations (10) and (11), together with the restric-
tions on the EU and U.S. stochastic discount factors that we just derived. Denoting trends
with upper bars, those restrictions imply

                                mw      w    US
                                 t − cy t ≡ mt  − cy Ut S = mEU
                                                             t  − cy EU
                                                                     t ,                                   (13)

where mw                                                              w
       t is the trend in the “world” stochastic discount factor and cy = cy
                                                                            US
                                                                               = cy EU is
the common convenience premium applied by international arbitrageurs to safe assets. Here,
we impose the standard assumption that the growth rate in the real exchange rate has no
trend, or ∆q t = 0. This restriction is implied by, but is weaker than, purchasing power parity
in the long run (q t = 1 in our notation).17
  16
       Jiang et al. (2018) discuss some of the frictions that would invalidate this irrelevance result and their
implications for UIP.
  17
     Most of the literature studying trends in real returns across countries (e.g., Hamilton et al., 2016; Borio
et al., 2017) implicitly makes this assumption. Without it, those trends would not be directly comparable,
since they would in part reflect secular changes in the value of the consumption bundles in which they are
quoted. In Section B.8 of the Online Appendix we provide independent evidence that this assumption holds
                                                                                                          14


    Given this definition of the world stochastic discount factor and convenience yield, we
can write
                                     Ri,t = π i,t + mw      w      i
                                                     t − cy t − cy t ,                                  (14)

where Ri,t is the trend in the nominal interest rate of country i (expressed in terms of that
country’s currency), π i,t is the trend in that country’s inflation rate, and cy it is the trend
in the country/currency-specific convenience yield (cy $t and cy et in the previous section).
This variable has an i super script because it represents an idiosyncratic factor in the cross
section of real interest rates. Note that, even if segmentation in international asset markets
prevented EU investors from engaging in cross-border arbitrage, invalidating (13), equation
(14) would maintain its structure as long as U.S. investors can trade the two assets. In that
case, the common component in interest rates would reflect the preferences of U.S. investors,
as in equations (10) and (11). This is the model for the low-frequency comovement of interest
rates that we estimate in the next section.



4     Empirical Results

This section discusses our estimates of the global trends in real interest rates and the models
that we use to decompose and interpret some of their drivers. These decompositions rely on
the simple economic theory based on international arbitrage described in the previous section.
Since we are focusing on trends, we only impose the theoretical restrictions in the long run,
making no economic assumptions on short-run dynamics. Technically, we take a stance on
the structure of the matrix Λ that determines how different trends enter the measurement
equations (1), but we leave the VAR matrices in (3) unconstrained. An advantage of this
approach is that the restrictions we impose are fairly uncontroversial in the long run, but
might easily be violated at other frequencies. In any case, readers who are skeptical of these
restrictions can still interpret our results as a trend-cycle decomposition obtained from a
(mildly restricted) reduced-form model and skip the interpretation of the empirical objects
in terms of the economic quantities discussed in Section 3.

    The basic building block of our analysis is the long-run relationship

                                          Ri,t − π i,t = rw    i
                                                          t + rt ,                                      (15)
true in our sample. There we present the results of the model described in Section 2 applied to real exchange
rate changes for all countries relative to the United States. We show that there is no evidence of either
common (Figure A24) or country-specfic (Figure A23) trends.
                                                                                                             15


where Ri,t and π i,t are trends in nominal short-term yields and inflation in country i, rw
                                                                                          t is
the trend in the short-term world real interest rate, and rit is a country-specific trend. This
relationship rewrites (14) to highlight that the trend in the world real interest rate rw
                                                                                        t reflects
trends in the discount factor of the marginal international investor, mw      w
                                                                       t − cy t , including her
taste for safety and liquidity. In light of Section 3, we interpret this idiosyncratic trend rit as
capturing the different degrees of safety and liquidity of the government paper issued by the
various countries in our sample, namely the fact that U.S. Treasuries and German bunds are
generally considered a safe haven, while Italian government securities may not be considered
as such (these are the cy it terms in equation (14)). However, these country-specific factors
could be interpreted more generally as capturing any long-run deviation from UIP, regardless
of its source.
       Section 4.1 presents estimates of the different components of the nominal interest rate
in (15), rw     i
          t , r t , and π i,t , from a baseline model based on data on inflation and nominal yields
on short- and long-term government securities across countries. Since most of these assets
are considered both safe and liquid, we interpret rw
                                                   t as the global trend for safe and liquid
returns. Section 4.2 further decomposes rw
                                         t into the part that we attribute to the global
convenience yield for safety and liquidity, cy w
                                               t , and a worldwide stochastic discount factor
mw
 t , using yields on “unsafe” and “illiquid” U.S. securities. Finally, Section 4.3 adds data
on consumption growth to split the stochastic discount factor mw
                                                               t into a component due to
global growth, which we call g w
                               t , and a residual component unrelated to it.

       Our data come from the Jordà-Schularick-Taylor Macrohistory Database, which is de-
scribed in Jordà et al. (2017b).18 In particular, we use annual data from seven advanced
countries (Canada, Germany, France, Italy, Japan, the U.K., and the U.S.) on short-term
and long-term interest rates, consumer prices (the database contains an index, which we
log-difference to obtain inflation), and real consumption per capita.19 We augment this data
set with annual averages of Moody’s Baa corporate bond yield for the U.S., which is available
from FRED dating back to 1919. The short-term rates are from government bills or money
market instruments, while the long-term rates are all from government bonds. For instance,
the long-term yield for the U.S. coincides with the 10-year Treasury constant maturity rate
obtained from FRED and going back to 1954. Therefore, we consider all these yields as
  18
       We are very grateful to Oscar Jordà, Moritz Schularick, and Alan Taylor for making their data publicly
available.
  19
     The time series of interest rates and inflation contain large outliers in the period around the world wars,
which are not very informative on the secular trends we are interested in. Therefore, we treat all observations
above 30 percentage points in absolute value as if they were missing data.
                                                                                                16


reflecting “safe and liquid” returns, because government paper is generally more liquid than
its privately issued equivalents, since it tends to be traded heavily, and is safer, since it is
backed by taxation. Of course, the degree of safety and liquidity of government securities
varies across countries, and we account for that in our analysis.

    In all specifications we use one lag in the VAR, both because we use annual data and
for computational feasibility.


4.1    A Baseline Model of the World Real Interest Rate

This section presents estimates of the trend in the world real interest rate from a baseline
                                                                            L
model with data on the nominal yields of short-term (Ri,t ) and long-term (Ri,t ) government
(or closely related) securities and inflation (πi,t ) in each of the seven countries in our sample.
Having three observable variables per country, we extract three trends—in inflation, the level
of interest rates, and the spread between long and short maturity rates. Moreover, the cross
section of countries allows us to separate a common, or “world,” component and a country-
specific component in each of these trends. Next, we describe the trend equations that embed
the restrictions discussed in the theory section, and provide a complete description of the
matrix Λ in equation (1) for each of the models we estimate.

    We already discussed the model for the trends in short-term real rates in equation (15).
Intuitively, we split trends in real returns into a common component and an idiosyncratic
component specific to each country. With observations on seven cross-sectional units, we
could also estimate country-specific loadings on the common component. However, Section
3 discussed how international arbitrage implies that these loadings must be one because, in
the long run, the free movement of capital across countries will equalize the return on assets
with the same characteristics. This common component in the returns induced by arbitrage
is therefore the textbook world real interest rate. As a further check on the no-arbitrage
restrictions embedded in equation (15), however, we will also present a model that does
allow for country-specific loadings on the world real interest rate. None of these loadings is
significantly different from one.

    Moving now to the model for the trends in long rates, it is convenient to express it in
terms of its implications for the term spread, namely the difference between the trends in
                          L
long and short rates: Ri,t − Ri,t . Although much of the literature models this spread as
stationary, we want our analysis to be robust to the possible failure of this assumption.
                                                                                                           17


This approach is dictated both by the longer time series that we are modeling, where low-
frequency movements in the slope of the yield curve might be more evident, as well as by our
focus on secular movements. Under no arbitrage, a trend component in the spread between
long and short-term yields must originate from a trend in the term premium. As pointed out
by our discussant Carlo Favero, allowing for such a trend is in slight contradiction with our
maintained assumption that risk premia are stationary. Our view is that the trend in the
term spread is simply a convenient econometric device to model low-frequency movements
in the term premium, even if these are not literally a random walk.
       As we do for the level of rates, we model the trend in the term spread as the sum of a
common and a country-specific component:
                                             L               w        i
                                           Ri,t − Ri,t = tst + tst .                                     (16)
           w         i
Both tst and tst are assumed exogenous. In Del Negro et al. (2017), we also considered a
specification in which the inflation trend affects the term spread, but found the results little
affected by this more general specification. Therefore, we do not consider it here.20
       We are restricting the loadings on the world trend in the term spread to be the same
across countries for the same reasons discussed above in relation to the level of rates. Inter-
national arbitrage implies convergence of interest rates at all maturities, as long as we are
                                                                          w
comparing identical assets. Therefore, we can interpret tst as the trend in the slope factor in
the SDF of the marginal global investor. To the extent that this factor is an important driver
                         w
of term premia, tst could thus also capture potential low-frequency variation in the riskiness
of long-term bonds. At the same time, we allow for deviations from this common pricing
of term spreads to reflect possible cross-country differences in maturity for the long-term
bonds in our sample, as well as relative differences in safety and liquidity between long and
short-term bonds in different countries. These and other potential deviations from perfect
                                                 i
arbitrage are captured by the term tst .
       Similarly, we decompose the trends in inflation in each country (π i,t ) into a common and
a country-specific component as
                                              π i,t = λπi π w    i
                                                            t + πt.                                      (17)

In this case, we do allow different countries to load differently on the global inflation trend
πw                           π
 t through the coefficients λi , since there is no economic force equivalent to no arbitrage
  20
       This model of the trends in short and long-term rates implies that the latter are the sum of the former
and of the trend in the term spread. Therefore, the trend in the world real interest rate rw
                                                                                           t should be
interpreted as having a short-term maturity.
                                                                                                                    18


enforcing the convergence of monetary policies and any other potential long-run determinant
of inflation across countries.21 This assumed structure of the inflation trends is the low-
frequency analog of the global inflation factor model estimated by Ciccarelli and Mojon
(2010).

       Summarizing, the first model we estimate is

                            Ri,t = rw     i    π w       i
                                    t + r t + λi π t + π t + R̃i,t ,
                             L                          w       i
                            Ri,t = rw     i                π w       i     L
                                    t + r t + tst + tst + λi π t + π t + R̃i,t ,                                  (18)
                             πi,t = λπi π w     i
                                          t + π t + π̃i,t ,


for i = 1, . . . , n. The system is estimated jointly for all seven countries in the sample (so
n = 21 and τ = 24, as we have both global and country-specific trends). Note that we do not
impose cointegration in either real interest or inflation rates across countries as the number
of trends is larger than the number of variables (for both inflation and real rates, we have
both global and country-specific trends).

           Figure 1: Trends in Global and U.S. Real Rates: 1870-2016, Baseline Model

                                                r̄tw and r̄U S,t
                       6
                       5
                       4
                       3
                       2
                       1
                       0
                      -1
                      -2
                      -3
                           1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
Note: The dashed black line shows the posterior median of r̄tw and the shaded areas show the 68 and 95 percent posterior
coverage intervals. The dotted black line shows the posterior median of r̄U S,t = r̄tw + r̄tU S .


  21
       Whenever we introduce loadings λ, we use as a prior the product of independent Gaussian distributions
with mean 1 and standard deviation 0.5.
                                                                                                19


4.1.1   Results

Figure 1 plots the posterior median of the trend in the world real interest rate r̄tw (dashed
line), together with its 68 and 95 percent posterior coverage intervals, as well as the posterior
median of the trend in the U.S. real rate r̄U S,t (dotted line). This figure delivers the first two
important results of the paper. First, r̄tw fluctuated around 1.5 percent for about a century,
but it has been on a steady decline over the past few decades, dropping almost 200 basis
points. Second, r̄tw and r̄tU S essentially coincide over the last century: the world trend is the
U.S. trend.

    More in detail, our estimates indicate that r̄tw fluctuated in a fairly narrow range around
1.5 percent through the post-World War II period, reaching a peak close to 2 percent just
before the Great Depression and a trough a bit above 1 percent in the early 1950s. From
then it rose steadily through the early 1980s, when it touched 2.5 percent. It has been on a
steady decline since, plunging to about 50 basis points by the end of the sample, below its
previous minimum. The uncertainty on the level of the trend at any point in time is large, so
the point estimates should be interpreted with caution. However, the decline over the past
few decades is statistically significant, as shown in the top panel of Table 1. This decline
has totaled close to 2 percentage points since 1980, with more than 150 basis points of it
occurring since 1990, and more than 1 percentage point over the last 20 years of the sample.
The 90 percent posterior coverage intervals for the estimated declines over the three periods,
which are in parentheses, all exclude zero. In fact, the posterior probability that the decline
is positive is greater than 95 percent across the board, as indicated by the stars. Table A1
in the Appendix offers even more detail on the posterior distribution of these declines, but
the message is clear: the declines are large and highly statistically significant.

    The dotted line in Figure 1 shows that r̄tw and r̄U S,t , which is the sum of r̄tw and the
country-specific trend r̄tU S , are very close since the 1920s. This implies that r̄tU S has been
small. However, the U.S. overall trend has fallen more than the world interest rate since 1980
and it has been below it since the late 1990s, indicating that the country-specific component
r̄tU S has been negative since then and growing. This evidence suggests that U.S. government
bonds have enjoyed a larger convenience yield than those of other sovereigns over the past
three decades.

    Intuitively, one would think that the trend world rate would be more or less a moving
average of the cross-country average of the real rates of interest (see, for example, King
and Low, 2014b). Figure 2 compares the global trend in the real rate shown in Figure 1
                                                                                                                               20




                                  Table 1: Change in rw
                                                      t and Its Components



                                       1980-2016                1990-2016               1997-2016

                                                            Baseline Model
                                                 ∗∗∗
                                        −1.88                   −1.64∗∗∗                 −1.03∗∗
                           rw
                            t
                                     (−3.24, −0.61)           (−2.84, −0.47)         (−1.96, −0.09)

                                                       Convenience Yield Model
                                                 ∗∗∗
                                        −1.71                   −1.73∗∗∗                 −1.13∗∗∗
                           rw
                            t
                                    (−2.94, −0.55) (−2.84, −0.67) (−2.01, −0.26)
                                         −0.82∗∗                −0.97∗∗∗                 −0.66∗∗
                         −cy w
                             t
                                    (−1.60, −0.05) (−1.65, −0.24) (−1.25, −0.06)
                                          −0.90                   −0.78∗                  −0.48
                          mw
                           t
                                     (−1.89, 0.08)            (−1.66, 0.09)           (−1.17, 0.22)
                                                         Consumption Model
                                                 ∗∗∗
                                        −1.93                   −1.94∗∗∗                 −1.22∗∗∗
                           rw
                            t
                                    (−3.18, −0.69) (−3.10, −0.82) (−2.18, −0.29)
                                         −0.71∗                 −0.92∗∗∗                 −0.65∗∗
                         −cy w
                             t
                                     (−1.51, 0.11)            (−1.67, −0.19) (−1.25, −0.02)
                                                 ∗∗
                                         −0.74                    −0.61∗                  −0.35
                           gw
                            t
                                    (−1.50, −0.03)            (−1.28, 0.06)           (−0.88, 0.19)
                             w            −0.47                   −0.42                   −0.24
                           βt
                                     (−1.21, 0.31)            (−1.07, 0.25)           (−0.78, 0.30)

                                                          w
Note: For a variable x, where x = {rw       w       w w
                                       t , mt , −cy t , g t , β t } depending on the model, the table shows the posterior median of
∆x = x2016 − xt0 for t0 being equal to 1980 (left column), 1990 (middle column), and 1997 (middle column), and the 90 percent
posterior coverage interval for ∆x (in parenthesis). The stars next to the posterior median indicate that P r{x ≤ 0} is greater
or equal to 97.5 (***), 95 (**), or 90 (*) percent, where P r{} is the posterior probability.
                                                                                                                              21


        Figure 2: Trends in Global Real Rates Under Alternative Priors for the Standard
               Deviation of Innovations to the Trend and Decadal Moving Averages


                              10


                               5


                               0


                              -5


                             -10

                                   1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
Note: The dashed black line is the posterior median and the shaded gray areas are the 68 and 95 percent posterior coverage
intervals for r¯tw in the baseline model. The dashed red line is the posterior median and the shaded red areas are the 68 and 95
percent posterior coverage intervals for r¯tw obtained when centering the prior for the variance of innovations to the trend equal
to 1 as opposed to 1/100 as in the baseline specification. The solid red line is the decadal moving average of the cross-sectional
average of ex-post real rates across all countries (specifically, at any point in time the moving average is constructed by taking
for each country the average ex-post short-term real rate of return over the previous five years, the current year, and the
following five years, and then taking a cross-sectional average of the resulting objects).



(dashed black line with gray bands) with the cross-country average of the decadal moving
average for each country in our sample (solid red line). Clearly, the moving average approach
yields a measure of the global trend in the real rate that is much more volatile than what
we find. For instance, it reaches even lower levels than today in the second and fourth
decade of the 20th century, around WWI and WWII, and rises to almost 5 percent in the
1980s. Why these differences? We argue that the moving-average approach provides a good
description of the trend for a researcher having a prior belief that this trend can fluctuate
substantially over a short period. Our own beliefs are quite conservative, as they reflect
skepticism about the possibility that secular trends could fluctuate wildly from one year to
the next: at the prior mode, the expected change in the trend has a standard deviation equal
to one over a one-century horizon (see Section 2). By shortening this horizon, one allows
the trend to capture more of the short-term fluctuations in the data. The dashed red line in
Figure 2 shows that the trend obtained from the cross-sectional average of moving averages
can be rationalized by a prior belief that this horizon is as short as one year—which means
attributing a substantial fraction of cyclical fluctuations in the real rate to the trend.22 The
  22
       Even using a one-year horizon, our estimates are not as low as the moving average around the two world
wars, partly because these very low values are due to outliers associated with hyperinflations that our trend
                                                                                                         22


cost associated with having such a loose belief of what represents a trend is apparent from
the large posterior uncertainty associated with these estimates: The 50 percent posterior
coverage intervals for r̄tw are as large as 10 percentage points in 2016! Interestingly, our
results based on the conservative prior are not very sensitive to modifications of the prior
that cut the horizon from one century to a half-century or a quarter of a century, or even a
decade—as shown in Figure A3 of the Online Appendix—as long as one does not use extreme
values such as one year. Summing up, our conclusion that the decline in the global trend in
interest rates over the past two decades is unprecedented is quite robust to the prior view of
what constitutes a trend, as long as one does not conflate trends with cyclical variations.

    The left panel of Figure 3 presents our estimates of r̄tw in the context of some of the
information that we use to extract this trend, namely the ex-post real short-term interest
rates (Ri,t −πi,t ) for all the countries in the sample. Although these rates fluctuated wildly in
the first part of the sample, the movements in r̄tw do capture some evident common patterns
in the data at least back to the 1930s. Real rates fell in the 1930s and 1940s, as well as in
the 1970s with high inflation, although the model interprets the latter movement as mostly
cyclical. Most notably, real rates have been falling closely together since the 1980s, dragging
the world trend down with them. Partly due to our conservative prior on the amount of
variation in the trends, the model interprets a good part of this decline as cyclical. Yet,
the persistent comovement of real rates over the past four decades is evident to the naked
eye. Ultimately, this low-frequency comovement is what drives the estimated decline in the
trend.23

    The pronounced fluctuations in real rates in the first part of the sample, and especially
during the two world wars, highlighted in Figure 3, raise the concern that our VAR with
constant volatilities might be misspecified. Even if the trends are homoskedastic, as we have
argued they are likely to be, their estimates might be affected by ignoring a possible break in
the volatilities of the innovations to the stationary VAR (3).24 To address this concern, we
also estimated the baseline model on a shorter sample starting in 1950. As shown in Figure
A4 in the Appendix, the trend estimates are very similar to those obtained with the longer
refuses to fit.
  23
     Section B.4 in the Appendix shows the results of the baseline model with a looser prior: we use 50
instead of 100 degrees of freedom. Those results are even stronger than those shown in this section in terms
of the size of the post-1980 decline in r̄tw .
  24
     A model with stochastic volatility in the innovations to the VAR describing the cyclical components,
similar to that estimated by Johannsen and Mertens (2016), is arguably appropriate for this sample. We
leave this interesting extension to future research.
                                                                                                                               23


 sample.

               Figure 3: Trends and Observables for Short-Term Real Rates, Baseline Model

                       r̄tw and Ri,t − πi,t                                                   r̄tw and r̄i,t
                                                                        6
10
                                                                        4

 5
                                                                        2


 0                                                                      0


                                                                       -2
-5
     1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000                                     1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
          us      de       uk      fr     ca      it       jp                 us      de       uk        fr      ca       it      jp


 Note: The left panel shows Ri,t − πi,t for each country i (dotted lines; see legend), together with the trend r̄tw (the dashed
 black line shows the posterior median and the shaded areas show the 68 and 95 percent posterior coverage intervals). The right
 panel shows the posterior median of r̄i,t = r̄tw + r̄ti for each country i (dotted lines; see legend), together with the posterior
 median of the trend r̄tw (dashed black line).


          The right panel of Figure 3 displays the trend in the world real interest rate (black dashed
 line) and the overall trend r̄i,t = r̄tw + r̄ti for each country in the sample (dotted lines). Two
 interesting facts emerge from this figure. First, the country-specific components have shrunk
 noticeably since the late 1970s, bringing the trends much closer together and also to the
 world real interest rate. This long-run convergence in rates of return arguably reflects the
 increased liberalization of capital movements over the past fifty years, which should move
 global capital markers closer to the perfect arbitrage ideal.25 Second, to the extent that we
 want to interpret r̄ti as indicative of a country-specific convenience yield, U.K. government
 paper yielded greater convenience than U.S. Treasuries for the first century of the sample,
 but this ranking has been reversed over the last fifty years (see Gourinchas and Rey, 2014).
 One puzzling feature of the figure is the trend for France, which is estimated to be below
     25
          Bekaert and Mehl (2017) propose a measure of global financial market integration that can be computed
 back to 1885. They find that it follows a “swoosh.” It was relatively high before the First World War, it
 fell in the interwar period, and it has been on a steady rise since around 1950. See also Chapter 3 of the
 IMF World Economic Outlook from April 2014 for a discussion of the connection between financial market
 integration and the decline in world real interest rates over the past few decades. We should note that our
 assumption that the country-specific trends are random walks, if taken literally, implies that this situation
 of convergence is unlikely to persist. However, the fact that our trends are very slow moving (the variance
 of their innovations is low) also implies that it may take a long time for trends in real rates to diverge again.
                                                                                                                                    24


 all others for the entire sample. Figure A2 in the Appendix compares the estimates of the
 country-specific trend r̄ti for each country with their closest observed counterpart, the ex-
                                                                            n
                                                                         1X
 post real rates Ri,t − πi,t in deviation from the cross-country average       (Ri,t − πi,t ). This
                                                                         n i=1
 comparison suggests there are no major discrepancies between the estimated idiosyncratic
 trends and the low-frequency movements in the observables. One exception is France in the
 past twenty years, where the country-specifc trend is clearly lower than the data.

                       Figure 4: Trends and Observables for Inflation, Baseline Model

                         π̄tw and πi,t                                                                   π̄tw and π̄i,t
15                                                                        15


10                                                                        10


 5                                                                         5


 0                                                                         0


     1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000                                        1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
      us         de        uk       fr       ca       it      jp                 us       de        uk        fr      ca       it      jp


 Note:    The left panel shows πi,t for each country i (dotted lines, see legend), together with the trend π̄tw (the dashed black line
 shows    the posterior median and the shaded areas show the 68 and 95 percent posterior coverage intervals). The right panel
 shows    the posterior median of π̄i,t = λπ   w     i
                                           i π̄t + π̄t for each country i (dotted lines, see legend), together with the posterior median
 of the   trend π̄tw (dashed black line).



      Our data set does not include direct observations on real interest rates. Therefore, our
 estimates of inflation trends are a crucial input in the extraction of the low-frequency compo-
 nent of global real returns. In fact, the inflation trends that we compute are of independent
 interest because they characterize secular movements in inflation across countries and the
 extent to which these reflect global rather than country-specific forces. In addition, they
 represent a useful reality check on the ability of our econometric tools to separate trend from
 cycle.

      The left panel of Figure 4 reports one such check by comparing the estimated global
 trend in inflation π̄tw with the observed inflation rates of all the countries in the sample.
 Similar to what we observed for real interest rates, inflation has become an increasingly
 global phenomenon, at least since World War II. Inflation rates in all countries were low in
                                                                                                                 25


the 1950s, rose in the 1960s and 1970s, and then fell in the last forty years. The results
indicate that the global trend in inflation is at an all-time low.
       The right panel of Figure 4 displays the world inflation trend π̄tw (black dashed line) along
with the trend π̄i,t = λπi π̄tw + π̄ti for each country in the sample (dotted lines). Although the
trends, like the raw data, tend to move more closely together in the second half of the sample,
this convergence is less pronounced and uniform over time than for real returns, with notable
country-specific idiosyncrasies. For instance, Italy is, not surprisingly, the country where the
inflation trend reaches higher at around 1980, followed by France. Germany’s trend, on the
contrary, barely touches 5 percent at its peak and is consistently toward the bottom of the
distribution. Japan’s trend, which was often the highest in the first century of data, has
been well below all others since the burst of its real estate bubble and the ensuing struggles
with deflation and the zero lower bound. Except for Japan, all other inflation trends have
been extremely close since the 1990s, heading together toward deflationary territory since
the global financial crisis. In part, this recent convergence probably reflects the long-run
effects on inflation of the adoption of a common monetary policy by Germany, France, and
Italy after the introduction of the euro.
       The last trend we discuss is that capturing low-frequency movements in term spreads.
                                                                                 w
Figure A1 in the Appendix displays the estimated global trend tst together with observations
                    L
on the term spread Ri,t − Ri,t for each country i (dotted lines) on the left, as well as the
estimated trends for each country tsi,t on the right. These results demonstrate that the slope
of the yield curve does fluctuate at low frequencies and that much of these fluctuations are
common across countries, especially over the last few decades.
       We close this section by discussing an empirical specification that relaxes the arbitrage
condition (15). We do so by letting real returns in each country load on the common factor
with a potentially different coefficient, as in

                                             Ri,t − π i,t = λri rw    i
                                                                 t + rt .                                     (19)

Table A2 in the Appendix reports the estimated loadings under this specification. None of
them is significantly different from one.26 Moreover, Figure A12 shows that the estimates of
r̄tw and r̄U S,t produced by the unconstrained model are very close to those reported above,
at least from the 1940s onward. We do not consider these results a particularly stringent
test of perfect international arbitrage in the long run, although they are consistent with it.
  26
       More specifically, all the 90 percent posterior credible intervals include zero. For the U.K., the 68 percent
credible interval is below one, while it is above one for the U.S. (barely) and Japan.
                                                                                                              26


Their relevant implication for our empirical strategy is that the restricted model, which has
the great advantage of being easily interpretable, is not at odds with the data. Therefore,
we will maintain the no arbitrage restrictions in the empirical specifications explored in the
remaining sections.


4.1.2       Trends in Real Interest Rates and Demographics

The aim of the rest of this paper is to identify some of the potential drivers of the trend in
the world real interest rate. A growing literature finds a connection between demographics
and low-frequency movements in interest rates (e.g., Aksoy et al., 2015; Carvalho et al.,
2016; Favero et al., 2016; Gagnon et al., 2016; Eggertsson et al., 2017; Ferrero et al., 2017).
The general idea is that the balance between different cohorts in the population affects the
overall supply of savings. Middle-aged individuals tend to save and hence provide funds to
the rest of the economy, while the young and the old tend to dissave and demand funds. As
a result, the real interest rate that balances the overall supply of savings with the demand
for investment is affected by the relative size of these cohorts. Favero et al. (2016) find that
one variable effectively summarizes this connection between demographic composition and
real interest rates—the ratio between middle-aged (those between 40 and 49) and young
individuals (those between 20 and 29), or MY, as suggested by the overlapping-generations
model of Geanakoplos et al. (2004).

       Figure 5 shows that this variable indeed comoves with our estimates of the trend real
interest rate at the global level and in most of the seven countries that we consider, although
the fit varies substantially depending on the period and the country.27 The panels show
again our baseline estimates of the trend in the world and each country’s real interest rate
(displayed in the right panel of Figure 3), along with the fitted value of a regression of that
trend on MY.28 In the United States, for which we have a longer sample, MY fits both the
mild secular decline in the real interest rate between 1900 and 1950 and the hump that peaks
  27
       For the United States, we build MY with data from the Census Bureau, as in Favero et al. (2016). For
the other countries, the data come from the UN World Population Statistics, which are available only since
1950. As the counterpart to the world real interest rate, we construct a “global” MY as the ratio between
the total populations of middle-aged and young in the seven countries in the sample.
  28
     These regressions are run separately for the world economy and for each country. The R2 in these
regressions ranges from 26 to 81 percent (in the U.K.) , while the regression coefficients are between -5.3 and
-1.7. These results are consistent with the visual impression that the fit of this relationship is close overall,
but also variable from country to country.
                                                                                                                               27


                                                Figure 5: MY regression
                           World                                                               U.S.
6                                                                   6
5                                                                   5
4                                                                   4
3                                                                   3
2                                                                   2
1                                                                   1
0                                                                   0
-1                                                                 -1
-2                                                                 -2
-3                                                                 -3
     1880   1900   1920    1940     1960   1980    2000                 1880   1900    1920    1940    1960    1980    2000

                          Germany                                                              U.K.
6                                                                   6
5                                                                   5
4                                                                   4
3                                                                   3
2                                                                   2
1                                                                   1
0                                                                   0
-1                                                                 -1
-2                                                                 -2
-3                                                                 -3
     1880   1900   1920    1940     1960   1980    2000                 1880   1900    1920    1940    1960    1980    2000

                          France                                                              Canada
6                                                                   6
5                                                                   5
4                                                                   4
3                                                                   3
2                                                                   2
1                                                                   1
0                                                                   0
-1                                                                 -1
-2                                                                 -2
-3                                                                 -3
     1880   1900   1920    1940     1960   1980    2000                 1880   1900    1920    1940    1960    1980    2000

                           Italy                                                               Japan
6                                                                   6
5                                                                   5
4                                                                   4
3                                                                   3
2                                                                   2
1                                                                   1
0                                                                   0
-1                                                                 -1
-2                                                                 -2
-3                                                                 -3
     1880   1900   1920    1940     1960   1980    2000                 1880   1900    1920    1940    1960    1980    2000

Note: The upper-left panel reproduces the estimates of r̄tw , and the remaining panels show the estimates of r̄i,t for each country
together with the fitted values of the regression of r̄i,t on a constant and MY for each country. Similarly, the solid black line
in the upper-left panel shows the fitted values of the regression of r̄tw on a constant and a “world” MY, which is constructed as
the ratio of the total middle-aged population to the total young population in all countries considered here. In all panels the
dashed line shows the posterior median and the shaded areas show the 68 and 95 percent posterior coverage intervals.



around 1980. In fact, MY captures this hump remarkably well in all the countries where one is
visible, with the possible exception of Italy. From this (admittedly only illustrative) evidence,
we conclude that demographic factors, as captured by the variable MY, are plausible drivers
                                                                                             28


of secular movements in real interest rates.
    However, these demographic factors turn upward (or remain flat) starting around 2000
in all countries except Italy and Japan. In fact, the recent evolution of the MY ratio suggests
that demographic factors have been putting upward pressure on interest rates since the turn
of the century. Therefore, demographics do not appear to be behind the decline in the trend
real interest rate that has taken place over the past two decades.
    As explained in Section 3, the trend in the real interest rate is driven both by move-
ments in the stochastic discount factor and in the convenience yield. According to the
theories outlined above, demographic factors are primarily reflected in the stochastic dis-
count factor. Instead of detailing the interaction between demographics, economic growth,
and the stochastic discount factor—which we leave for future research—we now proceed with
disentangling fluctuations in the stochastic discount factor and in the convenience yield.


4.2    The Role of Convenience Yields

The baseline model described in the previous section used just enough information to identify
this trend and distinguish it from trends in inflation and the term premium. In what follows,
we will bring more information into the estimation that will allow us to decompose the
overall trend in the world return on safe assets into some of its fundamental components.
A key component that we consider is the convenience yield that distinguishes widely traded
government bonds from comparable assets that are less liquid and safe. Going back to
equation (14), this distinction is based on the relationship

                                       rw    w      w
                                        t = mt − cy t ,                                   (20)

which splits rw
              t into the trend of the stochastic discount factor of the marginal world in-
vestor, mw
         t , and the low-frequency component of her taste for safety and liquidity, the global
convenience yield cy w
                     t . Under the maintained no-arbitrage assumption, only one SDF and
one convenience yield factor—those of the marginal international investor—are relevant to
pin down the trend in the world interest rate. Therefore, one extra observable is sufficient to
separately identify these two components, given the identification of rw
                                                                       t that we had already
achieved in the baseline model.
    The key observable that gives us this identification is the yield on U.S. Baa corporate
bonds, as computed by Moody’s. Building on the work of Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2012), we assume that these corporate bonds are both less safe and less liquid
                                                                                                           29


than U.S. Treasuries of roughly equivalent maturity. As in Del Negro et al. (2017), we take
this assumption to the extreme and postulate that these bonds have no convenience yield
whatsoever. Therefore, the long-run component of the spread between the Baa yields and
those on Treasuries is
                                         Baa         L
                                       RU S,t − RU S,t = cy w      US
                                                            t + cy t .                                   (21)

The assumption that Baa securities have no convenience at all is conservative, in the sense
that its violation would result in an under estimation of the size of the convenience yield
trend, as discussed in Del Negro et al. (2017). Indeed, Baa securities are not completely
illiquid, and there are certainly less safe assets. Therefore, they are likely to earn some
fraction of the convenience yield of Treasuries. If that is the case, the Baa spread will move
less than one-to-one with the convenience yield, thus providing a lower bound on its true
size.29

       The trend in the U.S. Baa spread provides observations on the sum of cy w        US
                                                                               t and cy t , as
shown in equation (22). How do we separate the two with no information on the returns of
illiquid/unsafe securities in other countries? The answer is that, under the assumption that
deviations from UIP are due to country-specific convenience yields cy it , the estimates of the
idiosyncratic component of the trend in the U.S. real interest rate from the baseline model
already give us a time series for cy Ut S . Given this estimate, the U.S. Baa spread is enough
to identify cy w
               t .
                   30


       In summary, the second model that we estimate is the same as (18), but now includes
the two common factors mw        w                                                       Baa
                        t and cy t , as in (20). Those factors are identified by adding RU S,t
to the list of observables, according to the equation
                                Baa              w       i
                              RU S,t = mw                π w       i     Baa
                                        t + tst + tst + λi π t + π t + R̃U S,t .                         (22)

In this model n = 22 and τ = 25.
  29
       Equation (22) ignores trends in the default rate as a potential determinant of the Baa spread. This is
because Del Negro et al. (2017) document that, at least in the last forty years, default rates for U.S. Baa
corporate bonds trended down, based on data from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012). Therefore, accounting
for the contribution of this trend to the spread would lead to even larger estimates of the convenience yield.
  30
     Adding a time-series for yields on corporate or similar bonds outside of the U.S. to our dataset would be
an interesting extension of our work, as it would provide a more direct measure of convenience yields in other
countries, thus allowing an explicit distinction between this and other potential sources of UIP violation on
safe returns. This approach would be tantamount to studying long-run UIP violations using returns on
unsafe/illiquid assets, rather than government bonds.
                                                                                                                                  30


                                                     Figure 6: r̄tw , cy w         w
                                                                         t , and m̄t


                    r̄tw                                     r̄tw and −cy w
                                                                          t                                  r̄tw and m̄w
                                                                                                                        t
6                                                6                                              6
5                                                5                                              5
4                                                4                                              4
3                                                3                                              3
2                                                2                                              2
1                                                1                                              1
0                                                0                                              0
-1                                              -1                                             -1
-2                                              -2                                             -2
-3                                              -3                                             -3
     1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000              1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000             1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
      Note: In all three panels, the dashed black line is the posterior median and the shaded gray areas are the 68 and 95 percent
      posterior coverage intervals for r̄tw . The dashed green line is the posterior median and the shaded green areas are the 68 and
      95 percent posterior coverage intervals for −cy w                         w
                                                       t (middle panel) and m̄t (right panel).




      4.2.1       Results

      Figure 6 shows the trend in the world real interest rate r̄tw from the model that includes Baa
      yields, as well as its decomposition between the trend in the stochastic discount factor of
      international investors m̄w                                                  w
                                t and the trend in the global convenience yield cy t . The estimates
      of r̄tw are reproduced in all three panels; the levels of −cy w
                                                                    t in the middle panel and of
      m̄w                                                                                w
        t in the rightmost one are normalized to coincide with the posterior median of r̄t at the
      beginning of the sample, so as to provide a visual sense of the contributions of each factor
      to the secular fluctuations in the world interest rate.

             This figure delivers the third result of the paper. Low-frequency movements in the global
      convenience yield are a key driver of the trend in the world real interest rate and especially
      of its pronounced decline over the past few decades. To a certain extent, this conclusion was
      already implied by our previous result that the trend in the world real interest rate is very
      close to that of the safe and liquid return in the U.S. This evidence, together with the finding
      in Del Negro et al. (2017) that the decline in the U.S. return since the late 1990s is driven
      in large part by an increase in its convenience yield, already delivers the result qualitatively.
      Figure 6 and Table 1 formalize and quantify this informal conclusion in the context of our
      global model.31
        31
             Figure A13 in the Appendix shows that the estimates of r̄U S,t from the model with the Baa spread are
      consistent with those from the baseline model. The fact that they are not identical is not surprising, since
      the former uses one more piece of information to estimate the U.S. trend. In both models, r̄U S,t and r̄tw fall
                                                                                                               31


    More specifically, the table shows that the trend in the global convenience yield accounts
for about half of the secular decline in the world real interest rate since 1980, which in this
model totals 171 basis points, and close to 60 percent of the more than 1 percent decline
since 1997. These contributions are surrounded by sizable uncertainty, as is the estimate of
the overall trend, but they are significantly different from zero at all three horizons. This
evidence is therefore consistent with the view expressed by Caballero and Krishnamurthy
(2009), Caballero (2010), Caballero et al. (2016), and Bernanke et al. (2011), among others,
that the increased global demand for safe assets since the Asian crisis of 1997 has played a
crucial role in driving interest rates lower across the world.32

    The right panel of Figure 6 shows that the global stochastic discount factor r̄tw has also
played an important role in the fall of the world real interest rate over the past decades.
Table 1 reports that the SDF has declined by about the same amount as the convenience
yield since 1980, but by less since 1990 and 1997. Moreover, the changes in the SDF are
less precisely estimated than those of the global convenience yield, as clearly illustrated by
the wider posterior probability bands in the right panel of Figure 6. As a result, the 90
percent posterior probability intervals for the declines over the three periods that we are
considering all include zero.33 What forces lie behind the estimated decline in the global
stochastic discount factor? The next section takes up this question by bringing to the table
information on consumption growth, as suggested by asset pricing theory.
closely together since the 1980s, with r̄U S,t declining a bit more toward the end of the sample. In addition,
Figures A14 and A15 show that the estimated country-specific trends in real rates and in inflation from the
model that includes the Baa spread are very similar to those from the baseline model shown in Figures 3
and 4.
  32
     Figure A25 in the Appendix plots our estimates of the convenience yield for the U.S. together with the
Baa-Treasury spread. It shows that the estimated convenience yield captures very well the low-frequency
movements in the spread, in particular its secular increase since the mid-1990s. Figure A26 shows spreads
for five other countries (the spreads for Germany, France, and Italy are obtained from Gilchrist and Mojon
(2018)), together with the estimates of cy
                                         ¯ i,t . While these spreads are generally available only for the past
twenty years, the figure shows that, during this period, the spreads increased on average by 50 to 100 basis
points, roughly consistent with the increase in cy
                                                 ¯ i,t . Note that while the change in the spreads is in line with
our estimates, the level is not. This is likely due to the fact that composition of the corporate bond indexes
in terms of credit ratings, liquidity, and maturity is different relative to the U.S.
  33
     Table A1 in the Appendix provides more details on the posterior distribution of the decline in the world
real interest rate and in the factors that drive it.
                                                                                              32


4.3    A Model with Consumption

The models that we have discussed so far treat the trend in the stochastic discount factor
mw
 t as an unobservable variable. In the specification considered in Section 4.2, this was
estimated as the common factor among short- and long-term yields to all securities across
the world, regardless of their safety and liquidity characteristics. In this section, we push
the decomposition of the world real interest rate one step further.

    We use data on per capita consumption growth to identify a component of mw
                                                                             t connected
to the global trend in consumption growth. We denote this trend as g w
                                                                     t . A connection
between the stochastic discount factor and some function of consumption growth forms
the basis of most macro-finance asset-pricing theories, even if the empirical relevance of the
resulting relationship between economic growth and rates of return has often been questioned.
In light of the mixed evidence on the extent to which interest rates and consumption growth
actually correlate even at low frequencies (see, e.g., Hamilton et al., 2016; Lunsford and
West, 2017), our proposed model of the stochastic discount does not connect the two very
tightly, allowing for other factors to shift that relationship. In particular, we assume that
                                                       w
                                        mw    w
                                         t = gt + β t ,                                     (23)
                                                                                                w
where g w
        t is the trend in consumption growth that is common across countries, while β t
captures trends in the SDF that are unrelated to consumption.

    We extract the global consumption trend g w
                                              t from real interest rates (using equation
(26)) and from the low-frequency dynamics of consumption growth across countries, which
evolve according to the equation

                                     ∆ci,t = g w     w     i
                                               t + γ t + γ t.                               (24)

Here, we allow for additional trends in consumption growth (γ w       i
                                                              t and γ t ) that are unrelated to
the stochastic discount factor and that therefore do not affect real interest rates (do not enter
(26)). These trends represent one more degree of freedom in the posited relationship between
growth and returns, which allow the empirical model to account for the potentially tenuous
connection between the two. Following the approach that we adopted for inflation and the
term premiums, we assume that one of these trends, γ w
                                                     t , is common across countries, while
another one, γ it , is idiosyncratic. This specification levers the cross-sectional information
contained in our international data set to generalize a similar model that we estimated
in Del Negro et al. (2017) on data for the United States. One possible interpretation of
                                                                                                                                   33


      the γ trends is that they reflect the growth rate of consumption of households that are
      hand-to-mouth or liquidity constrained (Campbell and Mankiw, 1989; Kaplan and Violante,
      2014) and/or are excluded from international asset markets, as in the limited-participation
      literature (e.g., Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002).

           From an econometric perspective, we could also identify a country-specific trend in con-
      sumption growth, say, g it , which would enter the expression for the stochastic discount factor.
      We restrict this term to zero because otherwise the stochastic discount factor would no longer
      be unique, violating the maintained assumption of perfect international arbitrage discussed
      in Section 3.

           In sum, the third model we estimate includes consumption growth across countries as
      an observable
                                                     ∆ci,t = g w     w     i
                                                               t + γ t + γ t + ∆ci,t ,
                                                                               f                                                 (25)

      for i = 1, .., n, in addition to the variables in (18) and (22). Moreover, the safe world real
      interest rate in this system is decomposed as
                                                                         w
                                                         rw     w            w
                                                          t = g t + β t − cy t .                                                 (26)

      Therefore, this specification includes four global trends: one that is common to all yields
                                                                                                                                  w
      and consumption growth rates across countries (g w
                                                       t ), one that is common only to yields (β t ),
      one that is common only to the yields for liquid assets (cy w
                                                                  t ), and finally one that is common
      only to consumption growth rates (γ w
                                          t ). In this model, n = 29 and τ = 34.


                                                 Figure 7: r̄tw , cy w     w         w
                                                                     t , g t , and β̄t

             r̄tw and −cy w
                          t                                     r̄tw and g w
                                                                           t                                   r̄tw and β̄tw
6                                                6                                              6
5                                                5                                              5
4                                                4                                              4
3                                                3                                              3
2                                                2                                              2
1                                                1                                              1
0                                                0                                              0
-1                                              -1                                              -1
-2                                              -2                                              -2
-3                                              -3                                              -3
     1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000               1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000             1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
      Note: In all three panels, the dashed black line is the posterior median and the shaded gray areas are the 68 and 95 percent
      posterior coverage intervals for r̄t . The dashed green line is the posterior median and the shaded green areas are the 68 and 95
      percent posterior coverage intervals for −cy t (middle panel) and m̄t (right panel).
                                                                                                       34


4.3.1       Results

Figure 7 shows the trend in the world real interest rate estimated from the model with
consumption and its decomposition into global trends in the (negative of the) convenience
yield −cy w                                                       w
          t , the part of consumption growth that prices assets ḡt , and the residual component
of the stochastic discount factor unrelated to consumption β̄tw . As in Figure 6, the series are
all normalized so that their posterior medians coincide at the beginning of the sample.

       The left panel of Figure 7, as well as Table 1, show that the estimated trend in the
world real interest rate and the convenience yield trend are very similar to those obtained
using the models of Sections 4.1 and 4.2. The middle panel shows that the global decline
in consumption growth, possibly related to the demographic changes discussed in Section
4.1.2, also plays an important role in bringing down r̄tw . The contribution of this factor to
the recent trend decline in the world real interest rate is about 75 basis points from 1980,
and 60 basis points from 1990. These median estimates are less precise than those of the
convenience yield, but the posterior probability that the global consumption growth factor
did decline after 1980 is above 95 percent, although it becomes lower after 1990.

       The right panel of Figure 7 shows there is not much left to explain in the secular decline
in the world safe return once the convenience yield and consumption growth are accounted
for. The residual pricing factor β̄tw is roughly flat throughout the sample and its mild decline
after 1980 is never statistically significant.34



5        Conclusions

Ten years after the most acute phase of the global financial crisis, interest rates remain at
or near historically low levels for many countries. We studied the secular drivers of this low-
interest-rate environment through the lens of a vector autoregression with common trends,
using historical data from seven countries dating back to 1870. We found that the trend in
the world safe real interest rate, which was roughly stable at a bit below 2 percent for more
than a hundred years, has dropped significantly over the past three decades. This global
trend, which we identified as the common component in the low-frequency movements of
the real yields on safe and liquid assets (government bonds or close substitutes) in the seven
economies in our sample, closely resembles the trends for all advanced economies, including
  34
       Figures A18, A19, and A20 reproduce the results shown in Figures 1, 3, and 4 of Section 4.1 for the
consumption model.
                                                                                           35


the United States, in the recent period. We find that country-specific trends have all but
vanished since the 1970s.

   This secular decline in global real rates is driven primarily by an increase in the premium
that international investors are willing to pay to hold safe and liquid assets, as well as by
lower economic growth around the world. The latter trend has been putting downward
pressure on real rates since around 1980, possibly linked to demographic shifts, while the
former emerged in the late 1990s. This timing points to the scarcity of safe assets in the
context of a global saving glut as a fundamental secular force behind the low-interest-rate
environment.
                                                                                          36


References
Aksoy, Yunus, Ron P. Smith, Tobias Grasl, and Henrique S. Basso, “Demographic
 structure and macroeconomic trends,” Working Paper 1528, Banco de Espana Working
 Papers, October 2015.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala i Martin, “World Real Interest Rates,” in “NBER
 Macroeconomics Annual 1990,” Vol. 5, 1990.
Barsky, Robert, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi, “The Natural Rate of
 Interest and Its Usefulness for Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, May 2014,
 104 (5), 37–43.
Bekaert, Geert and Arnaud Mehl, “On the Global Financial Market Integration Swoosh
 and the Trilemma,” National Bureau of Economic Research WP 23124, 2017.
Bernanke, Ben S., “The global saving glut and the U.S. current account deficit,” 2005.
  , Carol C. Bertaut, Laurie DeMarco, and Steven B. Kamin, “International capital
  flows and the return to safe assets in the United States, 2003-2007,” International Finance
  Discussion Papers 1014, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2011.
Borio, Claudio, Piti Disyatat, Mikael Juselius, and Phurichai Rungcharoenkitkul,
 “Why so low for so long? A long-term view of real interest rates,” BIS Working Papers
 685, Bank for International Settlements, December 2017.
Burstein, Ariel and Gita Gopinath, “International Prices and Exchange Rates,” in
 “Handbook of International Economics,” Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2014, pp. 391–451.
Caballero, Ricardo J., “The “other” imbalance and the financial crisis,” National Bureau
 of Economic Research WP 15636, 2010.
  , “Risk-centric Macroeconomics and Safe Asset Shortages in the Global Economy: An
  Illustration of Mechanisms and Policies,” mimeo, MIT, 2018.
   and Arvind Krishnamurthy, “Global imbalances and financial fragility,” National
  Bureau of Economic Research WP 14688, 2009.
   and Emmanuel Farhi, “The safety trap,” National Bureau of Economic Research WP
  19927, 2014.
  , , and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the
  ZLB,” National Bureau of Economic Research WP 21670, 2015.
Caballero, Ricardo J, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, “Safe asset
 scarcity and aggregate demand,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (5), 513–18.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, “The Safe
 Assets Shortage Conundrum,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2017, 31 (3),
 29–46.
Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw, “Consumption, income and interest
 rates: Reinterpreting the time series evidence,” in “NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989,
 Volume 4,” MIT Press, 1989, pp. 185–246.
Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio, “Demographics and real
 interest rates: Inspecting the mechanism,” European Economic Review, 2016, pp. 208–226.
                                                                                      37


Chin, Michael, Ferre De Graeve, Thomai Filippeli, and Konstantinos Theodor-
 idis, “Understanding International Long-Term Interest Rate Comovement,” Technical Re-
 port, Cardiff Business School, 2018.

Chong, Yanping, Òscar Jordà, and Alan M. Taylor, “The Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson
 Hypothesis: Real Exchange Rates and their Long-Run Equilibrium,” NBER Working
 Paper 15868, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2010.
Christensen, Jens H. E. and Glenn D. Rudebusch, “A New Normal for Interest Rates?
 Evidence from Inflation-Indexed Debt,” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
 working paper, 2016.
Ciccarelli, Matteo and Benoit Mojon, “Global Inflation,” The Review of Economics
  and Statistics, August 2010, 92 (3), 524–535.
Coroneo, Laura, Ian Garrett, and Javier Sanhueza, “Dynamic Linkages Across Coun-
 try Yield Curves: The Effects of Global and Local Yield Curve Factors on US, UK and
 German Yields,” in “New Methods in Fixed Income Modeling,” Springer, 2018, pp. 205–
 222.
Crump, Richard K., Stefano Eusepi, and Emanuel Moench, “The term structure of
 expectations and bond yields,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 775,
 2016.
Curdia, Vasco, Andrea Ferrero, Ging Cee Ng, and Andrea Tambalotti, “Has U.S.
 Monetary Policy Tracked the Efficient Interest Rate?,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
 2015, 70 (C), 72–83.
Del Negro, Marco, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tam-
 balotti, “Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural Rate of Interest,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
 nomic Activity, 2017, 48 (Spring), 235–316.
Diebold, Francis X., Canlin Li, and Vivian Z. Yue, “Global yield curve dynamics
 and interactions: A dynamic Nelson-Siegel approach,” Journal of Econometrics, October
 2008, 146 (2), 351–363.
Du, Wenxin, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan, “Deviations from Covered
 Interest Rate Parity,” Journal of Finance, June 2018, 73 (3), 915–957.
  , Joanne Im, and Jesse Schreger, “The U.S. Treasury Premium,” in “NBER Interna-
  tional Seminar on Macroeconomics 2017” NBER Chapters, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, January 2017.
Durbin, James and Siem Jan Koopman, “A Simple and Efficient Simulation Smoother
 for State Space Time Series Analysis,” Biometrika, 2002, 89 (3), 603–616.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacob A. Robbins, “A Model of
 Secular Stagnation: Theory and Quantitative Evaluation,” NBER Working Paper 23093,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, January 2017.
Engel, Charles, “Exchange Rates and Interest Parity,” in “Handbook of International
 Economics,” Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2014, pp. 453–522.
  , “Exchange Rates, Interest Rates, and the Risk Premium,” American Economic Review,
  February 2016, 106 (2), 436–474.
Favero, Carlo A., Arie E. Gozluklu, and Haoxi Yang, “Demographics and the Be-
  havior of Interest Rates,” IMF Economic Review, November 2016, 64 (4), 732–776.
                                                                                        38


Ferrero, Giuseppe, Marco Gross, and Stefano Neri, “On secular stagnation and low
  interest rates: demography matters,” European Central Bank Working Paper 2088, 2017.
Froot, Kenneth A. and Kenneth Rogoff, “Perspectives on PPP and long-run real
  exchange rates,” in G. M. Grossman and K. Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International
  Economics, Vol. 3 of Handbook of International Economics, Elsevier, 1995, chapter 32,
  pp. 1647–1688.
Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and J. David Lopez-Salido, “Under-
 standing the New Normal: The Role of Demographics,” Finance and Economics Discussion
 Series 2016-080, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2016.
Geanakoplos, John, Michael Magill, and Martine Quinzii, “Demography and the
 Long-Run Predictability of the Stock Market,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
 2004, 35 (1), 241–326.
Gerko, Elena and Hélène Rey, “Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital,” Journal of
 the European Economic Association, 2017, 15 (4), 721–745.
Giannone, Domenico, Michele Lenza, and Giorgio E Primiceri, “Prior selection for
 vector autoregressions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2015, 97 (2), 436–451.
Gilchrist, Simon and Benoit Mojon, “Credit risk in the euro area,” The Economic
 Journal, 2018, 128 (608), 118–158.
   and Egon Zakrajsek, “Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,” American
  Economic Review, 2012, 102 (4), 1692–1720.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey, “External adjustment, global imbalances,
 valuation effects,” in “Handbook of International Economics,” Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2014,
 pp. 585–645.
   and , “Real Interest Rates, Imbalances and the Curse of Regional Safe Asset Providers
  at the Zero Lower Bound,” National Bureau of Economic Research WP 22618, 2016.
   and    , “Global Real Rates: A Secular Approach,” Technical Report, Working Paper
  2018.
Greenwood, Robin and Dimitri Vayanos, “Bond supply and excess bond returns,”
 Review of Financial Studies, 2014, 27 (3), 663–713.
  , Samuel G Hanson, and Jeremy C Stein, “A Comparative-Advantage Approach to
  Government Debt Maturity,” The Journal of Finance, 2015, 70 (4), 1683–1722.
Hall, Robert E, “Understanding the decline in the safe real interest rate,” National Bureau
 of Economic Research WP 22196, 2016.
Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West, “The
 Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future,” IMF Economic Review, Novem-
 ber 2016, 64 (4), 660–707.
Hasenzagl, Thomas, Filippo Pellegrino, Lucrezia Reichlin, Giovanni Ricco et al.,
 “A Model of the Fed’s View on Inflation,” presentation at the EEA-ESEM Annual Meet-
 ings, Lisbon, 2017.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams, “Measuring the nat-
 ural rate of interest: International trends and determinants,” Journal of International
 Economics, 2017, 108 (S1), 59–75.
                                                                                       39


Itskhoki, Oleg and Dmitry Mukhin, “Exchange Rate Disconnect in General Equilib-
  rium,” NBER Working Paper 23401, National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2017.
Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig, “Foreign Safe Asset
  Demand and the Dollar Exchange Rate,” NBER Working Papers 24439, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, March 2018.
Johannsen, Benjamin K. and Elmar Mertens, “A Time Series Model of Interest Rates
  With the Effective Lower Bound,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-033,
  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 2016.

Jordà, Òscar, Katharina Knoll, Dmitry Kuvshinov, Moritz Schularick, and
  Alan M. Taylor, “The Rate of Return on Everything, 1870-2015,” NBER Working
  Paper 24112, National Bureau of Economic Research, December 2017.
  , Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, “Macrofinancial history and the new
  business cycle facts,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2017, 31 (1), 213–263.
Justiniano, Alejandro and Giorgio E. Primiceri, “Measuring the equilibrium real
  interest rate,” Economic Perspectives, 2010, (Q I), 14–27.
Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L Violante, “A model of the consumption response to fiscal
 stimulus payments,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (4), 1199–1239.
Kiley, Michael T., “What Can the Data Tell Us About the Equilibrium Real Interest
 Rate?,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-77, Board of Governors of the
 Federal Reserve System, August 2015.
King, Mervyn and David Low, “Measuring the ”World” Real Interest Rate,” Working
 Paper 19887, National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2014.
   and , “Measuring the ”World” Real Interest Rate,” NBER Working Papers 19887,
  National Bureau of Economic Research February 2014.
Koenig, Evan F. and Alan Armen, “Navigating by the Stars: The Natural Rate as
 Economic Forecasting Tool,” Economic Letter, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 2017, 12
 (2).
Kozicki, Sharon and Peter A Tinsley, “Effective use of survey information in estimating
 the evolution of expected inflation,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2012, 44 (1),
 145–169.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, “The Aggregate Demand
 for Treasury Debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), 233–267.
Laubach, Thomas and John C. Williams, “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,”
  Review of Economics and Statistics, November 2003, 85 (4), 1063–1070.
   and , “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux,” Business Economics, 2016, 51
  (2), 57–67.
Lubik, Thomas A and Christian Matthes, “Calculating the natural rate of interest: A
 comparison of two alternative approaches,” Richmond Fed Economic Brief, 2015, (Oct),
 1–6.
Lunsford, Kurt and Kenneth West, “Some Evidence on Secular Drivers of US Safe Real
 Rates,” 2017.
                                                                                      40


Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and Hélene Rey, “US monetary policy and the global fi-
 nancial cycle,” National Bureau of Economic Research WP 21722, 2015.
Nagel, Stefan, “The liquidity premium of near-money assets,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 2016, 131 (4), 1927–1971.
Neri, Stefano and Andrea Gerali, “Natural rates across the Atlantic,” Temi di discus-
 sione 1140, Bank of Italy, Economic Research and International Relations Area, September
 2017.
Nikolaou, Kleopatra and Michele Modugno, “The forecasting power of internal yield
 curve linkages,” Working Paper Series 1044, European Central Bank April 2009.
Pescatori, Andrea and Jarkko Turunen, “Lower for Longer; Neutral Rates in the United
 States,” IMF Working Paper 15/135, International Monetary Fund, June 2015.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, “Testing for common trends,” Journal of the
  American Statistical Association, 1988, 83 (404), 1097–1107.
Summers, Lawrence H., “Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures,” in Coen Teulings
  and Richard Baldwin, eds., Reflections on the New Secular Stagnation, CEPR Press, 2014,
  pp. 27–40.
Valchev, Rosen, “Bond Convenience Yields and Exchange Rate Dynamics,” Boston College
 Working Papers in Economics 943, Boston College Department of Economics October
 2017.
Villani, Mattias, “Steady State Priors for Vector Autoregressions,” Journal of Applied
 Econometrics, 2009, 24 (4), 630–650.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, “Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity of
 Intertemporal Substitution,” Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 110 (4), 825–853.
Watson, Mark W., “Univariate detrending methods with stochastic trends,” Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 1986, 18 (1), 49–75.
Williams, John C., “The Future Fortunes of R-star: Are They Really Rising?,” Speech,
 Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May 2018.
Yellen, Janet, “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy,” December 2, 2015.
