                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        PEER ADVICE ON FINANCIAL DECISIONS:
                       A CASE OF THE BLIND LEADING THE BLIND?

                                          Sandro Ambuehl
                                        B. Douglas Bernheim
                                            Fulya Ersoy
                                            Donna Harris

                                        Working Paper 25034
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25034


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2018




We are especially grateful to Michalis Drouvelis and the people at the Birmingham Experimental Economics
Laboratory for letting us perform our experimental sessions at their facilities. We also thank James
Choi, Florian Ederer, Glenn W. Harrison, and seminar audiences at Stanford, Oxford, Amsterdam,
Pittsburgh, the Norwegian School of Economics, the North American ESA 2016 meetings, the ASSA
2017 meetings, and the 2017 meetings of the Society for Experimental Finance for helpful comments
and discussions. David Zuckerman provided excellence research assistance. This research has been
approved by the Stanford IRB in protocol 31364. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Alfred
P. Sloan foundation (grant number G-2017-9017) and from the Stanford Department of Economics.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Sandro Ambuehl, B. Douglas Bernheim, Fulya Ersoy, and Donna Harris. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Peer Advice on Financial Decisions: A case of the blind leading the blind?
Sandro Ambuehl, B. Douglas Bernheim, Fulya Ersoy, and Donna Harris
NBER Working Paper No. 25034
September 2018
JEL No. D03,D12,D69,G02

                                         ABSTRACT

Previous research shows that many people seek financial advice from non-experts, and that peer
interactions influence financial decisions. We investigate whether such influences are beneficial,
harmful, or simply haphazard. In our laboratory experiment, face-to-face communication with a
randomly assigned peer significantly improves the quality of private decisions, measured by
subjects' ability to choose as if they properly understand their opportunity sets. Subjects do not
merely mimic those who know better, but also make better private decisions in novel tasks.
People with low financial competence experience greater improvements when their partners also
exhibit low financial competence. Hence, peer-to-peer communication transmits financial
decision-making skills most effectively when peers are equally uninformed, rather than when an
informed decision maker teaches an uninformed peer. Qualitative analysis of subjects' discussions
supports this interpretation. The provision of effective financial education to one member of a
pair influences the nature of communication but does not lead to additional improvements in the
quality of the untreated partner's decisions, particularly in novel tasks.

Sandro Ambuehl                                  Fulya Ersoy
Department of Management UTSC                   Loyola Marymount University
Rotman School of Management                     Department of Economics
University of Toronto                           1 LMU Drive
105 St. George Street                           University Hall 4216
Toronto, ON, M5S 3E6                            Los Angeles, CA 94043
CANADA                                          fulya.ersoy@lmu.edu
sandro.ambuehl@utoronto.ca
                                                Donna Harris
B. Douglas Bernheim                             Department of Economics
Department of Economics                         University of Oxford
Stanford University                             Manor Road Building, Manor Road
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                         Oxford OX13UQ
and NBER                                        UNITED KINGDOM
bernheim@stanford.edu                           donhatai.harris@economics.ox.ac.uk




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25034
1     Introduction
When making financial decisions, people often seek advice from family and friends, rather than
from experts (Bernheim, 1998; Lusardi, 2003, 2008; van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie, 2011; Lusardi
and Mitchell, 2014). A substantial literature shows that these social interactions a↵ect personal
financial choices,1 but little is known about the extent to which they improve or degrade the quality
of decision making (Hastings, Madrian and Skimmyhorn, 2013).2 Related literature tentatively
points in both directions. On the one hand, even professionally designed educational interventions
can fail to improve decision making (Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi, 2018). By comparison, peer-
communication would appear to involve the blind leading the blind.3 On the other hand, a sizable
experimental literature finds that when groups make collective decisions, they often perform better
than individuals (see Charness and Sutter (2012) and Kerr and Tindale (2004) for reviews). In
principle, if members of a group internalize the group’s decision-making principles, the benefits of
social interaction could spill over into their private decisions.
    In this paper, we study the e↵ect of peer advice on the quality of financial decision making
in an experiment with face-to-face interaction. The choices we study require an understanding of
some simple financial principles, but they also implicate personal preferences; there are no right or
wrong decisions. We adopt this approach for two reasons. First, most financial decisions depend
on idiosyncratic preferences such as patience and risk aversion. Second, the problem of learning
from peers becomes more challenging when preferences enter the mix. Merely mimicking a well-
informed decision maker is a sensible strategy when everyone shares the same objectives, but can
be highly suboptimal when they do not. To benefit from peer-to-peer communication, people must
be able to either (i) separate principles from preferences and apply the principles based on their
own preferences, or (ii) recognize and mimic those with better information and similar preferences.
In contrast to our approach, previous studies that speak to the e↵ects of peer communication on
the quality of financial decision making employ tasks with dominant alternatives, which remove
preferences from the mix, thereby simplifying the problem of social learning (Hvide and Östberg,
   1 Recent contributions include (Beshears, Choi, Laibson, Madrian and Milkman, 2015; Brown, Collins, Schmeiser

and Urban, 2014; Bursztyn, Ederer, Ferman and Yuchtman, 2014; Cai, De Janvry and Sadoulet, 2015; Duflo and
Saez, 2003; Hvide and Östberg, 2015; Hong, Kubik and Stein, 2004, 2005; Kast, Meier and Pomeranz, 2016; Ivković
and Weisbenner, 2007; Lieber and Skimmyhorn, 2017; McCartney and Shah, 2017)
   2 See Mobius and Rosenblat (2014) for a general review of social learning in economics.
   3 Relatedly, Linnainmaa, Melzer and Previtero (2016) find that even professional financial advisors often make

mistakes with their private investments, and successfully convince their clients to do likewise.




                                                       1
2015; Haliassos, Jansson and Karabulut, 2017). For many (but not all) purposes, this simplification
is artificial.
    We evaluate the quality of decision making using the notion of financial competence due to
Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi (2018). The method consists of comparing decisions subjects ac-
tually make to those they would have made if they properly understood their opportunity sets. The
main advantage of this approach is that it allows us to study the quality of decision making in set-
tings where the attractiveness of each alternative depends on preferences (so that dominance-based
approaches do not apply), and where decision makers may su↵er from consistent misunderstand-
ings (so that approaches based on measures of WARP and GARP violations, e.g. Choi, Kariv,
Müller and Silverman (2014), do not apply); see the general methodological discussion in Bernheim
and Taubinsky (2018). The approach is non-paternalistic in the sense that it evaluates outcomes
according to subjects’ own preferences rather than some external judgment.
    Our study involves a laboratory experiment. We employ this approach for two reasons. First,
we can measure the quality of decision making more accurately in the laboratory than in the field.
Studies of field data typically focus on decision problems with arguably dominant alternatives, which
limits their applicability (see above), or on indirect measures of decision quality, such as directional
changes in behavior and/or financial literacy. As Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi (2018) demon-
strate, those indirect measures can be misleading, and may point toward false conclusions about
the quality of decision making. Second, inferring peer e↵ects from observational data poses vari-
ous econometric challenges (Manski, 1993). An experiment allows us to overcome these difficulties
through exogenous assignment of treatments and peers.
    Our subjects are undergraduate students at the University of Birmingham, UK.4 University
students comprise an important demographic group, the members of which are just beginning to
make important personal financial decisions. However, may of them may be ill-equipped to do so:
a mere 45% of our sample correctly answer three standard financial literacy questions; see Lusardi
2008. Students are also a target demographic group for many financial education interventions.5
   4 We are grateful to Michalis Drouvelis for allowing us to use the Birmingham Experimental Economics Laboratory.
   5 Inthe UK, financial literacy education for students aged 11-16 became part of the National Curriculum in
September 2014, as part of citizenship requirements (House of Commons Library, 2016). Given their age and the
time at which we completed the study, the subjects in our sample were not a↵ected by this policy. The National
Curriculum covers simple interest in Grades 7, 8, or 9, and compound interest in Grades 10 and 11 (Department for
Education, 2014).




                                                        2
   Our subjects make decisions concerning investments that accrue compound interest. Optimal
choices depend on subjects’ idiosyncratic time preferences, as well as their subjective assessments of
factors such as experimenter reliability.6 We compare subjects in a Communication treatment with
others in a Solitary treatment. In both treatments, subjects start by making private decisions about
investments. Those in the Communication condition then proceed to a face-to-face discussion about
similar investments with a randomly assigned peer, while those in the Solitary control condition
study the same investments on their own. Finally, subjects return to their terminals and make
additional private decisions. A third treatment, Indirect Education, mirrors the Communication
treatment, except that half of the subjects complete an education intervention about compound
interest that demonstrably improves the quality of their decision making before they speak with
peers. This treatment allows us to assess whether the benefits of an e↵ective educational intervention
propagate through through social contacts.
   We find that peer-communication is, on average, beneficial. It substantially improves the quality
of decision making evaluated according to subjects’ own preferences, and it does so relative to
solitary contemplation. Once we document this finding, we turn our attention to the mechanisms
by which communication influences decision quality.
   After communicating with a peer, subjects make private decisions involving both the interest-
bearing assets they discussed, as well as assets they have not previously encountered. We find that
peer-communication improves the quality of subjects’ decisions in both cases, and to similar extents.
Hence, peer-to-peer communication does not improve the quality of decision making merely because
subjects can identify others who are better informed, without comprehending how the other person
arrived at their decision. Instead, communication appears to provide our subjects with generalizable
decision skills that are applicable beyond the specific problems they discuss.
   Next we ask whether subjects learn more e↵ectively from some types of peers than from others.
Specifically, we classify subjects according to whether their initial decision quality is in the top
or bottom half of our sample. We address two competing hypotheses. The first holds that the
transmission of decision making skills simply involves information flowing from the informed to
   6 We remain agnostic, however, about the reasons why a subject may exhibit some specific discount factor. All

that matters for our purposes is that subjects have some utility function they attempt to maximize, no matter its
determinants.




                                                       3
the uninformed.7 According to this hypothesis, the better the decision quality of the discussion
partner, the larger the beneficial e↵ect of peer communication on a subject’s own decision quality.
The second hypothesis holds that communication is more e↵ective between people who appreci-
ate each others’ gaps in knowledge, reasons for confusion, and preferred pace. According to this
hypothesis, the benefits from communication may be largest when peers are most similar, even
when greater similarity requires the peer to be less financially competent.8 Consistent with the
second hypothesis, we find that people in the bottom half of the financial competence distribution
experience greater improvements when interacting with others in the bottom half than when inter-
acting with others in the top half. Hence, peer-to-peer communication transmits financial decision
making skills most e↵ectively when peers are equally uninformed, rather than when an informed
decision maker teaches an uninformed peer. Qualitative analysis of subjects’ discussions supports
this interpretation. Similarly skilled partners engage in longer discussions without discussing more
problems or engaging in more small talk. Instead, they appear to discuss each problem in greater
depth.9
    Finally, we study the extent to which peer-to-peer communication can help to augment the
e↵ects of beneficial financial education interventions that target limited numbers of consumers by
propagating their e↵ects through the population. Based on the preceding discussion, two counter-
vailing mechanisms may be at work. On the one hand, treated consumers acquire new skills, which
they may transmit to others. On the other hand, an e↵ective treatment reduces the similarity be-
tween treated and untreated consumers, potentially stymying the transmission process. Consumers
may also have greater difficulty communicating recently acquired conceptual knowledge. Overall,
we find that communication with a treated peer is no more beneficial than communication with
an untreated peer (even though the treatment improves the quality of peer’s decisions). How-
ever, there is an important qualification. Communication with a treated peer is more beneficial
for choices involving assets that the pair discussed, and less beneficial for choices involving novel
assets.10 An analysis of the content of conversations reveals that pairs with similar initial skills are
   7 E↵ects consistent with this mechanism have been documented in di↵erent choice contexts by Bursztyn, Ederer,

Ferman and Yuchtman (2014) (financial choice) and by Jackson and Bruegmann (2009) (peer learning amongst
elementary school teachers).
   8 E↵ects consistent with this mechanism have been documented by Hoxby and Weingarth (2005) (elementary

school students), and by Booij, Leuven and Oosterbeek (2016) and Feld and Zölitz (2017) (university students).
   9 A possibly related finding by Bhattacharya, Hackethal, Kaesler, Loos and Meyer (2012) is that retail investors

who receive unbiased financial advice from experts (who have better financial decision making skills than their clients)
largely fail to follow it, perhaps because adviser and advisee are too di↵erent.
  10 The di↵erence-in-di↵erences is statistically significant, but simple di↵erences are not.




                                                           4
significantly less likely to highlight their similarity when one member is treated. Instead, it becomes
more likely that one member of the pair attempts to assert superior expertise. Additionally, while
the treatment dramatically increases the frequency at which subjects discuss a heuristic rule that
the treatment covers (the Rule of 72), this e↵ect comes at the cost of crowding out discussions of
the compound interest formula.
   We contribute to three strands of literature. The first concerns peer e↵ects in financial decision
making (starting with Duflo and Saez (2003) and Hong, Kubik and Stein (2004)). Bursztyn, Ederer,
Ferman and Yuchtman (2014) examine the nature of peer e↵ects among Brazilian investors. They
document two types of peer influences: first, investors learn from each other; second, they mimic
others’ asset holdings. Other papers delve into the e↵ects of peers’ characteristics. Ouimet and
Tate (2017) study employee stock purchase plans for U.S. public firms, and find that employees
who are poorly (highly) informed are most influenced by others who are poorly (highly) informed.
Relatedly, Ko and Pirinsky (2017) find that sociability within a county promoted more conservative
demand for housing and more stable real estate prices during the 2008 housing bubble, particularly
when the number of financially sophisticated residents in an area was high. Haliassos, Jansson and
Karabulut (2017) study both the nature of peer e↵ects and the relevance of peers’ characteristics,
finding that proxies for the quality of financial decisions among refugees in Sweden increase more
strongly when neighbors have economics or business education, but only for educated or male-
headed households. They conclude that the underlying mechanism involves knowledge transfer
rather than mere imitation. We contribute to this literature in several ways. First, we focus
on peer e↵ects involving the quality of financial decision making, which we measure in a precise
and theoretically rigorous way. Second, we study peer e↵ects in a controlled laboratory setting,
thereby identifying causal influences and associated mechanisms with greater confidence. Third, we
distinguish between a peer’s baseline competence and recently acquired skills, showing that people
have little ability to transmit the latter.
   The second related strand of literature concerns financial education (see Lusardi and Mitchell
(2014) and Hastings, Madrian and Skimmyhorn (2013) for reviews, and Miller, Reichelstein, Salas
and Zia (2014) and Fernandes, Lynch Jr. and Netemeyer (2014) for meta analyses). Some have ar-
gued for targeting interventions at influencers and relying on social di↵usion to leverage the e↵ects
of financial education (see, e.g., Haliassos, Jansson and Karabulut (2017) and Ouimet and Tate
(2017)). Because the indirect beneficial e↵ects of education in our experiment arise from mimicry


                                                  5
rather than from improved conceptual understanding, our experiment calls the e↵ectiveness of many
such di↵usion strategies into question. Beneficial di↵usion may be limited to the transmission of
descriptive information; conceptual decision strategies are less likely to propagate through social
networks.11 As an anecdotal example, many consumers appear to have learned the mantra that
small investors should achieve diversification through index funds without processing sensible prin-
ciples for making tradeo↵s between diversification and management fees (Hortaçsu and Syverson,
2004).
    Third, we contribute to an experimental literature on peer e↵ects in learning. Our paper is most
closely related to Kimbrough, McGee and Shigeoka (2017), which studies the transmission of skills
for solving Sudoku puzzles. It finds that peer-teching improves learning, but that ability-tracking
has a detrimental e↵ect. One important di↵erence from the current study is that our financial
decision-making tasks implicate preferences. Additionally, subjects are likely to have di↵erent
familiarity with, and misconceptions about, financial decision making and Sudoko puzzles. Because
of these di↵erences peer communication could be less beneficial in the settings we study.12 That
said, potential instances of “the blind leading the blind” arise even with neutral tasks. For example,
Boudreau and McCubbins (2010) find that providing subjects taking a mathematics test with polls
of their peers’ beliefs about the correct answers leads them to perform less well.
    The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 explains the design of our experiment.
Section 3 describes our data and performs preliminary analyses. Section 4 presents our main results.
Finally, Section 5 explores policy implications and concludes.



2     Design
Measuring decision quality             To assess the quality of decision making, we use the financial
competence approach of Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi (2018). Subjects make substantively
equivalent decisions in two frames. In the complex frame of the present experiment, a future
payment amount is described as an investment that accrues compound interest: “We will invest y
 11 While   the data of Haliassos, Jansson and Karabulut (2017) point to a social multiplier of education, their
identification is based on whether peers happen to be educated or not. Therefore, while the indirect e↵ects of
financial education they document could be caused by the education itself, they could also be a consequence of the
di↵erent personalities and skills of individuals who chose to educate themselves.
   12 Another di↵erence is that all treatments in Kimbrough, McGee and Shigeoka (2017) involve an education inter-

vention.




                                                        6
tokens in an account with r% interest per day. Interest is compounded daily. We will pay you the
proceeds in t days.” We then elicit the present dollar amount the subject considers equivalent to
that investment. The simple frame is similar, except that we directly reveal the future payment
amount to the subjects: “You will receive x tokens in t days”. A subject who fully understands
the consequences of her decisions should make the same choice in substantively equivalent choice
problems even if they are framed di↵erently. A divergence in valuations indicates that the subject
lacks the ability to choose her preferred outcome in at least one of the frames. The extent of this
divergence provides a measure of the quality of decision making.
   The absolute value of the di↵erence in valuations across frames serves as our main outcome
variable. Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi (2018) shows that one can interpret this measure as the
maximal welfare loss a subject incurs by having to make a choice in the complex frame rather than
in the simple frame, as judged by the preferences she reveals in the simple frame.
   A potential reservation concerning this welfare measure is that the preferences revealed in the
simple frame may be tainted by other cognitive limitations and biases. For example, a subject who
su↵ers from ‘present bias’ may exhibit excessive impatience in the simple frame, and overestimating
compound interest might o↵set that bias. In principle, one could factor such ancillary biases
into the welfare measure (comprehensive welfare analysis). In practice, this approach encounters
two problems. First, it requires a comprehensive positive and normative understanding of all
cognitive biases that may a↵ect the decision in question. It admits neither the existence of unknown
biases, nor the possibility of disagreements about the magnitudes or normative implications of other
known biases. Second, broadening the scope of the analysis to include other known biases without
simultaneously expanding it to include other measures that could address those biases can lead to
problematic conclusions—for example, that misleading communication is beneficial if it exaggerates
the benefits of compound interest. Arguably, it is better to promote communication that improves
comprehension while simultaneously addressing present bias through more targeted measures, such
as the provision of commitment opportunities or tax incentives.
   Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi (2018) advocate an alternative to comprehensive welfare anal-
ysis, which they call idealized welfare analysis. The essence of this approach is to conduct welfare
analysis under the assumption that other biases will be (but have not yet been) addressed through
other measures. For example, when focusing on comprehension of compound interest, one could
image that present bias will be (but has not yet been) addressed by o↵ering appropriate com-


                                                 7
mitment opportunities. Idealized welfare analysis provides a conceptually coherent framework for
compartmentalizing biases in parallel with measures designed to address them, thereby permitting
the analyst to focus on solving one problem at a time.
    At first, it might appear that idealized welfare analysis also requires a deep understanding of
all decision-making flaws and their solutions.13 On the contrary, Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi
(2018) prove that their measure of financial competence (the absolute di↵erence in valuations across
the simple and complex frames) provides a first-order approximation of the idealized welfare e↵ect,
up to a multiplicative scalar. Thus, this welfare measure has the right sign, ranks policies in the
correct order, and is strictly comparable across di↵erent financial decisions.14


Design overview          Briefly, each subject proceeds through the experiment in five steps, consisting
of three decision stages and two interventions. Subjects begin with decisions that reveal their val-
uations for compound-interest-accruing investments in both the simple and complex frames (Stage
0 ). They then take part in the first intervention. Some subjects receive education pertaining to
the decision tasks; others view an unrelated video (a documentary about lions). Subjects then
make additional decisions similar to those in the first stage (Stage 1 ). Next, they participate in
a face-to-face discussions with a partner concerning compound-interest-accruing investments (with
the exception of subjects in a control condition). Finally, they return to their terminals and make
additional private decisions similar to those in the previous stages (Stage 2 ).
    We pay subjects with Amazon gift cards based on one randomly selected decision, thereby
providing them with incentives to choose according to their genuine preferences in every decision.
We inform subjects of this compensation scheme at the outset.


Treatments        Table 1 presents an overview of our design. We assign each subject to one of three
treatments and one of two roles. The roles di↵er according to the order in which subjects encounter
the decision problems.
  13 Formally, suppose the utility function U rationalizes observed choices, while the function V rationalizes idealized

choices. Idealized welfare analysis evaluates outcomes according to V rather than U, even though V is not observed
and impossible to infer absent a comprehensive understanding of pertinent biases.
  14 The intuition for this formal result is that the welfare loss caused by complex framing in the idealized setting

will depend on the alignment between choices in the complex and simple setting. While the choices themselves may
be skewed by other biases and cognitive limitations, the measured alignment is not. Similarly, a subject’s reasons
for using one discount factor rather than another are immaterial for our purposes. Discount factors may represent
intertemporal rates of substitution in consumption, but they could also reflect ancillary concerns such as hassle costs
and/or subjective perceptions of experimenter reliability (Cohen, Ericson, Laibson and White, 2016). Our welfare
measure continues to apply (as an approximation) to settings from which those ancillary factors are removed.


                                                           8
 Role                                       A (Receivers)                                        B (Senders)
 Treatment               Solitary         Communication         Indirect Educ.       Communication         Indirect Educ.
 Stage 0                                  Choice Problems                                      Choice Problems
                                          (Simple, Test 0 )                                    (Simple, Test 0 )
 Intervention 1                             Documentary                                Documentary           Education
 Stage 1                                Choice Problems                                      Choice Problems
                                    (Simple, Complex 1 , Test 1 )                        (Simple, Discussed, Test 1 )
 Intervention 2      Contemplation        Communication         Communication                  Communication
 Stage 2                                 Choice Problems                                     Choice Problems
                                  (Simple, Complex 2 , Discussed )                    (Simple, Complex 1 , Complex 2 )

                                      Table 1: Experiment Structure.


    In the Communication treatment, subjects converse face-to-face in pairs between Stages 1 and
2. Each pair consists of one subject in role A and one in role B (where the subjects are unaware
of these roles). To facilitate discussions, we distribute six sheets to each pair, each describing a
compound-interest-accruing investment.15 Each subject in role B has made private decisions con-
cerning the investments on the decision sheets (in Stage 1) before conversing with their partner.
For subjects in role A, these tasks are novel. We recommend that subjects use 15 minutes for
discussion, but they are free to end the discussion whenever they like, and can continue with the
experiment once they are done. To help subjects break the ice, we ask them to note two questions
they plan to ask their partner, and two pieces of advice they may want to give. We provide no
explicit incentives for engaging in discussion, but we remind subjects they will complete 18 addi-
tional decision tasks in private, which may include the ones we ask them to discuss; consequently,
there is a substantial chance that their payment will be determined by one of those decisions. All
decision problems are numbered so that subjects can check whether they have seen a problem be-
fore. We unobtrusively record all communication, which subjects understand.16 All subjects in the
Communication treatment view the unrelated video between Stages 0 and 1.
    The Indirect Education treatment parallels the Communication treatment, but adds financial
education for subjects in role B prior to communication. Subjects complete the intervention between
 15 The following is an example. “Decision Task 10. We will invest 6 tokens at 2% for 72 days, compounded daily.

You will get whatever is in the account after that time. How many tokens would we have to give you today, so you
would be just as happy with receiving those tokens today as with receiving the proceeds in the account in 72 days?”
The problem described on every sheet shares this same structure.
 16 See Appendix B.4 for the verbatim instructions.




                                                        9
the first two Stages of decision making. Subjects in role A watch the unrelated video. It is based on
the section on compound interest from a popular investment guide, The Elements of Investing: Easy
Lessons for Every Investor, by Malkiel and Ellis (2013). It focuses on the rule of 72, a simple method
for approximating the time it takes for an investment to double. Subjects view videos of narrated
slide presentations. The narration is verbatim from the text (with a few minor adjustments), while
the slides summarize key points. We enhanced the e↵ectiveness of that intervention by adding
practice questions with personalized feedback.17 See Appendix B.2 for details.
    The Solitary treatment serves as an overall control—there is no education, and no communi-
cation prior to decision making. Just as in the other treatments, subjects converse in pairs about
assigned decision problems (and expect to do so from the outset), but the communication takes
place after Stage 2 rather than between Stages 1 and 2. Our purpose in preserving peer-to-peer
communication in the Solitary treatment is to isolate e↵ects on behavior arising from communica-
tion per se, rather than from the expectation of communication, which could lead subjects to think
harder about the tasks, and thereby make higher-quality decisions.18 We continue to hand out the
six discussion sheets between Stages 1 and 2, and ask subjects to consider these assets in private.
Subjects know that their Stage 2 decision tasks may reference these assets.


Decision tasks       Each round of decision making concerns a future reward that is either framed
as a compound-interest-accruing investment (the complex frame) or presented directly (the simple
frame). We elicit valuations for these investments using once-iterated multiple price lists (Andersen,
Harrison, Lau and Rutstrom, 2006). On each line of each list, the subject decides between receiving
the future reward or V tokens immediately, where V ranges from 0 to 109 tokens. The first and
second lists for each task have resolutions of 10 and 1 tokens, respectively.19 Subjects cannot
proceed if they switch back and forth between the future and the present reward as V increases, as
such behavior is inconsistent with a well-defined valuation of the future reward. If they do behave
inconsistently, an error message prompts them to revisit their decisions. Subjects complete all lists
at their own pace.
  17 Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi (2018) use a similar intervention. To maximize e↵ectiveness, we tested several

versions using a series of pilot experiments on Amazon Mechanical Turk.
  18 In a preliminary version of the Solitary treatment, subjects did not anticipate that they would communicate

with anyone. The quality of financial decision making was generally lower, presumably because these subjects lacked
the social motivation for good decision making that was present in the other treatments. Blanes i Vidal and Nossol
(2011) and Kuhnen and Tymula (2012) document related attempts to save face.
  19 See Appendix B.3 for screenshots of the decision screens.




                                                        10
   We employ three sets of complexly framed tasks labelled Complex 1 , Complex 2 , and Discussed.
Each set contains six tasks. The investments in the Discussed set are those the subjects discuss
with each other. The tasks in Complex 1 and Complex 2 are similar, but di↵erent subjects encounter
them in di↵erent Stages. Table 2 shows the details of each task. Half of the investments in each
set concern investments that pay out in 72 days; the other half concern investments that pay
out in 48 days. We have chosen the parameters so that the principal amount doubles an integer
number of times over the investment period. These properties make it easy for subjects to apply
the rule of 72, a heuristic formula for approximating exponential growth covered in the educational
intervention. All payments are denominated in tokens, which are worth £0.20 each. Subjects face
each combination of time frame and interest rate three times, with varying principal amounts, in
order to increase statistical power. In each decision, the investment compounds to approximately
(±2) 24, 58, or 88 tokens. These amounts are located near the top, middle, and bottom of the
multiple decision lists, so that any tendency to choose switching points towards the middle of a list
does not systematically influence our results.

                     Task set           Complex 1      Complex 2       Discussed
                                             Investment duration: 72 days
                     Interest rate          3%             1%              2%
                     # of doublings           3              1              2
                     Principal          {6, 14, 22}    {12, 28, 44}    {3, 7, 11}
                     Future reward      {24, 56, 88}   {24, 56, 88}   {24, 56, 88}
                                             Investment duration: 48 days
                     Interest rate          3%            4.5%           1.5%
                     # of doublings           2              3              1
                     Principal          {12, 28, 44}    {3, 7, 11}     {6, 14, 22}
                     Future reward      {24, 56, 88}   {24, 56, 88}   {24, 56, 88}

                                      Table 2: Task parameters.


   As is clear from Table 2, only the framing of investment opportunities di↵ers across the three sets
of complexly framed tasks. Moving from one set to the next, we change the framing by varying the
principal amount and interest rate while holding the future reward and the length of the delay fixed.
The eighteen complexly framed assets have a total six simply framed counterparts. Consequently,
we present subjects with only one set of six simply framed tasks, which we label Simple. As shown
in Table 1, subjects provide valuations for all six simply framed opportunities in all three Stages.

                                                  11
To avoid showing them exactly the same opportunity multiple times, we vary the future rewards in
the simply framed tasks by two tokens or less.20
    Two sets of ancillary tasks, labeled Test 0 and Test 1 , consist of incentivized questions that test
the subject’s ability to compute compound interest, but do not implicate preferences. In these
tasks, subjects evaluate compound interest investments that pay o↵ in t days, and indicate the
amount of money to be received in t days (rather than immediately) that they consider equally
valuable.21 We use these responses to construct statistical control variables.
    The order in which subjects perform the various sets of decision tasks depends on their roles
(see Table 1). Stage 0 is the same for all subjects. Its purpose is to establish baselines for financial
knowledge and time preferences. Accordingly, the subjects perform the Simple and Test 0 tasks,
which we intermingle.
    The purpose of Stage 1 is to evaluate financial knowledge, time preferences, and the quality
of decision making in complexly framed tasks after the first intervention. Tasks include Test 1 ,
Simple, and a set of complexly framed tasks – Complex 1 for subjects in role A, and Discussed
for subjects in role B. Comparisons between Test 0 and Test 1 allow us to assess the e↵ects of the
intervention on knowledge. Comparisons between the simply framed tasks from Stages 0 and 1
allow us to determine whether the intervention influences time preferences. Comparisons between
the complexly and simply framed tasks in Stage 1 allow us to assess the quality of decision making
after the first intervention. All Stage 1 decisions are intermingled in an individually randomized
order. Substantively equivalent decision problems are never identified as such.
    The purpose of Stage 2 is to evaluate time preferences and the quality of decision making in
complexly framed tasks, separately for tasks the subjects have discussed as well as for novel tasks,
after communication or contemplation. Tasks include Simple and either Discussed and Complex 2
for subjects in role A, or Complex 1 and Complex 2 for subjects in role B. Comparisons between the
simply framed tasks from Stages 1 and 2 allow us to determine whether the second intervention
influences time preferences. Comparisons between assessed financial competence (the discrepancies
between simply and complexly framed choices) in Stages 1 and 2 allow us to determine the extent
to which the second intervention a↵ects decision making quality. For subjects in role A, we can
  20 Specifically,  rewards with a 72-day delay are (26, 59, 90), (25, 58, 92), and (24, 57, 91) in Stages 0, 1, and 2,
respectively. The corresponding rewards with a 48-day delay are (24, 58, 89), (24, 57, 90), and (25, 58, 91).
  21 The parameters of problems in set Test
                                                   0 in the format (duration, interest rate, principal, future reward)
are given by (18, 8, 22, 88), (36, 4, 6, 24), and (54, 4, 7, 56). For set Test 1 , they are (18, 4, 12, 24), (36, 6, 7, 56), and
(54, 2.67, 22, 88).



                                                              12
separately evaluate the e↵ects on the quality of decision making for tasks they have discussed
(Discussed ) and for tasks they have not previously seen (Complex 2 ). Once again, decisions are
randomly intermingled.
    Because subjects in role B make decisions about the Discussed tasks before communicating
while subjects in the A role do not, we will refer to the B subjects as Senders and the A subjects
as Receivers. Notice, however, that communication can flow in either direction, or not at all. Also
notice that, in the Solitary treatment, all subjects are in role A.
    Table 1 summarizes the timing of the decision problems for each role.


Implementation          All instructions are displayed on screen and explained via an audio recording
to minimize experimenter e↵ects.22 Subjects proceed at their own pace. They begin with a short
video recording of one of the authors (Bernheim), vouching that we will pay subjects exactly the
amount we promise them at precisely the time we promise them. There is also a comprehension
check that subjects need to pass in order to continue.
    Following that check, we measure subjects’ comprehension of the mechanics of multiple decision
lists. We present them with an initial list that asks them to decide, on each line, whether they
prefer to receive x pence, or £1, for a range of values x. Since these are decisions between larger and
smaller amounts of money to be received at the same point in time, any switching point other than
100 indicates deficient understanding. In addition, subjects see a completed list, and are required
to indicate their payment in case the computer selects a given line for implementation. Subjects
proceed regardless of their answers to these questions.23
    Before participating in the main Stages of the experiment, subjects also complete a short battery
of unincentivized psychological questions,24 as well as three standard financial literacy questions
   22 See    Appendix     B.4.         The   videos   of    the    instructions   are    accessible  through   these
links:          https://youtu.be/OHQvUZZKUzM          (Preliminary),       https://youtu.be/LCIAldy3SvM       (Stage
0),       https://youtu.be/OkbCO2iV76s       (Stage    2-Communication        and     Indirect    Education),    and
https://youtu.be/xSvxEG R5WY (Stage 2-Solitary).
   23 These decisions are not incentivized.
   24 This battery consists of a 10-item version of the big-five personality scale (Rammstedt and John, 2007), the

Mehrabian and Stefl (1995) conformity scale, as well as Frederick’s 2005 three-item scale of cognitive style.




                                                        13
(Lusardi, 2008).25 At the end of the experiment, they complete an unincentivized demographic
survey. They also answer questions about their decision making processes and about their partners.
    Because people typically have access to computational tools when making financial decisions,
we provided each subject with a calculator that included a function for exponentials.26



3      Data Collection and Preliminary Analysis
Data Collection         We ran sessions from Fall 2015 to Spring 2016 at the University of Birmingham,
      27
UK.        On average, sessions lasted 124 minutes, and subjects earned £26.55, including a £12.5
participation fee. We restrict our analysis to subjects who demonstrated comprehension of the
experimental procedures (87.12%, or 460 of 528 subjects).28 Focusing on subjects in the role of
Receiver, we have 99, 89, and 75 subjects in the Communication, Indirect Education, and Solitary
treatments, respectively.29
    To study the content of subjects’ discussions, we engaged workers on Amazon Mechanical Turk
and assigned to of them to transcribe each audio recording. Research assistants at Stanford Uni-
versity reviewed these transcripts and coded qualitative information concerning each discussion,
such as whether the subjects mentioned the rule of 72 or discussed market interest rates.30 Most
  25 We elicit these at the beginning of the study to prevent answers from being influenced by subjects’ communication

partners. The financial literacy questions are 1) Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was
2% per year. After 5 years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to grow?
[More than $102, Exactly $102, Less than $102, Don’t know], 2) Imagine that the interest rate on your savings
account was 1% per year and inflation was 2% per year. After 1 year, with the money in this account, would you
be able to buy [More than today, Exactly the same as today, Less than today, Don’t know], 3) Do you think the
following statement is true or false? Buying a single company stock usually provides a safer return than a stock
mutual fund. [True, False, Don’t know].
  26 Typically, people also have access to the internet. However, Lusardi and Mitchell (2011) find that only about

20% of a representative sample make use of these tools for real financial decisions, and the web-based experiment in
Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi (2018) finds that an equally small proportion of experimental subjects use these
tools for their experimental decisions.
  27 See Appendix B.1 for details. We chose the University of Birmingham because the subject pool is large and

diverse in terms of mathematical skills.
  28 90.78% of Senders and 85.67% of Receivers passed the initial comprehension check. We retain subjects who

understand the mechanics of the decision lists even if they are paired with subjects who do not, since the quality of
communication does not depend on an understanding multiple decision lists. Despite of precautions, four subjects
participated twice. These subjects may have had multiple accounts in the participant management system. We
identify these subjects by their email addresses, which they must supply to receive payment via Amazon gift cards.
For these subjects, we only retain the data from their first session.
  29 While 98 Senders in the Indirect Education treatment passed the comprehension checks, only 89 Receivers passed.
  30 Word count is recorded separately for each transcript; all other responses are coded based on both transcripts

jointly.




                                                         14
recordings were of sufficient quality to allow transcription, yielding qualitative data on the nature of
communication for 175 out of 188 pairs in the Communication and Indirect Education treatments.


Financial competence            Throughout, we measure the quality of subjects’ decision making by
                                                                                     f
their financial competence (Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi, 2018). Formally, we let Vj,d denote
individual j’s valuation in decision problem d with framing f 2 {simple, complex}.31 To compare
behavior across rewards of di↵erent sizes, we normalize valuations. If the future reward associated
                                                                   f
                                                       f         Vj,d
with decision problem d is given by r, we let          j,d   =    r      denote subject j’s normalized valuation.
For each decision d, subject j’s financial competence is then given by

                                                  complex        simple
                                      cj,d =      j,d            j,d         .


To interpret the magnitude of cj,d , consider the example of a subject who is willing to pay 80
cents for a complexly framed investment that he would value at $1 if he properly understood his
opportunity set. For that subject, cj,d =         0.2.32
    Our main dependent variable is the extent to which a subject’s financial competence changes
between Stages 1 and 2. By considering changes rather than levels, we di↵erence out individual-
level heterogeneity in financial competence and thus obtain more precise estimates. Specifically, we
pair each complexly framed decision d in Stage 2 with the unique complexly framed decision d0 in
Stage 1 that has the same time frame and the same future value. Subject j’s improvement on task
d is then given by


                                     Improvementj,d = cj,d              cj,d0 .


This procedure yields 12 observations per subject, one for each valuation pair in Stage 2.
    Notice that we compare a subject’s complexly framed choices in a given Stage of the experiment
to her simply framed choices in the same Stage. In a subset of regressions, we instead compare a
subject’s complexly framed choices in any Stage to the simply framed choices she made in Stage
0. The substantive di↵erence between these two alternatives is that the former gauges subjects’
ability to choose in accordance with their goals at the time of choice, whereas the latter gauges
 31 Because  we elicit valuations using multiple price lists, they are interval-coded. We use interval midpoints.
 32 The  value cj,d = 0.2 can also obtain for someone who is willing to pay $1.20 for a complexly framed investment
that he values at $1 in the simple frame.



                                                        15
                            20
                    Percent
                    10   0




                                 -1.5              -1              -.5                           0
                                                  Financial Competence
Figure 1: Distribution of financial competence. We display within-subject averages taken across
all decisions that involve complex framing.


their ability to choose in accordance with their goals at the beginning of the experiment. Our main
conclusions do not di↵er across these two measures.


Summary statistics and randomization check                       Figure 1 shows a histogram of financial com-
petence averaged over all decisions, c̄, for all subjects in our study who passed the comprehension
check on multiple price lists. The distribution of financial competence is skewed, with a mean of
  0.22 and a median of              0.14. For 10% of decisions, c̄ is larger than         0.015, and the first and
third quartiles are         0.33 and      0.05, respectively. The three financial literacy questions subjects
answered at the beginning of the study (reproduced in footnote 25) provide a measure of initial
financial knowledge. 45.04% answered all of those questions correctly.33
    Our subjects’ behavior is also similar to that documented in existing literature regarding both
the extent of temporal discounting and the extent of exponential growth bias (a well-established
tendency to underestimate the extent to which compound interest accumulates over time; see
Wagenaar and Sagaria (1975), Eisenstein and Hoch (2007), Stango and Zinman (2009), Almenberg
and Gerdes (2012), and Levy and Taso↵ (2016)). Regarding temporal discounting, subjects value
   33 Similarly, 44.3% of U.S. college graduates answered all three questions correctly (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2014). In

our sample, 97.7%, 87.2%, and 49.6% of subjects answered the first, second, and third questions correctly, respectively.
We did assess subjects’ initial knowledge of the compound interest formula. Assuming subjects discussed the formula
if they knew it, we can assess the fraction who knew it based on the fraction of pairs who discussed it. 62.6% of
pairs discussed the rule. Because we paired subjects randomly, we estimate the likelihood that any given subject was
initially unfamiliar with the formula as 0.3741/2 = 61.2%.



                                                          16
£1 at £0.87 on average if it is paid with a delay of 48 days, and at £0.84 if it is paid with a delay
of 72 days (with a population-level standard deviation of £0.27 in both cases).34 These discount
factors are comparable to those in the literature on discounting over similarly brief time frames
(Frederick, Loewenstein and O’Donoghue, 2002).35 Regarding exponential growth bias, we find
that Receivers tend to undervalue compound interest investments by 5.03 percentage points on
average (s.e. 1.90 percentage points, clustered by subject) in Stage 1 of the study.36
    Summary statistics for 36 additional subject-level variables are listed in Appendix A.1. Compar-
ing across our three treatments (Communication, Indirect Education, and Solitary), we reject four
tests of joint equality at the 10% level, and an additional three at the 5% level, which is a bit higher
than expected by chance. Significant di↵erences appear for the demographic variables gender, age,
and credit card ownership. Moreover, di↵erences are present in some of the debriefing questions
(e.g. whether subjects had previously talked about the study with others), which possibly reflects
the fact that we ran the Solitary treatment after the Communication treatment.37 To address these
di↵erences, we include statistical controls for subject characteristics in all regressions that involve
the Solitary treatment. Specifically, we sort control variables into three categories. Demographic
variables consist of gender, age, age-squared, ethnicity indicators, an indicator for whether English
is the subject’s first language, an indicator for whether the subject is an international student, and
indicator variables for whether the subject lives in a rural, suburban, or urban area. Financial
variables encompass log household per capita income, dummies for credit card ownership, having
used a cash advance, having rolled over credit card debt, and a dummy indicating whether the sub-
ject correctly answered all of the three unincentivized financial literacy questions administered at
the beginning of the survey. Psychological and debriefing variables consist of subjects’ performance
on the Cognitive Reflection Test (Frederick, 2005), the five dimensions of the big five personality
scale (Rammstedt and John, 2007), subjects’ conformity score (Mehrabian and Stefl, 1995), and
  34 These numbers include all subjects in all roles who passed the comprehension check about the multiple price list.

In Stage 1, the respective numbers are 0.87 and 0.85, and in Stage 2 they are 0.89 and 0.86.
  35 They are, however, smaller than the discount factors elicited over longer time frames (Harrison, Lau and Williams,

2002; Andersen, Harrison, Lau and Rutström, 2014).
  36 Because valuations derived from the multiple price lists method can be a↵ected by the upper and lower bounds

of the list (Andersen, Harrison, Lau and Rutstrom, 2006), we perform this analysis separately depending on whether
the future value of the investment is in the upper, middle, or lower third of the list. We find significant exponential
growth bias for the first two cases but not for the third. The respective numbers are 13.18 (s.e. 1.60), 9.58 (s.e.
1.84), and -7.67 (s.e. 3.47). Moreover, for questions in sets Test 0 and Test 1 , these numbers are 24.29 (s.e. 4.76),
-15.62 (s.e. 2.07), and -18.41 (s.e. 1.47).
  37 We conducted the Solitary treatment at a later time than the treatments involving communication, as our initial

hypotheses focussed on the comparison between the Communication treatment and the Indirect Education treatment
alone.


                                                          17
dummies indicating whether subjects had heard about the study before participating, had talked
to others about it, had prepared for it, and wished to be contacted about any follow-up study.



4     Main Analysis
Our analysis proceeds in four parts. We first study the e↵ect of communication with a randomly
assigned peer on the quality of financial decision making (Section 4.1). We then examine mecha-
nisms. We investigate whether the beneficial e↵ects of communication reflect genuine learning, or
are merely a consequence of subjects’ ability to identify high-competence peers and mimic their
choices without comprehending the underlying concepts (Section 4.2). We also study how the ef-
fectiveness of communication depends on the relative financial sophistication of the subject and her
partner (Section 4.3). Finally, we investigate whether the e↵ects of beneficial financial education
propagate through peer-to-peer communication (Section 4.4).


4.1     Mean E↵ect of Communication

We begin by studying whether communication about financial decisions is helpful, harmful, or
haphazard (a case of the blind leading the blind).
    Panel A of Figure 2 displays the levels of financial competence across Stages 1 and 2 separately for
the Solitary and Communication treatments. While competence increases slightly in the Solitary
treatment, the improvement in the Communication treatment is substantially larger.38 In our
experiment, communication with a randomly selected peer has a clear beneficial e↵ect on the
quality of decision making.
    Formally, we regress Improvement j,d on an indicator for the Communication treatment, using
the Solitary treatment as baseline. We focus on subjects in the role of Receiver and pool across
discussed decisions (the Discussed set) and novel decisions (the Complex 2 set). We include a control
for Receivers’ preexisting level of financial competence (measured by their decisions in the Test 0 and
Test 1 sets).39 Panel A of Table 3 displays the result. Column 1 shows that the improvement in the
Solitary treatment is a statistically insignificant 2.2 percentage points. The increase in competence
  38 The increase in the Solitary treatment does not necessarily reflect learning. An alternative explanation is the

fact that Stage 2 employs a di↵erent set of decisions than Stage 1.
  39 The rationale for this control is that subjects who di↵er with respect to initial financial competence may improve

to varying degrees over the course of the experiment, either due to learning or to regression to the mean. This factor
could create apparent treatment e↵ects as an artifact of a di↵erence in starting points across the treatment groups.


                                                          18
                                                                                             -.15
                                                                                                              Solitary
                                                                                                              Communication




                                                                      Financial Competence
                                                                                             -.2
                                                                                             -.25
                                                                                             -.3
                                                                                                    Stage 1                                               Stage 2


                                                                             A. Overall e↵ect of communication.
                                          -.15




                                                                                                                                                          -.15
                                                           Solitary                                                                                                        Solitary
                                                           Communication                                                                                                   Communication
       Financial Competence




                                                                                                                        Financial Competence
                                          -.2




                                                                                                                                                          -.2
                                          -.25




                                                                                                                                                          -.25
                                          -.3




                                                                                                                                                          -.3



                                                 Stage 1                                     Stage 2                                                             Stage 1                   Stage 2


                                         B. E↵ect on discussed problems.                                                                                  C. E↵ect on novel problems.
                                                                                                                                                          -.05
       Receiver's Financial Competence




                                                                                                                        Receiver's Financial Competence
                                          -.05




                                                                                                                                                                           Sender Better Half
                                                                                                                                                                           Sender Worse Half
                                                                                                                                                          -.15




                                                                                                                                                                           Solitary
                                          -.15




                                                                                                                                                          -.25
                                          -.25




                                                                                                                                                          -.35
                                          -.35




                                                           Sender Better Half
                                                           Sender Worse Half
                                                           Solitary
                                          -.45




                                                                                                                                                          -.45




                                                 Stage 1                                     Stage 2                                                             Stage 1                   Stage 2


             D. E↵ect on Receivers in better half                                                                                   E. E↵ect on Receivers in worse half


Figure 2: Overview of results. Figures depict estimated average financial competence in Stage
1 and Stage 2 for di↵erent groups of subjects and questions. All data are from subjects in the role
of Receiver only. See Tables 3, 4, and 5 for standard errors of the slope coefficients and statistical
                                                 19
tests for di↵erences between them.
                                                  (1)    (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)     (6)
VARIABLES                                         Improvement in Receivers’ financial competence
                                                          before / after communication

Benchmark choices in simple frame                   Contemporaneous                    Stage 0

Improvement in Solitary                          0.022   0.021       0.016 0.0001 0.0003 -0.004
                                                (0.018) (0.018)     (0.018) (0.020) (0.019) (0.019)

Panel A: Communication
Improvement (compared to Solitary)              0.064** 0.066** 0.072*** 0.069** 0.068** 0.072***
                                                (0.027) (0.028) (0.027) (0.028) (0.028) (0.027)

Panel B: Indirect Education
Improvement (compared to Solitary)              0.073** 0.073*** 0.080*** 0.067** 0.067** 0.076***
                                                (0.029) (0.028) (0.028) (0.028) (0.028) (0.028)

    p-value
       Communication = Indirect Education 0.748            0.788     0.747    0.955    0.972     0.871



Controls
  Initial skills                                  Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes
  Demographic                                      -        Yes       Yes       -       Yes       Yes
  Financial & Psychological                        -         -        Yes       -        -        Yes

Observations                                     3,156     3,156     3,156    3,156    3,156     3,156
Subjects                                          263       263       263      263      263       263

Table 3: Overall e↵ect of communication. Improvement in financial competence from Stage 1
to Stage 2. Estimates in the Improvement in Solitary row are the predicted levels of improvement
of a Receiver in the Solitary condition, with subjects’ initial skills and demographic, financial and
psychological characteristics averaged over all subjects in all treatments. Initial skills are measured
as the absolute deviation between a subjects’ valuation and the true future value in decision sets
Test 0 and Test 1 . A full list of demographic, financial and psychological controls is given in Appendix
Table A.1. Standard errors are clustered by subject. ⇤ p < 0.1,⇤⇤ p < 0.05,⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01.




                                                   20
of Receivers in the Communication treatment is 6.4 percentage points larger than this baseline
(p < 0.05). This size of this e↵ect is particularly impressive when compared to the average level
of financial competence among all Receivers in Stage 1 (26 percent, with a standard error of 1.6
percent). These findings remain substantively unchanged as we include additional control variables
(columns 2 - 3).
   Because financial competence is defined as the absolute di↵erence in valuations across simple
and complex frames, changes in competence could reflect behavioral changes in either frame. To
demonstrate that peer communication increases competence primarily through its e↵ect on behavior
with complex framing, columns 4 - 6 replicate columns 1 - 3, using the simply framed choice
made in Stage 0 as the normative benchmark rather those made contemporaneously with the
complexly framed tasks. This alternative measure of financial competence is una↵ected by changes
in simply framed choices that may result from communication. The estimated treatment e↵ects
remain virtually unchanged. Hence, we conclude that communication improves measured financial
competence primarily through its e↵ect on choices in the complex frame.


4.2       E↵ect of communication on discussed and novel tasks

To understand the mechanisms underlying the beneficial e↵ect of peer communication, we now
study whether it is limited to the specific decisions the subjects discuss with their peers, or whether
it extends to novel tasks. Panels B and C of Figure 2 separate panel A into these two types of
tasks (decision sets Discussed and Complex 2 , respectively).40 While the improvement of subjects
in the Solitary treatment appears slightly smaller for the novel tasks, there is no such di↵erence
for subjects in the Communication treatment. This finding suggests that communication improves
decision making through conceptual learning, and not merely through choice mimicry.
   Formally, we estimate these e↵ects as follows. For each subject, we compute average improve-
ment j,d across the six tasks in each of the two sets of decisions. We estimate a two-equation system
using Seemingly Unrelated Regression. The critical explanatory variable is an indicator for whether
the subject was in the Solitary or Communication treatment.
   Panel A of Table 4 displays the results. Column 1a shows that a Receiver in the Communica-
tion treatment improves by an additional 6.6 percentage points for novel questions (the Complex 2
set) compared to the Solitary treatment. The corresponding number for discussed questions (the
 40 The   Stage 1 decisions used are the same in both these panels.


                                                         21
                                                  (1a)          (1b)       (2a)    (2b)      (3a)      (3b)     (4a)     (4b)      (5a)    (5b)     (6a)                             (6b)
     VARIABLES                                                          Improvement in Receivers’ financial competence before / after communication
     Benchmark choices in simple frame                                   Contemporaneous                                                           Stage 0

     Decisions discussed                           No           Yes        No            Yes       No           Yes       No           Yes       No           Yes       No           Yes
     Task set                                    Compl.2        Disc.    Compl.2         Disc.   Compl.2        Disc.   Compl.2        Disc.   Compl.2        Disc.   Compl.2        Disc.

     Improvement in Solitary                      0.012      0.031         0.014      0.027       0.009      0.022       -0.010     0.010       -0.007     0.007      -0.0110     0.003
                                                 (0.021)    (0.022)       (0.021)    (0.022)     (0.021)    (0.022)     (0.021)    (0.022)     (0.021)    (0.022)     (0.021)    (0.022)

     Panel A: Communication
     Improvement (compared to Solitary)          0.066** 0.062** 0.065** 0.068** 0.071** 0.073** 0.071** 0.067** 0.067** 0.069** 0.072** 0.071**
                                                 (0.028) (0.029) (0.028) (0.029) (0.029) (0.030) (0.028) (0.030) (0.028) (0.030) (0.029) (0.030)

     Panel B: Indirect Education
     Improvement (compared to Solitary)          0.054* 0.092*** 0.047 0.099*** 0.055* 0.106*** 0.047 0.087*** 0.041 0.093*** 0.048 0.103***
                                                 (0.029) (0.030) (0.029) (0.030) (0.029) (0.030) (0.029) (0.030) (0.029) (0.031) (0.029) (0.031)

        p-value
           Sender educated = Sender uneducated    0.648         0.290      0.519         0.263    0.541         0.241    0.376         0.459    0.341         0.396    0.393         0.269




22
     Controls
        Initial skills                                    Yes                      Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes
        Demographic                                        -                       Yes                    Yes                     -                     Yes                    Yes
        Financial & Psychological                          -                        -                     Yes                     -                      -                     Yes

     p-values
        discussed = not-discussed                        0.846                  0.885                 0.917                  0.819                  0.918                  0.977
           if Sender uneducated
        discussed = not-discussed                        0.043                  0.006                 0.005                  0.033                  0.006                  0.003
           if Sender educated
        Di↵erence in di↵erences                          0.016                  0.005                 0.004                  0.010                  0.004                  0.001

     Subjects                                             263                      263                    263                    263                    263                    263
     Observations                                         526                      526                    526                    526                    526                    526

     Table 4: E↵ect of communication on discussed and novel problems. Estimation based on a SUR two-equation system.
     The means of the dependent variable for novel valuation problems are 0.02.1, 0.075, and 0.060 in the Solitary, Communication,
     and Indirect Education treatments, respectively. For discussed valuation problems they are 0.046, 0.090, and 0.115. A full list
     of demographic, financial and psychological controls is given in Appendix Table A.1. Initial skills are measured as the absolute
     deviation between a subjects’ valuation and the true future value in decision sets Test 0 and Test 1 . Statistical controls are
     constrained to have the same coefficients across the two equations. ⇤ p < 0.1,⇤⇤ p < 0.05,⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01.
Discussed set) is 6.2 percentage points (column 1b). While both of these coefficient estimates are
statistically significant at the 5% level, they are not statistically distinguishable from each other
(p = 0.84).41 The results remain qualitatively unchanged when we add statistical control variables
(columns 2 and 3), and if we isolate the portion of these e↵ects due to changes in behavior in
the complex frame by using the simply framed choices from Stage 0 as the normative benchmark
(columns 4 - 6).


4.3     E↵ectiveness of Communication by Subject Characteristics

The mechanisms underlying the e↵ects of peer communication likely depend on the characteristics
of the subjects in each pairing. We consider two hypotheses. On the one hand, communication
may facilitate the transmission of financial knowledge and decision-making skills from those who
have them to those who do not. Under this first hypothesis, a subject’s improvement should be
larger the more competent her peer. On the other hand, e↵ective skill transmission may require
an ability to understand each others’ sources of confusion and to address each other’s questions
and concerns at the appropriate level, and at a comprehensible pace. It may also require people
to feel comfortable asking questions without fear of embarrassing themselves (Edmondson, 1999).
Under this second hypothesis, the benefits from communication may be largest when peers are most
similar, even when greater similarity requires the peer to be less financially competent
    To determine which of these hypotheses more accurately describes our data, we classify each
subject according to whether her initial financial competence falls into the top or bottom half of
the distribution. We perform this classification using the tasks in Test 0 and Test 1 , rather than the
tasks we use to define our primary outcome variables (i.e., the decisions in Complex 1 , Complex 2
and Discussed ).42 Accordingly, our measured changes in financial competence are not confounded
by regression to the mean. To increase statistical power, we pool across the Communication and
Indirect Education treatments.
    Panels D and E of Figure 2 display the results. Panel D shows that there is little room for
improvement for Receivers who are initially among the more skilled half of decision makers.43
  41 Di↵erences between the discussed and novel tasks are di↵erenced out under the assumption that they have the

same e↵ects on behavior in the Solitary and Communication treatments.
  42 For Senders, we also use decision set Discussed for classification. Senders make these decisions before meeting

their peer, and the inclusion of these data increases statistical power.
  43 If behavior is stochastic even within the simple framing, one cannot expect measured financial competence to

equal zero even for a subject who perfectly understands compound interest, and applies this knowledge when making



                                                        23
Communication has little if any e↵ect on the degree of improvement regardless of the peer’s skills.
In contrast, Receivers who are initially among the less skilled half of decision makers improve
substantially when they communicate, as shown in panel E. Significantly, the improvement is smaller
for low-skill Receivers when they are paired with high-skill Senders rather than low-skill Senders.
Thus, peer-to-peer communication transmits financial decision making skills most e↵ectively when
peers are equally uninformed, rather than when an informed decision maker teaches an uninformed
peer.
    We formalize these comparisons by regressing the extent of improvements in financial compe-
tence on a dummy variable indicating whether the subject was assigned to the Communication
treatment or the Solitary treatment, as well as dummy variables indicating whether the Receiver
and (for subjects in the Communication treatment) the Sender fell within the top half or bottom
half of decision makers according to initial financial competence.
    Results appear in Column 1 of Table 5. Compared to a below-median subject in the Solitary
treatment, a below-median Receiver who communicates with a below-median Sender improves the
most; the additional improvement is 16.4 percentage points (p < 0.01). While such Receivers also
benefit from communication with above-median Senders (p < 0.1), the improvement is larger in
the former case (8.3 percentage points, p < 0.1). Columns 2 and 3 perform this analysis separately
on the sets of novel and discussed decision problems, respectively. The results are similar to the
ones in column 1. For below-median Receivers, both the improvement in the Solitary condition, as
well as the additional improvement due to communication, are slightly smaller for novel than for
discussed tasks. No such di↵erences are apparent for above-median receivers.
    To evaluate the extent to which our results are due to changes in complexly framed choices
as opposed to simply framed choices, columns 4-6 replicate columns 1-3, using the simply framed
choices from Stage 0 as the normative benchmark. This modification strengthens our conclusions:
the incremental improvement when a below-median Receiver communicates with a below-median
Sender rather than an above-median Sender is now statistically significant at the 1% level.
decisions. To estimate the deviation one would expect due to stochasticity in behavior from a subject who is perfectly
informed of the implications of a complexly framed decision, we estimate the extent of stochasticity in choice in the
simply framed choices alone. We pair simply framed decisions with approximately the same future value (16 with
19, 17 with 20, and 28 with 21). For each subject, we calculate the absolute distance in normalized valuations
between members of a pair, and average across the three pairs. The sophisticated half of decision makers exhibit
a mean absolute deviation of 0.058 (s.e. 0.094) whereas the corresponding number is 0.105 (s.e. 0.162) for the less
sophisticated half.




                                                         24
                                                      (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)

VARIABLES                                              Improvement in Receiver’s financial competence

Benchmark choices in simple frame                       Contemporaneous                     Stage 0
Sets of decision problems
  Discussed                                          Yes                  Yes      Yes                 Yes
  Complex 2                                          Yes       Yes                 Yes       Yes

Improvement in Solitary condition                 0.031*      0.023     0.040**    0.010     0.000     0.020
  for bottom half Receiver                        (0.016)    (0.016)    (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.018)

Additional improvement from communication if
  Receiver bottom half
      and Sender bottom half                 0.164***        0.148***   0.179*** 0.183*** 0.158*** 0.208***
                                              (0.045)         (0.049)    (0.046) (0.045) (0.049) (0.046)
      and Sender top half                     0.083*           0.054     0.112** 0.053      0.029    0.078
                                              (0.044)         (0.044)    (0.049) (0.044) (0.044) (0.050)
  Receiver top half
      and Sender bottom half                   0.005          0.008      0.002     0.005     0.009      0.002
                                              (0.019)        (0.021)    (0.020)   (0.017)   (0.018)   (0.019)
      and Sender top half                      -0.022         -0.022     -0.021    -0.013    -0.006    -0.019
                                              (0.020)        (0.022)    (0.021)   (0.018)   (0.020)   (0.018)

Control variables
  Initial skills                                     Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes
  Receiver Top Half                                  Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes
  Demographics                                       Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes

p-values about e↵ect on Receiver
   (R bottom, S bottom) = (R bottom, S top)          0.092    0.065      0.181    0.006      0.010     0.008
   (R bottom, S bottom) = (R top, S bottom)          0.001    0.008      0.000    0.000      0.004     0.000
   (R bottom, S top) = (R top, S top)                0.029    0.121      0.012    0.160      0.486     0.057
   (R top, S bottom) = (R top, S top)                0.191    0.157      0.294    0.321      0.469     0.253
    Joint insignificance                             0.004    0.022      0.002    0.001      0.019     0.000

Subjects                                              263      263        263      263        263       263
Observations                                         3,156    1,578      1,578    3,156      1,578     1,578

Table 5: E↵ect of communication by pair characteristics. We pool Receivers across the
Communication and Indirect Education treatments. This table includes statistical controls for
demographics and initial skill levels. Initial skills are measured as the absolute deviation between
a subjects’ valuation and the true future value in decision sets Test 0 and Test 1 . A full list of
demographic controls is given in Appendix Table A.1. We reproduce this table with the addition
of financial and psychological controls in Appendix A.3. Doing so does not change the qualitative
conclusions or statistical significance. Decision problem fixed e↵ects are included. Standard errors
are clustered by subject. ⇤ p < 0.1,⇤⇤ p < 0.05,⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01.
                                                25
    An analysis of the contents of subjects’ conversations reinforces these inferences.44 We estimate
additional regressions to determine how the content of communication depends on whether the
Sender and Receiver are in the same or in di↵erent halves of the skill distribution.45 Panel A of
Table 6 displays the results. Column 1 shows that members of pairs we classify as similar are
much more likely to highlight similarities than members of pairs we classify as dissimilar (73.6% vs.
42.2%), through statements such as “I’m bad at this too, so let’s see whether we can help each other
out.” Moreover, while heterogenous pairs discuss tasks for 8.26 minutes, similar pairs discuss tasks
for 10.15 minutes, nearly 25 percent more (column 2, p < 0.1 for di↵erences across pairs). This
di↵erence relates to the quality and focus of the conversation: while the number of tasks discussed
does not di↵er according to the pairs’ characteristics (column 3), the number of small-talk topics
discussed is significantly smaller (column 4).46


4.4     Indirect E↵ects of Financial Education

The beneficial e↵ects of peer communication raise the possibility that social networks may propagate
the influence of financial education through the population, magnifying its benefits. Accordingly,
in this subsection we examine the indirect e↵ects of financial education on those who have not
participated themselves. The preceding results suggest two competing hypotheses. On the one
hand, treated consumers acquire new skills, which they may transmit to others. On the other
hand, an e↵ective educational treatment reduces the similarity between treated and untreated con-
sumers, potentially stymying the transmission process. Individuals may also have greater difficulty
communicating recently acquired conceptual knowledge.
    Before investigating the indirect e↵ects of education, we demonstrate that our intervention has a
direct beneficial e↵ect on those who participate. We regress Senders’ financial competence in Stage
  44 A sample conversation between two of our subjects illustrates the importance of responding to the partner at

the right level and pace: A: But you already have one whole pie. I hope I’m making it clear. So you’ve got a whole
pie, right? This is day zero. You’ve got to have a pie, but after day one, you gain a slice of that pie, so you have
more slices. And on day two, you get even more slices of pie. B: Okay, that seems to make sense. A: Yeah, so
that’s why you have to add one to it, because you already have this pie. This is one, but this is 0.02. B: On top of
that. A: Yeah. The pie is good example? B: Yeah, that was much easier. Later in the conversation: B: You’ve just
taught me more maths then I’ve ever learned, ever.
  45 Each of our audio recordings uniquely matches a pair of subjects in our data, but we cannot reliably identify

whether a pair member is in the role of Sender or Receiver. Hence, all our analysis of discussion content is at the
pair level.
  46 Transcribers indicated which of three pre-specified small-talk topics subjects discussed: place of origin, field of

degree, and years of study.




                                                          26
                                     (1)         (2)       (3)      (4)    (5)       (6)        (7)
VARIABLES                         highlight minutes # problems #small one person Rule Compounding
                                 similarities discussed discussed  talk proclaims   of 72    formula
                                                                  topics  skills  discussed discussed

Panel A: Communication
   Di↵erent skills                 0.341      8.264      4.136     0.659     0.229      0.000          0.667
                                  (0.132)    (0.487)    (0.196)   (0.119)   (0.037)    (0.000)        (0.135)
   Similar skills                  0.622     10.154      4.073     0.400     0.137      0.039          0.588
                                  (0.181)    (0.595)    (0.341)   (0.143)   (0.061)    (0.016)        (0.104)

Panel B: Indirect Education
   Di↵erent skills                 0.386      8.516      4.023     0.432     0.413      0.739          0.391
                                  (0.105)    (0.664)    (0.797)   (0.176)    (0.13)    (0.092)        (0.061)
   Similar skills                  0.357      9.499      4.476     0.214     0.349      0.767          0.442
                                  (0.063)    (0.469)    (0.443)   (0.070)   (0.072)    (0.051)        (0.139)

p-Values
   E↵ect of similarity
      Communication tr.            0.001      0.091      0.873     0.088     0.284      0.530         0.509
      Indirect Education tr.       0.997      0.403      0.380     0.150     0.412      0.886         0.729
   E↵ect of indirect education
      Similar skills               0.009      0.568      0.437     0.239     0.035      0.000         0.038
      Dissimilar skills            0.550      0.826      0.800     0.153     0.059      0.000         0.002
   All four parameters equal       0.006      0.301      0.817     0.044     0.020      0.000         0.004
   Di↵-in-di↵                      0.023      0.576      0.463     0.863     0.868      0.735         0.476

Observations                        175       188         171       175       175        175           175

Table 6: Discussion content by treatment and pair characteristics. Standard errors based
on 10,000 bootstrap samples, clustered by coder. Hypothesis tests based on linear regressions with
coder fixed e↵ects. Column 2 does not include coder fixed e↵ects because minutes discussed is
measured directly. The number of observations is smaller for column 3 since the measure could not
be determined from some of the recordings due to audio quality. ⇤ p < 0.1,⇤⇤ p < 0.05,⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01.




                                                27
1 on an indicator for whether they participated in the education intervention.47 We find that the
direct e↵ect of the intervention is to raise Senders’ financial competence. The level of competence of
Senders who undergo the intervention is           0.192, compared with         0.274 for those who did not. The
di↵erence of 8.2 percentage points is substantial, and corresponds to roughly a one-third increase
in competence (p < 0.1).48
    Next we test whether peer communication is more e↵ective if the Sender has participated in
the education intervention. Panel B of Table 3 shows that there are no detectable indirect e↵ects
of education on a Receivers’ degree of improvement, pooling discussed and novel tasks. Depending
on the specification, the indirect e↵ect of education leads to an additional improvement that varies
between -0.1 and 0.9 percentage points, and is never statistically significant.
    Di↵erences do emerge, however, once we distinguish between discussed and novel tasks. Panel B
of Table 4 shows that Receivers who are indirectly exposed to the education intervention improve to
a significantly greater degree in decision tasks they have discussed than in novel ones (columns 1 -
3). The di↵erence-in-di↵erences, compared to Receivers whose Sender did not receive the education
intervention, is statistically significant (p < 0.05 or p < 0.01, depending on specification).
    To what extent do these e↵ects correspond to qualitative di↵erences in conversations? Table
6 shows that pairs whose members are initially in the same half of the competence distribution
are substantially less likely to highlight similarities if the Sender participates in the education
intervention (column 1, p < 0.01). It becomes much more likely, however, that one member of
the pair tries to convince the other that he is more knowledgeable than his peer, regardless of
their similarity (column 5, p < 0.05 for similar pairs and p < 0.1 for dissimilar pairs). This finding
suggests that education may increase the likelihood that Senders rely on strategies akin to ‘proof by
intimidation,’ which would help Receivers perform better in discussed problems, but would diminish
the benefits of peer communication for novel problems.
    An additional possibility is that the contents of the education intervention crowd out other
methods of decision making. Indeed, in the Indirect Education condition three quarters of the
pairs discuss the rule of 72—the main substantive content of the education intervention—whereas
virtually no one does so in the Communication treatment. Meanwhile, 62.6% of pairs discuss
the exact compound interest formula, f uture value = present value · (1 + r)t if the Sender has
  47 In contrast to the previous regressions, we control for preexisting financial competence using only the Test tasks
                                                                                                                 0
and not the Test 1 tasks, because the educational intervention is administered between these two Stages.
  48 Appendix A.2 presents a more detailed analysis.




                                                          28
not participated in the education intervention, while only 41.6% do so in the Indirect Education
treatment. If the rule of 72 is an inferior substitute for the exact formula (either because the Sender
fails to explain it intelligibly, or because the Receiver fails to apply it correctly), then such crowding
out would reduce the e↵ectiveness of peer communication.



5     Conclusion
We have presented an experiment in which communication about financial decisions between ran-
domly paired subjects leads to genuine improvements in the quality of decision making, measured
according to the financial competence method of Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi (2018).
    We have shown that the improvements reflect genuine conceptual learning rather than mimicry
of the choices of those who are better informed. The beneficial e↵ects of communication are espe-
cially pronounced in interactions between people who are similarly unskilled, and who seem to be
more adept at addressing each others questions and concerns at the appropriate level and pace. Sub-
jecting one member of each pair to an e↵ective financial education intervention, however, provides
no benefits beyond those arising from communication alone. The intervention provides subjects
with more skills to transmit, but decreases the e↵ectiveness of skill transmission by creating skill
di↵erentials and by crowding out more e↵ective forms of communication.
    Some have argued for targeting interventions at influencers and relying on social di↵usion to
leverage the e↵ects of financial education (see, e.g., Haliassos, Jansson and Karabulut (2017) and
Ouimet and Tate (2017)). Because the indirect beneficial e↵ects of education in our experiment
arise from mimicry rather than from improved conceptual understanding, our experiment calls the
e↵ectiveness of many such di↵usion strategies into question. For the same reason, our results caution
against promoting rules of thumb that are appropriate for particular segments of the population,
but that may propagate to other segments.49
    A natural extension of our research would involve the study of peer e↵ects in settings where
subjects interact with peers of their own choosing. Another extension would examine interaction
  49 For instance, Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi (2018) show that subjects are highly heterogenous in the extent to
which they misestimate the power of compound interest. The majority su↵ers from exponential growth bias, but many
people are well calibrated, and some overestimate the power of compounding. The financial education intervention
their subjects receive alters behavior mainly through its rhetorical elements, causing subjects to increase their estimate
of the value of interest-bearing assets, regardless of the initial extent of their bias. While this counteracts exponential
growth bias on average, this intervention harms subjects who did not initially underestimate the power of compound
interest.



                                                            29
among larger groups of individuals. In both settings, subjects’ abilities to identify those from whom
they can benefit most, and to avoid those who set bad examples, would play important roles in
determining the e↵ects of social interaction. We leave these issues for further research.




                                                 30
References
Almenberg, Johan and Christer Gerdes, “Exponential Growth Bias and Financial Literacy,”
  Applied Economics Letters, 2012, 19 (17), 1693–696.

Ambuehl, Sandro, B. Douglas Bernheim, and Annamaria Lusardi, “Evaluating Financial
  Competence,” NBER Working Paper, 2018, 20618.

Andersen, Ste↵en, Glenn W. Harrison, Morten I. Lau, and E. Elisabet Rutstrom,
  “Elicitation using Multiple Price List Formats,” Experimental Economics, 2006, 9, 383–405.

  , Glenn W Harrison, Morten Igel Lau, and E Elisabet Rutström, “Discounting behav-
  ior:A reconsideration,” European Economic Review, 2014, 71, 15–33.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Financial Illiteracy, Education, and Retirement Saving,” in Olivia S.
  Mitchell and Sylvester J. Schieber, eds., Living with Defined Contribution Pensions. Remaking
  Responsibility for Retirement., University of Pennsylvania Press, 1998, chapter 3.

Beshears, John, James J Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian, and Katherine L
  Milkman, “The E↵ect of Providing Peer Information on Retirement Savings Decisions,” The
  Journal of Finance, 2015, 70 (3), 1161–201.

Bhattacharya, Utpal, Andreas Hackethal, Simon Kaesler, Benjamin Loos, and Ste↵en
  Meyer, “Is Unbiased Financial Advice to Retail Investors Sufficient? Answers from a Large
  Field Study,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2012, 25 (4), 975–1032.

Booij, Adam S, Edwin Leuven, and Hessel Oosterbeek, “Ability Peer E↵ects in University:
  Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2016, 84 (2), 547–
  78.

Boudreau, Cheryl and Mathew D McCubbins, “The Blind Leading the Blind: Who Gets
  Polling Information and Does it Improve Decisions?,” The Journal of Politics, 2010, 72 (2),
  513–27.

Brown, Alexandra, J Michael Collins, Maximilian Schmeiser, and Carly Urban, “State
  Mandated Financial Education and the Credit Behavior of Young Adults,” Divisions of Research



                                                31
  & Statistics and Monetary A↵airs Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C., Finance and Eco-
  nomics Discussion Series, 2014, 2014-68.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Florian Ederer, Bruno Ferman, and Noam Yuchtman, “Under-
  standing Mechanisms Underlying Peer E↵ects: Evidence from a Field Experiment on Financial
  Decisions,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (4), 1273–301.

Cai, Jing, Alain De Janvry, and Elisabeth Sadoulet, “Social Networks and the Decision to
  Insure,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2015, 7 (2), 81–108.

Charness, Gary and Matthias Sutter, “Groups Make Better Self-Interested Decisions,” Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26 (3), 157–76.

Choi, Syngjoo, Shachar Kariv, Wieland Müller, and Dan Silverman, “Who is (More)
  Rational?,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (6), 1518–550.

Cohen, Jonathan D, Keith Marzilli Ericson, David Laibson, and John Myles White,
  “Measuring Time Preferences,” NBER working paper, 2016, 22455.

Department for Education, “The national curriculum in England. Key stages 3 and 4 framework
  document,” December 2014.

Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez, “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Re-
  tirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2003, 118 (3), 815–42.

Edmondson, Amy, “Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams,” Administrative
  Science Quarterly, 1999, 44 (2), 350–383.

Eisenstein, Eric M. and Stephen J. Hoch, “Intuitive Compounding: Framing, Temporal
  Perspective, and Expertise,” Unpublished Manuscript, Dec 2007.

Feld, Jan and Ulf Zölitz, “Understanding Peer E↵ects: On the Nature, Estimation and Channels
  of Peer E↵ects,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2017, 35 (2), 387–428.

Fernandes, Daniel, John G Lynch Jr., and Richard G Netemeyer, “Financial Literacy,
  Financial Education, and Downstream Financial Behaviors,” Management Science, 2014, 60 (8),
  1861–883.

                                               32
Frederick, Shane, “Cognitive reflection and decision making,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  2005, 19 (4), 25–42.

  , George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue, “Time Discounting and Time Preference: A
  Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2002, 40 (2), 351–401.

Haliassos, Michael, Thomas Jansson, and Yigitcan Karabulut, “Financial Literacy Exter-
  nalities,” Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper Series, 2017, 333.

Harrison, Glenn W, Morten Igel Lau, and Melonie B. Williams, “Estimating Individual
  Discount Rates in Denmark: A Field Experiment,” American Economic Review, 2002, 92 (5),
  1606–1617.

Hastings, Justine S., Brigitte C. Madrian, and William L. Skimmyhorn, “Financial
  Literacy, Financial Education, and Economic Outcomes,” Annual Review of Economics, 2013, 5,
  347–73.

Hong, Harrison, Je↵rey D Kubik, and Jeremy C Stein, “Social Interaction and Stock-
  Market Participation,” The Journal of Finance, 2004, 59 (1), 137–63.

  ,   , and    , “Thy Neighbor’s Portfolio: Word-of-Mouth E↵ects in the Holdings and Trades of
  Money Managers,” The Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (6), 2801–824.

Hortaçsu, Ali and Chad Syverson, “Product Di↵erentiation, Search Costs, and Competition
  in the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2004, 119 (2), 403–56.

House of Commons Library, “Financial and enterprise education in schools,” http://
  researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN06156 November 2016.

Hoxby, Caroline M and Gretchen Weingarth, “Taking Race Out of the Equation: School
  Reassignment and the Structure of Peer E↵ects,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2005.

Hvide, Hans K and Per Östberg, “Social interaction at work,” Journal of Financial Economics,
  2015, 117 (3), 628–652.

i Vidal, Jordi Blanes and Mareike Nossol, “Tournaments without Prizes: Evidence from
  Personnel Records,” Management Science, 2011, 57 (10), 1721–736.

                                               33
Ivković, Zoran and Scott Weisbenner, “Information Di↵usion E↵ects in Individual Investors’
  Common Stock Purchases: Covet Thy Neighbors’ Investment Choices,” The Review of Financial
  Studies, 2007, 20 (4), 1327–357.

Jackson, C Kirabo and Elias Bruegmann, “Teaching Students and Teaching Each Other: The
  Importance of Peer Learning for Teachers,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  2009, 1 (4), 85–108.

Kast, Felipe, Stephan Meier, and Dina Pomeranz, “Saving More in Groups: Field Experi-
  mental Evidence from Chile,” HBS Working Paper 12-060, 2016.

Kerr, Norbert L and R Scott Tindale, “Group Performance and Decision Making,” Annual
  Review of Psychology, 2004, 55, 623–55.

Kimbrough, Erik O, Andrew D McGee, and Hitoshi Shigeoka, “How Do Peers Impact
  Learning? An Experimental Investigation of Peer-to-Peer Teaching and Ability Tracking,” NBER
  working paper, 2017, 23439.

Ko, K Jeremy and Christo Pirinsky, “Did Social Interactions Fuel or Suppress the US Housing
  Bubble?,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2017.

Kuhnen, Camelia M and Agnieszka Tymula, “Feedback, Self-Esteem, and Performance in
  Organizations,” Management Science, 2012, 58 (1), 94–113.

Levy, Matthew and Joshua Taso↵, “Exponential Growth Bias and Lifecycle Consumption,”
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 2016, 14 (3), 545–83.

Lieber, Ethan MJ and William Skimmyhorn, “Peer E↵ects in Financial Decision-Making:
  Social Spending but Private Saving,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2017.

Linnainmaa, Juhani T, Brian T Melzer, and Alessandro Previtero, “The Misguided Beliefs
  of Financial Advisors,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2016.

Lusardi, Annamaria, “Planning and Saving for Retirement,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2003.

  , “Household Saving Behavior: The Role of Financial Literacy, Information, and Financial Edu-
  cation,” NBER Working Paper, 2008, 13824.


                                              34
   and Olivia Mitchell, “Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications for Retirement Well-
  being,” in Annamaria Lusardi and Olivia S Mitchell, eds., Financial Literacy. Implications for
  Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace, Oxford University Press, 2011, pp. 17–39.

   and    , “The Economic Importance of Financial Literacy: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of
  Economic Literature, 2014, 52 (1), 1–44.

Malkiel, Burt G. and Charles D. Ellis, The Elements of Investing: Easy Lessons for Every
  Investor, New Jersey: Wiley, 2013.

Manski, Charles F, “Identification of Endogenous Social E↵ects: The Reflection Problem,” The
  Review of Economic Studies, 1993, 60 (3), 531–42.

McCartney, W. Benedict and Avni Shah, “‘I’ll Have What She’s Having’: Identifying’ Social
  Influence in Household Mortgage Decisions,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2017.

Mehrabian, Albert and Catherine A Stefl, “Basic Temperament Components of Loneliness,
  Shyness, and Conformity,” Social Behavior and Personality: An International Journal, 1995, 23
  (3), 253–63.

Miller, Margaret, Julia Reichelstein, Christian Salas, and Bilal Zia, “Can You Help
  Someone Become Financially Capable? A Meta-Analysis of the Literature,” World Bank Policy
  Research Working Paper, 2014, 6745.

Mobius, Markus and Tanya Rosenblat, “Social Learning in Economics,” Annual Review of
  Economics, 2014, 6 (1), 827–47.

Ouimet, Paige and Geo↵rey Tate, “Learning from Coworkers: Peer E↵ects on Individual
  Investment Decisions,” NBER working paper, 2017, 24085.

Rammstedt, Beatrice and Oliver P John, “Measuring Personality in One Minute or Less: A
  10-Item Short Version of the Big Five Inventory in English and German,” Journal of Research
  in Personality, 2007, 41 (1), 203–12.

Stango, Victor and Jonathan Zinman, “Exponential Growth Bias and Household Finance,”
  The Journal of Finance, 2009, 64 (6), 2807–849.



                                              35
van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie, “Financial Literacy and Stock
 Market Participation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2011, 101 (2), 449–72.

Wagenaar, William M. and Sabato D. Sagaria, “Misperception of Exponential Growth,”
 Perception and Psychophysics, 1975, 18 (6), 416–22.




                                             36
