                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DO EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY STATEMENTS BACKFIRE? EVIDENCE
       FROM A NATURAL FIELD EXPERIMENT ON JOB-ENTRY DECISIONS

                                       Andreas Leibbrandt
                                          John A. List

                                       Working Paper 25035
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25035


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2018




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Andreas Leibbrandt and John A. List. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Equal Employment Opportunity Statements Backfire? Evidence From A Natural Field
Experiment On Job-Entry Decisions
Andreas Leibbrandt and John A. List
NBER Working Paper No. 25035
September 2018
JEL No. C93,J71,J82,J88,K31

                                          ABSTRACT

Labor force composition and the allocation of talent remain of vital import to modern economies.
For their part, governments and companies around the globe have implemented equal
employment opportunity (EEO) regulations to influence labor market flows. Even though such
regulations are pervasive, surprisingly little is known about their impacts. We use a natural field
experiment conducted across 10 U.S. cities to investigate if EEO statements in job advertisements
affect the first step in the employment process, application rates. Making use of data from nearly
2,500 job seekers, we find considerable policy effects, but in an unexpected direction: the
presence of an EEO statement dampens rather than encourages racial minorities’ willingness to
apply for jobs. Importantly, the effects are particularly pronounced for educated job seekers and
in cities with white majority populations. Complementary survey evidence suggests the
underlying mechanism at work is “tokenism”, revealing that EEO statements backfire because
racial minorities avoid environments in which they are perceived as regulatory, or symbolic, hires
rather than being hired on their own merits. Beyond their practical and theoretical importance,
our results highlight how field experiments can significantly improve policymaking. In this case,
if one goal of EEO regulations is to enhance the pool of minority applicants, then it is not
working.


Andreas Leibbrandt
Department of Economics
Monash University
Clayton, Vic 3800
Australia
andreas.leibbrandt@monash.edu.au

John A. List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@uchicago.edu
“But freedom is not enough. You do not wipe away the scars of centuries by saying:
Now you are free to go where you want, and do as you desire, and choose the leaders
you please.
You do not take a person who, for years, has been hobbled by chains and liberate him,
bring him up to the starting line of a race and then say, "you are free to compete with
all the others," and still justly believe that you have been completely fair.

Thus it is not enough just to open the gates of opportunity. All our citizens must have
the ability to walk through those gates.

This is the next and the more profound stage of the battle for civil rights. We seek not
just freedom but opportunity. We seek not just legal equity but human ability, not just
equality as a right and a theory but equality as a fact and equality as a result.

For the task is to give 20 million Negroes the same chance as every other American to
learn and grow, to work and share in society, to develop their abilities--physical, mental
and spiritual, and to pursue their individual happiness……To this end equal
opportunity is essential...”
                --Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965 Howard University commencement speech


Introduction
Sweeping changes in the 1960s potentially altered employment and lifetime
opportunities in the U.S. that were unprecedented. A few months after President
Lyndon B. Johnson gave his moving Howard University commencement speech, the
New York Times (August, 1965) reported that “The President's Committee on Equal
Employment Opportunity said today it had helped place more than 100,000 Negroes
and other nonwhites in jobs in the last two years with its Plans for Progress program.”

     This landscape change has altered every aspect of the employer-employee
relationship. In the past half century, for example, Equal Employment Opportunity
(EEO) statements were added as a requirement in the Code of Federal Regulations, and
nearly every employer in the U.S. has grappled with how to provide equal opportunities.
Even with such policies and affirmative action programs in place, racial inequalities
remain ubiquitous in labor markets (Altonji and Blank, 1999; Bertrand, 2010; Blau et
al., 2010). 1 Relative to whites, blacks are twice as likely to be unemployed and earn
more than 20% less in the U.S. A critic of EEO regulations might interpret such data


1
  Affirmative action can be defined as “any measure, beyond simple termination of a discriminatory
practice, adopted to correct or compensate for past or present discrimination or to prevent discrimination
from recurring in the future” (US Commission on Civil Rights, Statement on Affirmative Action,
October 1977).




                                                                                                        2
patterns as stark evidence of a policy gone awry, whereas a supporter of EEO
regulations might view such data under an optimistic lens, noting that such comparisons
would be even more highly skewed absent the sweeping EEO policies enacted in the
20th century. 2

     Rather than turning back the clock and examining how EEO regulations in totality
have influenced labor market patterns over the past several decades, we present initial
insights into how an important element of EEO regulations affects labor markets today.
In this sense, we aim to provide initial empirical evidence on how EEO statements
currently affect racial minorities and their labor market choices. Such an exercise is
important for several reasons. First, several states and the U.S. federal government
require EEO statements in job advertisements today. 3 Second, aside from these cases,
employers have to decide whether they want to include an EEO statement in their job
advertisement. Third, many public and private employers in the U.S. and elsewhere still
use EEO statements in job advertisements. Fourth, there are broad recommendations
and regulations surrounding their inclusion. 4 Finally, as racial minorities remain
disadvantaged in many labor markets, it is of utmost importance to evaluate common
practices and policies that aim to reduce labor-market inequalities.                       To our best
knowledge, causal estimates of actual EEO statements do not exist despite their
pervasiveness and arguments that they could discourage minorities (Kanter, 1977 and
2008; McKay and Avery, 2005; Kang et al., 2016). 5


2
  Interestingly, it is difficult to find research motivating EEO regulations requiring the inclusion of EEO
statements in job advertisements. Examining the Federal Register for policy changes related to EEO
policy, we are unable to find research cited. Likewise, scouring older issues of the New Yorker and New
York Times to find policymakers mentioning research findings to justify the policies yields nothing of
substance. While it is difficult to prove there was no research motivating the policies, a relatively
thorough search has yielded nothing.
3
 For instance, the state of New Jersey requires the inclusion of EEO statements in all advertisements for
employees        (http://www.state.nj.us/treasury/contract_compliance/pdf/njac_17_27_ac.pdf),         the
University of California San Diego recommends the following in all ads: “All external ads should include
‘UCSD is an Equal Opportunity Employer (…),” and the federal government requires all contractors to
hire using EEO statements.
4
  One of the largest job board providers, Monster.com, advises “DO include language [in your job
description]     indicating     that    you      are     an     ‘Equal     Opportunity     Employer.’ ”
(http://hiring.monster.com/hr/hr-best-practices/recruiting-hiring-advice/acquiring-job-candidates/legal-
hiring-process.aspx). Interestingly, however, Monster.com also discusses job seeker concerns to become
a token worker if there is a perceived corporate focus on recruiting minorities
(https://www.monster.com/career-advice/article/are-you-a-token-worker).
5
 However, in a recent working paper, Flory et al. (2018) find evidence that signalling explicit interest in
diversity in job advertisements for a Fortune 500 company in the U.S. can increases interest in racial




                                                                                                         3
     We use a large-scale natural field experiment aimed at exploring the causal impact
of EEO statements in job advertisements to provide a first step into understanding the
effects of EEO policy. To investigate how EEO statements affect the job-applicant
pool, we advertise real jobs and investigate more than 2,300 job-entry decisions across
various labor market settings.           Our working hypothesis is that EEO statements
encourage minorities to apply for a job.               Our experiment renders it possible to
investigate interesting heterogeneities because we post the job advertisements in 10
large U.S. cities with substantially different racial compositions.

     We find that EEO statements do affect job-entry decisions. However, the statement
that all job applicants receive equal consideration irrespective of race leads to
unexpected outcomes. In particular, we find that EEO statements discourage racial
minorities to apply for jobs in important ways. Educated non-whites are less likely to
apply if the job description entails an EEO statement, and the discouragement effect is
particularly pronounced in cities with white majority populations. 6 The impact of EEO
statements on job applications from minorities is economically significant, as their
application likelihood drops by up to 30 percent.

     To explore the underlying mechanism at work, we conduct complementary surveys
with job-seekers drawn from the same subject pool. We find that the inclusion of EEO
statements significantly affect anticipated discrimination, stereotype threat, and
tokenism. That is, we observe that the inclusion of the EEO statement in the studied job
advertisements decreases the likelihood with which job-seekers anticipate
discrimination during hiring and career advancement and that it lowers stereotype
threat. At the same time, however, we observe that the inclusion of the EEO statement
significantly increases the perception of tokenism. This effect is particularly
pronounced in cities with white majority populations, where more than two-thirds of
job-seekers believe that the inclusion of the EEO statement signals that there will be
token hires.

     Our survey findings augment the field experimental results and provide insights
into the mechanism underlying the observed discouragement effect of EEO statements.



minority candidates. Similarly, Ibanez and Riener (2018) find that the promise of preferential treatment
for women in Columbia increases their job applications.
6
  Non-whites include African American, Hispanic, Asian, and Native American. We use the term ‘non-
whites’ for simplicity and brevity.


                                                                                                      4
They suggest that racial minorities prefer not to apply for jobs where there is a high
likelihood that they are token hires. These tokenism concerns are so strong that they
outweigh other desirable impacts of EEO statements, such as lower anticipated
discrimination and stereotype threat.

     Combined with the insights in Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) and Kang et al.
(2016), who report that employers who use EEO statements are not less likely to
discriminate against racial minorities, our findings paint a rather bleak picture of current
EEO policies having a positive impact on minority labor market representation. This
does not imply that EEO statements have never had their intended impacts, that EEO
policies requiring the mandatory inclusion of EEO statements across-the-board cannot
have their intended impacts, or that differently formulated statements cannot have their
intended impacts (Flory et al., 2018). Rather, the results suggest that there is little
support for the inclusion of standard EEO statements in job ads in today’s labor market,
and even evidence that important deleterious effects arise from such statements.

     Beyond informing policy, taken as a whole, our work fits in nicely with several
strands of research. First, we provide novel evidence on the role of perceived tokenism
in the allocation of talent. Tokenism (see, e.g., Kanter, 1977 and 2008), the practice of
recruiting minorities to give the appearance of an equal opportunity employer, can lead
to performance pressures, social isolation, and role encapsulation – especially in
workplaces where minorities are significantly underrepresented. Our findings suggest
that the perception of tokenism can distort the allocation of minority talents, especially
in cities where they also represent the statistical minority.

     Second, our work contributes to research on affirmative action, labor market
discrimination, and stereotype threat. The empirical literature on affirmative action
policies is largely focused on quotas and based on observational data (Card and
Krueger, 2005; Dickson, 2006; Adams and Ferreira, 2009; Bertrand et al., 2010;
Hinrichs, 2012; Ahern and Dittmar, 2012; Matsa and Miller, 2013) or laboratory
experimental data (Bull et al., 1987; Schotter and Weigelt, 1992; Balafoutas and Sutter,
2012; Niederle et al., 2013; Leibbrandt et al., 2017). 7 The experimental literature on
discrimination provides clear evidence that racial and gender minorities still face


7
  An exception is Beaman et al. (2009), who investigate gender quotas using a randomized control trial
in India. The results show that gender quotas can reduce gender-occupation stereotypes in the long term.



                                                                                                      5
significant hurdles in labor markets, which likely contribute to racial and gender
inequalities (Goldin and Rouse, 2000; Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004; List, 2004;
Bertrand et al., 2005; Fryer et al., 2013; Mujcic and Frijters, 2015) and may affect job-
entry decisions (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004; Carlson and Rooth, 2007; Banerjee
et al., 2009; Pager et al., 2009; Kass and Manger, 2012). The literature on stereotype
threat provides manifold evidence that racial and gender cues can harm minorities
(Coate and Loury, 1993; Steele and Aronson, 1995; for a more recent summary,
Nguyen and Ryan, 2008). We show that EEO statements can mitigate fear of
discrimination and stereotypes suggesting the importance of employers to provide clear
signals, but that it is crucial that these statements do not feed other fears, such as
tokenism.

    The remainder of our study proceeds as follows. The next section details the field
experimental design. Section 3 discusses the experimental results. Section 4 presents
the survey design and findings. Section 5 concludes.

2. Experimental Design

    We investigate the impact of EEO statements for job-entry decisions with a large-
scale natural field experiment (see Harrison and List, 2004) in 10 actual labor markets
in the U.S. with different racial compositions. In our natural field experiment, we
posted job advertisements asking job seekers to express interest. After this initial
expression of interest, we expose job seekers to two different treatments, culminating
with a request to submit a formal job application. We randomize whether we include
an EEO statement in the job description received by interested job seekers. In this way,
our field experiment renders it possible to estimate causally the effect of EEO
statements on the proportion of initially interested job seekers who ultimately apply.

    Our two-stage field experimental method is in the spirit of Flory et al. (2015) and
Leibbrandt and List (2014), who investigate gender differences in preferences for wage
contracts and initiating negotiations.    Using this two-step methodology, we can
randomize job environments across job seekers without affecting the normalcy of the
field setting. Moreover, we can collect individual characteristics, such as race and




                                                                                         6
education, even for those subjects who expressed interest but chose not to apply after
they were informed about the job environment. 8

     Our job advertisements closely resembled other advertisements for similar
positions. They identified the employer and its location. We explicitly used a genuine
organization to minimize any risk of suspicion. The advertisement was signed by a
current employee of our organization. Having a genuine employee of the organization
sign off the email added further insurance, should any job seekers wish to perform a
brief internet search to verify the authenticity of the advertisement. The advertisement
ended with a single sentence requesting interested job seekers to email their resume.

     To operationalize our natural field experiment, we posted employment
advertisements for administrative assistant positions. There are several advantages of
choosing this occupation. On the practical side, we are able to offer real administrative
assistant positions and can afford to pay market salaries. Further, administrative
assistant positions are the most common occupation in the US (13% of the workforce;
http://www.bls.gov/opub/ee/ empearn201001.pdf). We posted two openings for
administrative assistant positions with the same job function (Appendix, Section II).
One job advertisement sought someone to help with administrative assistant duties in
an environment focused on arts, culture, and business. The other job advertisement
sought someone to help with administrative assistant duties in an environment focused
on sports.

2.1 Equal employment opportunity treatment

     We randomly inserted in the job description (i.e., in the second stage) the following
statement with a 50% probability: “(employer redacted) is an equal opportunity
employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without
regard to sex, color, age, or any other protected characteristics.”

     This EEO statement is common on this job board. More precisely, during the
period of our experiment, approximately 12% of the job advertisements posted on the

8
 A simpler approach is to post employment advertisements, which do or do not include EEO statements
at the outset, and then compare the ratio of white-to-black applicants across treatments. However, we
would then observe only job seekers who decide to apply (i.e., we would not know the denominator); the
number and characteristics of job seekers who would have been interested in the position in the presence
and absence of EEO statements would remain unknown. This presents two major problems. First, the
power of the design would be limited, compared to our preferred approach. Second, inference based on
changes in absolute numbers of final applicants is limited, and it is problematic to use the white–black
application ratio without knowing the underlying race ratio of those interested prior to treatments.


                                                                                                      7
job board included an EEO or affirmative action statement. The language of our EEO
statement mirrored the other most frequently used EEO statements in other job
advertisements on this job board, and it matches the spirit of EEO statements used more
broadly by governments, firms, and other institutions.

    The job description was given to job seekers who had already expressed interest in
the job, and they received the description usually within 2 days of expressing this
interest (83% received it within 24 hours, 96% within 2 days). To ultimately apply for
the job, job-seekers had to fill out a questionnaire. We asked job seekers to answer ten
interview questions that were attached to the job environment description and related
to the employment advertisement (Appendix, Section IV). In addition, in the job
description, job seekers received information about the wage of the advertised job. The
posted wage was slightly higher than the median wage for comparable jobs in most
cities and was identical across cities and employment advertisements. In addition, we
signaled that we were open to questions, apologized for any questions about the job
they may have asked to which we had not yet responded, and welcomed further
inquiries. To avoid heterogeneous treatment, we did not interact with job seekers until
they applied. The only difference between the two treatments is the existence of the
EEO statement at the end of the job description. The scripts are included in Section III
of the Appendix.

2.2 Response variable and job-seeker characteristics

    Our key outcome variable is the individual decision to apply for our job. Our
subject pool consists of every individual who contacted us to express interest in the job
(this represents the denominator in the fraction of people applying for our jobs). In
order to submit an actual application, the interested job seeker must fill out an interview
attachment and return it to us. Therefore, we classify all subjects who returned the
questionnaire as having applied, and those who did not return the questionnaire as
having not applied.

    Our most important job-seeker characteristics are race and education. To determine
race, we first employed two sets of raters who independently searched through social
networking websites to look for pictures of the job seekers using their names and other
information included in their resumes. The raters were blind to treatment and used five




                                                                                         8
main categories for assignment: White, Black, Hispanic, Others (Asian, Indian, Middle
Eastern, Pacific Islander), and Not found.

     The assignment of race was as follows. First, we assigned race to all job seekers
where both raters identified race and agreed on it. There was an agreement of 75.9%
and the level of inter-rate agreement is high (k = 0.675). In this manner, we were able
to assign race to 1,391 out of 2,321 job seekers (59.9%). Appendix Table S1 shows the
corresponding racial categorization outcome from two independent raters for each job
seeker. The table indicates that the largest disagreements occurred in the category Not
found. Consequently, we employed more raters who searched more intensively for the
job seekers for which race was not yet assigned (930 out of 2,321). We then assigned
race for any of the 930 job seekers if a rater identified race and no other rater identified
a different race. 9 Thus, in total, we were able to assign race for 93.7% of all job seekers
(N=2,175 out of 2,321).

     Education is often used as an important criterion for job suitability. While we are
also interested in the overall effect of EEO statements on racial minorities, arguably, it
is more important to estimate the effect of EEO statements on racial minorities that are
regarded as potentially suitable for a certain advertised job. For administrative assistant
jobs and other comparable jobs, high school graduation is a typical necessary criterion.
We determine education from the resumes sent to us by job seekers. The resumes reveal
that 70% graduated from high school (N=1,623) and that 44.8% obtained at least the
equivalent of a B.A. degree (N=1,040).

2.3 Advertisement locations and statistical racial minorities

     The job advertisements were posted in popular city-specific internet job boards and
we used the same job-board provider in all cities. To conclude the study, we offered
real jobs to applicants and hired 10 people. We posted the advertisements in 10 major
US cities. Table 1 illustrates that we chose cities with greatly different racial
compositions. We can separate them into cities with a clear white majority population
(Denver, Dallas, Houston, Los Angeles, San Francisco) and cities which are more
racially diverse (Chicago, New York city, Philadelphia, Washington DC, Atlanta).



9
 In addition, we used other categorizations of race, for example, majority decisions in which race was
assigned as soon as at least two raters agreed. Our findings are very similar using different categorizations
of race.


                                                                                                           9
                           {INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE}

2.4 Standard and alternative hypotheses

    Labor market discrimination, regardless of whether it is actual or perceived, can be
an important reason for racial inequalities, such as lower callback rates, earnings, and
higher unemployment. EEO laws are common in many countries to assist overcoming
such discrimination and have their origins in protecting minorities in labor markets.
Although EEO laws already exist, it is still possible that the inclusion of an EEO
statement in a job advertisement sends a positive signal to minority job seekers. This
is likely one main reason why some institutions require or strongly recommend the use
of EEO statements.

    Our standard hypothesis is based on the assumption that the explicit inclusion of
an EEO statement can reduce the expectation of discrimination and that this translates
into a higher perceived likelihood of minorities to be hired (and under certain standard
labor productivity assumptions, without significantly affecting majorities). The impact
of the signal depends on the actual expectation of discrimination and the credibility of
the EEO signal. If job seekers do not expect discrimination or doubt the credibility of
the signal, then EEO statements should not affect job-application likelihoods. However,
if minority job seekers expect discrimination and perceive the signal to be credible, then
EEO statements should increase their job-application likelihood. To summarize:

             H0: Job seekers are equally, or more likely to apply if a job
             advertisement includes an EEO statement.

    Yet, it is possible that the inclusion of an EEO statement in a job advertisement
sends different, and unintended, signals. Following the literature, we consider three
such mechanisms. First, it is possible that EEO statements do not reduce, but activate,
expectations of discrimination. It is possible that EEO statements are perceived as
strategically managed propositions, or semantic moves (Van Dijk, 1993; Bonilla-Silva,
2002). A typical example of a semantic move is “I treat everyone equally, I am not a
racist, some of my best friends are black”. In this respect, EEO statements may deter
minorities. Further, it is also possible that EEO statements are perceived by majorities
as a signal that they could be discriminated in the hiring process.

    Second, it is possible that EEO statements activate stereotype threat. Stereotype
threat describes a situation in which one’s social group is at risk of confirming a



                                                                                       10
negative stereotype when the salience of the stereotyped group identity is emphasized
(Steele and Aronson, 1995). Stereotype threat can be a pervasive phenomenon (Nguyen
and Ryan, 2008; but see Fryer et al., 2008). There is evidence that priming race can
activate stereotype threats, and consequently affect behavior, such as test performance
(Steele and Aronson, 1995; Shih et al., 1999), labor market behavior (Roberson and
Kulik, 2007; Gupta et al., 2008; von Hippel et al., 2011), and that affirmative action
programs can create stereotype threat as minority workers fear being marked by the
stigma of incompetence (Heilman et al., 1992). 10

     Third, it is possible that EEO statements increase the belief that there is tokenism
(Kanter, 1977 & 2008) and that minorities prefer not to apply to a job where
employment appears to be not primarily based on merit but on tokenism. That is, they
do not want to risk to be considered as token hires, and voluntarily forego applying for
a job when they believe that their application success is enhanced because of their
minority status. We these mechanisms in mind, a useful alternative hypothesis is:

               HA: Job seekers are less likely to apply if a job advertisement includes
               an EEO statement.

     It is conceivable that the impact of EEO statements on racial minorities depends
on the racial composition of the local labor market. Relatedly, there is evidence that
racial gaps in callback rates are smaller in racially mixed neighborhoods than white
neighborhoods (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004). 11 More generally, anticipated
discrimination, stereotype threat, and perception of tokenism may systematically
interact with the composition of the local labor market.

     In particular, it seems plausible that these factors are more important for non-white
job-seekers in white cities, where non-whites are not only historical minorities but also
statistical minorities. Non-whites may be more concerned with discrimination and
tokenism in primarily white cities. If this is true, then the signaling value and thus the
impact of EEO statements should be stronger in primary white cities compared to


10
   Moreover, studies suggest that stereotype threat can lead to self-handicapping strategies, such as
reduced effort for a task (Stone, 2002), reduced sense of belonging to a stereotyped domain (Good et
al., 2008), and even reduced utility of the domain in question (Osborne, 1995; Steele, 1997; Aronson et
al., 2002).
11
   However, there is also evidence that wages from African Americans vary negatively with the
fraction of a state that is black (Charles and Guryan, 2008).




                                                                                                    11
racially mixed cities. Consistent with our previous hypotheses this signaling value may
lead to an increase or decrease of job applications.


H0 city: Non-white job-seekers are more likely to apply for a job that includes an
EEO statement in cities with primary white populations.

HA city: Non-white job-seekers are less likely to apply for a job that includes an
EEO statement in cities with primary white populations.

With these hypotheses in mind, we turn to the field experimental results.

3. Experimental Results
3.1 Descriptive overview

     In total, we observe that 43.7% of the job seekers with identified race ultimately
applied for our advertised positions (n=951 out of 2,175). 12 In our sample of job-
seekers, 42.5% are characterized as white. Racial minorities are composed as follows:
39% are African Americans, 14.3% Hispanic, and 4.3% others (mainly Asian). Table
1 summarizes the distribution of racial minority job seekers in each city. 70.7% of the
job seekers have obtained at least a high school degree and satisfy the typical minimum
criteria for this kind of job. Race and education are important predictors for the
likelihood of job application in the baseline. When no EEO statement was included in
the job advertisement, we observe that whites are significantly more likely to apply than
racial minorities (49.5% vs. 41.4%, p<.01, 2-sided Fisher’s exact).

3.2 Overall impact of EEO statements

     Figure 1 provides a first illustration of the impact of EEO statements on job
applications from all job seekers (left) and all sufficiently qualified job seekers who
graduated from high school (right). We observe that the application likelihood is lower
for both samples of job seekers if an EEO statement is included. In the sample of all
job seekers regardless of qualifications, the application likelihood drops from 0.449 to
0.425, a difference that is not significant at conventional levels (p=0.261, 2-sided
Fisher’s exact test, N=2,175). In the sample of job seekers who are sufficiently qualified




12
  The application rate is slightly higher than in the two other studies using a similar experimental
design. In Flory et al. (2015), 39.3% applied and 36.2% applied in Leibbrandt and List (2015). This
suggests that the interview questions in this study did not deter job-seekers from applying.



                                                                                                       12
for the advertised job, the negative impact of the EEO statement from 0.485 to 0.436 is
marginally statistically significant at p = 0.058 (2-sided Fisher’s exact test, N=1,537).

                               {INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE}

     To provide conditional estimates in a regression framework, we use linear
probability models to estimate the impact of EEO statements on job applications. 13 In
these models, we regress the application decision on treatment (EEO statement yes/no),
education (minimal education criteria and/or highly educated), type of job
advertisement (arts, culture, business vs. sports), response delay (time between job-
seeker signaled interested and we responded with treatment), and racial minority
(African American, Hispanic, Others; models 4-6).

     Table 2 provides an overview of the impact of EEO statements for the full sample
of racial minorities and whites. Model (1) estimates the overall impact of EEO
statements. We observe that the inclusion of an EEO statement has no significant
impact on the job application likelihood at conventional levels (p=0.183, 2.8 pp). We
also observe that highly educated job-seekers are more likely to apply (p<.01), and that
job-seekers are more likely to apply for the job advertisement focused on sports
(p=0.026). Whether job-seekers are sufficiently educated for the job has no significant
impact on application likelihoods (p=0.317). The treatment delay is also insignificant
(p=0.238).

     Model (2) estimates the impact of EEO statements for all job-seekers who satisfy
the minimum education criteria. Here, in the sample of qualified job-seekers we observe
that the inclusion of an EEO statement significantly lowers the application likelihood
by 5.2 pp (p=0.042). Highly educated job-seekers are again more likely to apply
(p<.01). Model (3) estimates the impact of EEO statements for all job-seekers who do
not satisfy the minimum education criteria. For this sample, we do not observe a
significant impact of EEO statements on the application likelihood (p=0.624, 1.9 pp).
None of the control variables is significant. Thus, consistent with our alternative
hypothesis HA the first result is:

RESULT 1 – EEO statements deter job applications from qualified job seekers.



13
  The correction procedure of List et al. (2016) is not applicable with our current analysis since we use
regression models with controls. Using Bonferroni and Holm corrections where applicable yield results
similar to those presented.


                                                                                                     13
3.3 Impact of EEO statements on racial minorities and whites

         Next, we separately examine the impact of EEO statements on racial minorities
and whites. Models (4) – (6) in Table 2 correspond to models (1) – (3) but estimate the
impact of EEO statements on racial minorities (i.e., non-whites). Similar to Model (1)
for the whole sample of job seekers, Model (4) shows that EEO statements have no
significant impact on the sample of all racial minority job-seekers (p=0.302, -2.9 pp.).
In Model (5), however, we observe in the sample of sufficiently qualified non-white
job-seekers that EEO statements significantly deter job applications. Qualified non-
white job-seekers are 6.4 pp less likely to apply if an EEO statement is included, a
substantial negative impact that is statistically significant at p ≤ 0.05. In contrast, for
insufficiently qualified racial minorities, we observe that they are considerably more
likely to apply if an EEO statement is included (5.7 pp), but given the relatively small
sample size this effect is not significant (p=0.270; Model 6).

         We do not observe corresponding patterns for whites. Models (7) – (9) in Table
2 correspond to models (1) – (3) but estimate the impact of EEO statements on whites.
In contrast to non-whites, we do not find any significant impact of EEO statements on
whites, regardless of whether we consider the whole sample (p=0.370, model 7), the
sample of sufficiently qualified (p=0.380, model 8), or the sample of not sufficiently
qualified (p=0.887, model 9). This leads to our second result:

                                 {INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE}

RESULT 2 – EEO statements deter job applications from qualified racial minorities.
EEO statements do not significantly affect job applications from white job seekers and
insufficiently qualified racial minority job seekers.



3.4 The impact of EEO statements in white and mixed cities

         To test our hypotheses H0 city and HA city, we first compare the impact of EEO
statements on job application rates of non-whites in the five cities with white majority
populations and then in the five more racially diverse cities. 14 Consistent with HA city,
we observe that (i) the job application likelihood of non-whites drops significantly from
0.469 to 0.344 if an EEO statement is included in the white cities (p=0.012, 2-sided


14
  We use Census data to separate the cities into white and mixed cities. The patterns presented are
qualitatively similar if we use instead the racial distribution data from our experiment.


                                                                                                      14
Fisher’s exact test) and that (ii) there is no significant impact of the EEO statement in
the mixed cities (0.385 vs. 0.419; p=0.324, Fisher’s exact test).

        Figure 2 provides a more fine-grained illustration of job application likelihoods
from non-whites in our two treatments in each of the ten studied local labor markets.
On the top row of this figure we observe the five cities with white majority populations.
We can see that non-whites are less likely to apply in all of these primary white cities
if an EEO statement is included. In contrast, in the bottom row, which illustrates
behavior from non-whites in racially mixed cities, we do not observe a clear pattern.
Job application likelihoods appear to be unaffected by EEO statements in four of the
five cities.

                            {INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE}

        Regression Table 3 corresponds to Table 2 but takes into account whether the
job advertisement was posted in primary white (Models 1-4) or mixed cities (Models
5-8). Several insights emerge. First, we observe that the impact of EEO statements is
much stronger in primary white cities (between -7 pp and -18.6 pp) as compared to
mixed cities (between -0.01 and 0.028 pp). Second, we observe pronounced negative
impacts of EEO statements in primary white cities, consistent with our alternative
hypothesis HA City. Model (1) shows the overall impact of EEO statements in primary
white cities, and we observe a highly significant negative impact of EEO statements on
the job application likelihood of all job seekers (p<.01, -10.8 pp). Model (2) shows that
non-whites in primary white cities are 15.2 pp less likely to apply if the job
advertisement contains an EEO statement (p<.01). Model (3) reveals that the impact of
EEO statements is even stronger for sufficiently educated non-whites in primary white
cities (p<.01, -18.6 pp).

        Third, we observe that EEO statements do not affect job application likelihoods
in mixed cities. For example, there is no discernible impact on non-whites (Models 5-
7; p>0.405) and there is also no significant impact of EEO statements on applications
from whites in white and mixed cities (Models 4 and 8; p>0.145).

                             {INSERT TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE}

        Figure 3 further examines the relevance of the city type and illustrates the
impact of the EEO statement in each city ordered according to the share of the white
population for African Americans and Hispanics. Each circle represents the percentage


                                                                                      15
point change in application likelihoods if the job advertisement included an EEO
statement. We observe that there is a negative relationship between the impact of the
EEO statement on job applications and the share of the white population in a given city
(r=-0.414, p=0.0695, N=20). This negative relationship is particularly pronounced for
African Americans (r=-0.783, p<.01). Together, these data lead to our third result:

                          {INSERT FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE}

RESULT 3 – EEO statements deter job applications from non-whites in cities with
primary white majority populations. EEO statements do not significantly affect job
applications from non-whites in racially mixed cities.



       We provide further robustness checks concerning race and gender in the first
section of the Appendix. Table A2 corresponds to Table 3 but distinguishes between
the sample of African Americans and Hispanics. We observe that the EEO statement
negatively affects both African Americans’ and Hispanics’ application likelihoods
(e.g., -12.22 to -12.99 pp for African Americans in Models 1 and 2 of Table A3 and -
15.4 to -20.5 pp for Hispanics in Models 5 and 6). Table A3 corresponds also to Table
3 but distinguishes between the sample of females and males. We observe that the EEO
statement also negatively affects both gender, females’ application likelihood is 9.1 to
11.1pp lower (Models 1 and 2) and males’ application likelihood is 10.2 to 11.5 pp
lower (Models 5 and 6).

4. Complementary evidence exploring the mechanisms underlying EEO effects
4.1 Survey design
       Our natural field experiment provides causal evidence that EEO statements
lower job application rates, reveals that qualified non-white job seekers are most
affected, and that EEO statements backfire in cities with primary white majority
populations. Yet, while the experiment is able to measure such effects, alone it cannot
detail the mechanisms responsible for the observed effects.

       To understand the drivers behind these data patterns, we conducted surveys with
job seekers drawn from the same population as the job seekers in our natural field
experiment. After we concluded our field experiment, we advertised paid surveys on
the same job board provider and in the same category (Office/Admin Jobs). In the
surveys, we asked job seekers several questions to understand the perceived signals of
the EEO statement in our job advertisement. Each survey participant received a $10


                                                                                      16
Amazon gift voucher immediately after completion. There were two surveys and both
were administered more than a year after we completed the natural field experiment.
The surveys were advertised in two primary white cities (Denver and San Francisco)
and two mixed cities (Atlanta and Chicago).

        In the two surveys, we asked job seekers to read through a job advertisement
that very closely followed the job advertisements used in our natural field experiment.
The only difference was that we joined the two steps in the field experiment (job
advertisement and job description). All participants first read through the job
advertisement with the job description which did not contain an EEO statement. They
were then asked a number of questions (six questions in survey I and two questions in
survey II) before we confronted them with the EEO statement used in the natural field
experiment. More precisely, we told them: “Imagine now you see the same job
advertisement but it includes the following statement (…)”. Thereafter, we asked the
job seekers to respond to the same set of questions. The surveys are reproduced in
Section V of the Appendix.

        We were particularly interested to understand how EEO statements affect the
expectation of discrimination, stereotype threat, and tokenism. In addition, we were
interested in whether EEO statements signalled the extent to which the employer
already employs diverse job seekers. All of these four factors are candidates to explain
the backfiring of EEO statements. For example, if job seekers expect a greater level of
stereotype threat if the job advertisement contains an EEO statement, then this would
suggest that EEO statements lower application rates from minorities because they
increase stereotype threat. We report responses from N=175 job seekers in survey I and
N=87 job seekers in survey II. 15

4.2 Survey Findings
        Table 4 summarizes our main survey findings. A first interesting insight is that
job seekers perceive that the EEO statement lowers expected discrimination in the
application stage and during employment. More precisely, they believe that qualified


15
  We collected a total sample of N = 400 survey responses (N = 250 survey I, N = 150 survey II).
However, because of a glitch in the software we collected from some participants multiple observations
who figured out that they can receive multiple gift vouchers (the software missed blocking IP addresses
from further participation). To avoid the multiple observation issue, we constrain our sample to unique
IP addresses within each city where survey advertisements were posted and only count the first survey
response for those IP addresses.


                                                                                                   17
African American and Hispanic job applicants have a higher probability to be hired if
the job advertisement entails an EEO statement (+7.3 pp, p<.001, t-test), and have less
difficulty to advance once hired (45.2% expect easier advancement if an EEO statement
is included vs. 10.9% who expect more difficult advancement; p<.001). The positive
impact of EEO statements to address expected discrimination is similarly pronounced
in primarily white and mixed cities.

       Moreover, the survey indicates that the EEO statement lowers stereotype threat.
Importantly, the respondents believe that African American and Hispanic job seekers
are less anxious to perform at the advertised job if the advertisement has an EEO
statement included (32.6% less anxious vs. 16% more anxious), regardless of the city
type. Further, job seekers do not perceive that an EEO statement signals something
about employer diversity. More precisely, they believe that the percentage of current
white employees is similar regardless of whether the job advertisement includes an
EEO statement and whether the advertisement was posted in white or mixed cities.

                           {INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE}

       However, job seekers believe that the inclusion of an EEO statement
considerably raises the belief that African Americans and Hispanics are token hires.
More precisely, more than half of the job seekers (50.7%) believe that the EEO
statement signals that African Americans and Hispanics are token hires. Importantly,
this raised belief of tokenism is city dependent. In primary white cities, more than two-
thirds of the participants believe that the inclusion of an EEO statement signals
tokenism (69.2%). In contrast, in mixed cities less than one-third (29.4%) believe so,
and a greater number actually believe the opposite—that EEO statements signal a
decrease in tokenism (38.2%). These data are important in that the pattern of tokenism
concerns overlaps with the pattern of the EEO statement’s dampening effect on
application rates from non-whites, consistent with the hypothesis that tokenism
concerns are one important driver for the backfiring. This leads to our final result:


RESULT 4 – EEO statements increase the perception that racial minorities are token
hires, especially in primary white cities. At the same time, EEO statements generally
lower anticipated discrimination against non-whites and alleviate stereotype threat.


5. Discussion


                                                                                        18
    Dozens of public policies are rolled out daily around the world. While we have
the necessary empirical tools to evaluate them on their merits, very few policies
undergo a systematic diagnosis. This is likely due to both a lack of resources and a lack
of knowledge about how to analyze formally the policy at hand. Beyond its direct
policy significance, our research underscores how field experiments can be used to
examine policies more broadly. Our natural field experiment provides a case study for
how to understand one such policy: equal employment opportunity regulations. We
focus on EEO statements that potentially affect racial minorities. EEO statements in
job advertisements arguably belong to one of the least invasive and controversial
affirmative action policies. Perhaps these circumstances together with the belief that
EEO statements can do no harm may explain why the empirical study of their impact
has been neglected.

    We make use of a natural field experiment combined with a labor market survey
to explore the effect of EEO statements.        The participants in our natural field
experiment are unaware of being investigated, belong to different minorities/majorities,
and have different backgrounds. Because we are concerned primarily with job-entry
decisions and we did not want to endanger the natural environment of the job
application, we did not ask job seekers about potential drivers for the impact of EEO
statements such as expectations of discrimination. Instead, we ask these questions in
our complementary job seeker surveys. These features allow us to not only directly
measure the causal impacts of our EEO statement, but also shed light on the underlying
mechanisms for the observed effects.

    We show that EEO statements can backfire, discouraging the very population they
are meant to help. The discouragement effect is in line with our alternative hypothesis
that EEO statements activate tokenism concerns and that minority job seekers prefer to
avoid the chance to be perceived as a token hire. As such, our study provides
information and guidance to managers and policymakers on the direct use of EEO
statements.   Viewed more generally, our approach represents a roadmap for the
empirical investigation of other public and private regulations—from health and safety
to environment to labor market policies—that have yet to be scrutinized. Even in those
cases where policymakers and managers failed to use science to guide initial decision
making, we show how field experiments can be used intermittingly to assess whether
the regulation is working as intended.


                                                                                      19
    Certainly, more research is warranted to increase our understanding of how EEO
statements and other affirmative action policies affect labor markets. Caution should
also be exercised as it remains the case that we are examining only the first step in the
employment process. Of course, it is also important to understand other aspects of
employment, such as actual hiring and advancement in the job. Moreover, it is
important to gain understanding of whether the impact of EEO statements depends on
the nature of the employer. For instance, it is possible that the negative impact of EEO
statements is more pronounced for smaller and private employers than for larger and
public employers. Finally, it is important to investigate whether the deterrence of EEO
statements is a general phenomenon that translates into different jobs or is dependent
on the description of the statement or job type. We leave these research topics for
another occasion.




                                                                                      20
                                     References
Adams, R. B., & Ferreira, D. (2009). Women in the boardroom and their impact on
governance and performance. Journal of financial economics,94(2), 291-309.

Ahern, K. R., & Dittmar, A. K. (2012). The changing of the boards: The impact on firm
valuation of mandated female board representation. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 127(1), 137-197.

Altonji, Joseph G., and Rebecca Blank. (1999). Race and Gender in the Labor Market.
In Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3C, eds. O. Ashenfelter, and D. Card, 3144–
3259. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat
on African American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 38(2), 113-125.

Balafoutas, L. and Sutter, M. (2012). Affirmative action policies promote women and
do not harm efficiency in the lab. Science, 335: 579-582.

Banerjee, A., Bertrand, M., Datta, S., & Mullainathan, S. (2009). Labor market
discrimination in Delhi: Evidence from a field experiment. Journal of Comparative
Economics, 37(1), 14-27.

Beaman, L., Chattopadhyay, R., Duflo, E., Pande, R., & Topalova, P. (2009) Powerful
women: female leadership and gender bias. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4),
1497-1540.

Bertrand, M., Chugh, D., & Mullainathan, S. (2005). Implicit discrimination. American
Economic Review, 94-98.

Bertrand, M., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than
Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination. The
American Economic Review, 94(4), 991-1013.

Bertrand, M. (2010). New Perspectives on Gender. In Handbook of Labor Economics,
Vol. 4b, eds. O. D. Card, and O. Ashenfelter, 1543-1590 (Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science).

Bertrand, M., Hanna, R., & Mullainathan, S. (2010). Affirmative action in education:
Evidence from engineering college admissions in India. Journal of Public
Economics, 94(1), 16-29.

Blau, F., Feber, M, Winkler, A. (2010). The Economics of Women, Men and Work
(Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs).

Bonilla-Silva, E. (2002). The linguistics of color blind racism: How to talk nasty about
blacks without sounding “racist”. Critical Sociology, 28(1-2), 41-64.




                                                                                     21
Bull, C., Schotter, A., & Weigelt, K. (1987). Tournaments and piece rates: An
experimental study. The Journal of Political Economy, 1-33.

Card, D., & Krueger, A. B. (2005). Would the elimination of affirmative action affect
highly qualified minority applicants? Evidence from California and Texas. Industrial
& Labor Relations Review, 58(3), 416-434.

Carlsson, M., & Rooth, D. O. (2007). Evidence of ethnic discrimination in the Swedish
labor market using experimental data. Labour Economics, 14(4), 716-729.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, and Jonathan Guryan. "Prejudice and wages: an empirical
assessment of Becker’s The Economics of Discrimination." Journal of Political
Economy 116.5 (2008): 773-809.

Coate, S., & Loury, G. C. (1993). Will affirmative-action policies eliminate negative
stereotypes?. The American Economic Review, 1220-1240.

Dickson, L. M. (2006). Does ending affirmative action in college admissions lower the
percent of minority students applying to college?. Economics of Education
Review, 25(1), 109-119.

Flory, J. A., Leibbrandt, A., and List, J. A. (2015). Do Competitive Workplaces Deter
Female Workers? A Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment on Job Entry
Decisions. Review of Economic Studies, 82(1), 122-155.

Flory, J.A., Leibbrandt, A., Rott, C., and Stoddard, O. (2018). Increasing Workplace
Diversity: Evidence from a Recruiting Experiment at a Fortune 500 Company. Cesifo
Working paper.

Fryer R, Levitt S, and List J.A. (2008). Exploring the Impact of Financial Incentives
on Stereotype Threat: Evidence from a Pilot Study. American Economic Review, 98
(2), 370-375.

Fryer, R. G., Pager, D., and Spenkuch, J. L. (2013). Racial disparities in job finding and
offered wages. The Journal of Law and Economics, 56(3), 633-689.

Goldin, C., and C. Rouse. (2000). Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of ‘Blind’
Auditions on Female Musicians. American Economic Review, 90(4): 715–741.

Good, C., Aronson, J., and Harder, J. A. (2008). Problems in the pipeline: Stereotype
threat and women's achievement in high-level math courses. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology, 29(1), 17-28.

Gupta, V. K., Turban, D. B., & Bhawe, N. M. (2008). The effect of gender stereotype
activation on entrepreneurial intentions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93(5), 1053.

Harrison, G.W. and J.A. List, "Field Experiments," Journal of Economic Literature,
(2004), 42(4), pp. 1009-1055.




                                                                                       22
Heilman, M. E., Block, C. J., & Lucas, J. A. (1992). Presumed incompetent?
Stigmatization and affirmative action efforts. Journal of Applied Psychology, 77(4),
536.

Hinrichs, P. (2012). The effects of affirmative action bans on college enrollment,
educational attainment, and the demographic composition of universities. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 94(3), 712-722.

von Hippel, C., Issa, M., Ma, R., & Stokes, A. (2011). Stereotype threat: Antecedents
and consequences for working women. European Journal of Social Psychology, 41(2),
151-161.

Ibañez, M. & Riener, G. (2018). Sorting through affirmative action: Three field
experiments in Colombia. Journal of Labor Economics, 36(2), 437-478.

Kaas, L., & Manger, C. (2012). Ethnic discrimination in Germany's labour market: a
field experiment. German Economic Review, 13(1), 1-20.

Kang, S. K., DeCelles, K. A., Tilcsik, A., & Jun, S. (2016). Whitened resumes: Race
and self-presentation in the labor market. Admin. Science Quarterly, 61(3), 469-502.

Kanter, R. M. (1977). Some effects of proportions on group life: Skewed sex ratios and
responses to token women. American journal of Sociology, 82(5), 965-990.

Kanter, R. M. (2008). Men and women of the corporation: New edition. Basic books.

Leibbrandt, A., and J. A. List (2014). Do women avoid salary negotiations? Evidence
from a large-scale natural field experiment. Management Science, 61(9), 2016-2024.

Leibbrandt, A., Wang, L. C., & Foo, C. (2017). Gender quotas, competitions, and peer
review: Experimental evidence on the backlash against women. Management Science.

List, J. A. (2004). The nature and extent of discrimination in the marketplace: Evidence
from the field. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 49-89.

List, J. A., Shaikh, A. M., & Xu, Y. (2016). Multiple Hypothesis Testing in
Experimental Economics (No. w21875). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Matsa, D., and A. Miller. (2013). A female style in corporate leadership? Evidence from
quotas. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5:3: 136–169.

McKay, P. F., & Avery, D. R. (2005). Warning! Diversity recruitment could
backfire. Journal of Management Inquiry, 14(4), 330-336.

Mujcic, R., & Frijters, P. (2015). Still Not Allowed on the Bus: It Matters If You're
Black or White!

Niederle, M., Segal, C., Vesterlund, L. (2013). How costly is diverstity? Affirmative
action in light of gender differences in competitiveness. Management Science. 59(1),
1-16.


                                                                                     23
Nguyen, H. H. D., & Ryan, A. M. (2008). Does stereotype threat affect test performance
of minorities and women? A meta-analysis of experimental evidence. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 93(6), 1314.

Osborne, J. W. (1995). Academics, self-esteem, and race: A look at the underlying
assumptions of the disidentification hypothesis. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 21(5), 449-455.

Pager, D., Western, B., & Bonikowski, B. (2009). Discrimination in a low-wage labor
market a field experiment. American Sociological Review, 74(5), 777-799.

Roberson, L., & Kulik, C. T. (2007). Stereotype threat at work. The Academy of
Management Perspectives, 21(2), 24-40.

Schotter, A., & Weigelt, K. (1992). Asymmetric tournaments, equal opportunity laws,
and affirmative action: Some experimental results. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 511-539.

Shih, M., Pittinsky, T. L., & Ambady, N. (1999). Stereotype susceptibility: Identity
salience and shifts in quantitative performance. Psychological science, 10(1), 80-83.

Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual ability and
performance. American Psychologist 52(6), 613-629.

Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual test
performance of African Americans. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 69(5), 797.

Stone, J. (2002). Battling doubt by avoiding practice: The effects of stereotype threat
on self-handicapping in white athletes. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 28(12), 1667-1678.

Van Dijk, T. A. (1993). Principles of critical discourse analysis. Discourse &
society, 4(2), 249-283.




                                                                                      24
                                       Tables



                      Table 1: Racial distribution across cities




Notes: The dashed line separates cities into 'white' (above line) and 'mixed’ (below
line) cities.




                                                                                       25
                                                    Table 2: The impact of EEO statements

Model                         (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)            (9)
Race/ethnicity                 all            all             all         non-white      non-white       non-white          white          white          white
Satisfy min.                                  yes             no                             yes              no                             yes            no
education criteria?
                            -0.0282       -0.0516**         0.0191         -0.0286       -0.0644**         0.0566         -0.0293         -0.0346        -0.0088
EEO statement
                           (0.0211)        (0.0253)        (0.0389)       (0.0277)        (0.0329)        (0.0513)        (0.0327)        (0.0394)       (0.0622)

Minimal education           0.0293                                         0.0163                                          0.0765
criteria                   (0.0293)                                       (0.0374)                                        (0.0477)
                          0.0947***       0.0957***                       0.0814**        0.0795**                         0.0679          0.0680
Highly educated
                           (0.0269)        (0.0273)                       (0.0345)        (0.0349)                        (0.0441)        (0.0450)

Job advertisement          0.0482**        0.0503*          0.0482         0.0478*         0.0454          0.0856          0.0359          0.0439         0.0333
type                       (0.0216)        (0.0258)        (0.0417)       (0.0285)        (0.0341)        (0.0561)        (0.0331)        (0.0393)       (0.0668)
                            0.0009          0.0005          0.0021         0.0011          0.0011          0.0009          0.0008          0.0001         0.0039
Response delay
                           (0.0008)        (0.0009)        (0.0016)       (0.0011)        (0.0013)        (0.0022)        (0.0011)        (0.0012)       (0.0025)
                                                                           -0.0305         -0.0399         -0.0274
Hispanic
                                                                          (0.0370)        (0.0437)        (0.0698)

Other                                                                     0.1313**        0.1483**         0.0553
race/ethnicity                                                            (0.0564)        (0.0671)        (0.1122)

Constant                  0.3446***       0.4050***      0.2778***       0.3569***       0.4117***       0.2563***       0.3349***      0.4433***       0.2320**
                           (0.0368)        (0.0453)        (0.0612)       (0.0454)        (0.0551)        (0.0765)        (0.0663)        (0.0826)       (0.1095)

N                            2174            1536            638            1250             887             363            924             649            275

Notes: *p<.1, **p<.05, ***p<.01. Minimal education criteria equals 1 if job-seeker has obtained the equivalent of a high-school degree, 0 otherwise. Highly
educated equals 1 if job-seeker has obtained at least the equivalent of a B.A. degree, 0 otherwise. Job advertisement type equals 1 if the focus is on sports, 0 if
the focus is more general. In models (4) - (6) the baseline race is Afrian American. Other race/ethnicity includes Asians. All models include city fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                                26
                        Table 3: The impact of EEO statements in white and mixed cities

Model                          (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)             (8)

City type                     white           white            white           white           mixed           mixed            mixed           mixed
Race/ethnicity                  all        non-white        non-white          white             all         non-white       non-white          white
Satisfy min.                                                    yes                                                              yes
education criteria?
EEO statement                   -               -                -            -0.0701         0.0205           0.0282          -0.0063          0.0021
                           0.1077***       0.1521***        0.1862***
                            (0.0339)        (0.0481)         (0.0567)        (0.0480)        (0.0269)         (0.0338)        (0.0404)         (0.0448)
Minimal education           0.0790*          0.0688                           0.1077          0.0126          -0.0053                           0.0614
criteria
                            (0.0470)        (0.0656)                         (0.0694)        (0.0375)         (0.0458)                         (0.0662)
Highly educated              0.0495          0.0780           0.0635          0.0115        0.1002***        0.0921**         0.0910**         0.0995*
                            (0.0446)        (0.0601)         (0.0609)        (0.0677)        (0.0341)         (0.0423)        (0.0428)         (0.0586)
Job advertisement            0.0405          0.0777          0.1007*          0.0159          0.0454*          0.0406          0.0286           0.0454
type
                            (0.0348)        (0.0496)         (0.0591)        (0.0489)        (0.0275)         (0.0347)        (0.0417)         (0.0454)
Response delay               0.0007          0.0028           0.0033          -0.0004         0.0008           0.0003          0.0002           0.0018
                            (0.0012)        (0.0018)         (0.0021)        (0.0016)        (0.0010)         (0.0013)        (0.0015)         (0.0017)
African American             -0.0602                                                          -0.0944
                            (0.0450)                                                         (0.0309)
Hispanic                     -0.395          0.0370          -0.0054                             -            -0.0947*         -0.0848
                                                                                            0.1935***
                            (0.0445)        (0.0540)         (0.0635)                        (0.0494)         (0.0508)        (0.0607)
Other                        0.0573          0.1382*          0.1417                          0.0414          0.1396*         0.1743*
race/ethnicity
                            (0.0764)        (0.0828)         (0.0955)                        (0.0761)         (0.0760)        (0.0928)
Constant                   0.3223***       0.3216***        0.3466***       0.3431***       0.4003***        0.3490***       0.3882***       0.2979***
                            (0.0662)        (0.1007)         (0.0994)        (0.0744)        (0.0474)         (0.0500)        (0.0612)         (0.0750)
N                              836             412              300             424             1338             838             587             500
Notes: *p<.1, **p<.05, ***p<.01. Minimal education criteria equals 1 if job-seeker has obtained the equivalent of a high-school degree, 0
otherwise. Highly educated equals 1 if job-seeker has obtained at least the equivalent of a B.A. degree, 0 otherwise. Job advertisement type
equals 1 if the focus is on sports, 0 if the focus is more general. In models (1) & (5) the baseline race is white; in models (2), (3), (6), (7) it is
African American. Other race/ethnicity includes Asians. All models include city fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                             27
TABLE 4: Job-seeker survey findings on EEO statements




                                                        28
                                            FIGURES

           FIGURE 1: Overall impact of EEO statements on job applications




         Notes: Sample of all job seekers N=2,175. Sufficiently qualified job seekers have at least the
       equivalent of a high school degree (N=1,537). P-values from 2-sided Fisher’s exact test.



FIGURE 2: Impact of EEO statements on job applications from non-whites in each
city




Notes: The top row shows job application likelihoods from non-whites in white cities as defined by
Census data in Table 1. The bottom row shows job application likelihoods from non-whites in mixed
cities as defined by Census data in Table 1.




                                                                                                    29
FIGURE 3: Impact of EEO statements on job applications from African Americans
and Hispanics in each city




Notes: Circles show change in application likelihood when an EEO statement was included depending
on race/ethnicity. Full circles for African Americans (AA), hollow circles for Hispanics (HI). City names
are abbreviated to the first two letters. Dashed line is line of best fit.




                                                                                                     30
                            Appendix


Overview


I.     Appendix Tables
II.    Job advertisements
III.   Job descriptions
IV.    Interview attachments
V.     Job seeker surveys




                                       31
    I.      Appendix Tables




                        Table A1: Racial categorization of job seekers (first round)
                                                                               First set of raters
                                            White           Black              Hispanic        Others                  Not Found
                       White                593               20                  33               1                      102
         Second        Black                 9               532                   2               0                       64
         set of       Hispanic               5                 4                 211               1                       16
         raters        Others                1                                     1             55                        15
                      Not found             109              125                  38             13                       371
    Notes: Shows first round racial categorization only. Illustrates level of agreement between first two sets of raters to
    calculate Kappa.




          Table A2: The impact of EEO statements on African Americans and Hispanics

Model                        (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
City type                  white          white         mixed          mixed          white         white         mixed         mixed
                          African       African        African        African
                                                                                     Hispanic      Hispanic      Hispanic     Hispanic
Race/ethnicity           American      American       American       American
Satisfy min.                               yes                           yes                          yes                         yes
education criteria?
                                                                                        -             -
EEO statement             -0.1222        -0.1299        0.0219         -0.0120      0.1542**      0.2051**        0.0571        0.0085
                          (0.0744)      (0.0906)       (0.0377)       (0.0449)       (0.0714)      (0.0836)      (0.0955)      (0.1166)
Minimal education         0.1656*                      -0.0030                       -0.0014                     -0.0450
criteria
                          (0.0997)                     (0.0515)                      (0.0937)                    (0.1232)
                          0.0045*        0.0051         0.0012         0.0007         0.0008        0.0007       -0.0024       -0.0014
Highly educated
                          (0.0025)      (0.0033)       (0.0015)       (0.0017)       (0.0030)      (0.0031)      (0.0029)      (0.0042)
Job advertisement          0.0618        0.0622       0.0970**        0.1034**        0.0540        0.0501        0.0694        0.0569
type
                          (0.0949)      (0.0987)       (0.0475)       (0.0481)       (0.0860)      (0.0874)      (0.1167)      (0.1187)
                           0.0356        0.0684         0.0442         0.0249         0.1075        0.1302        0.0049        0.0809
Response delay
                          (0.0761)      (0.0919)       (0.0389)       (0.0463)       (0.0729)      (0.0889)      (0.0935)      (0.1218)
Constant                   0.0778       0.2756*       0.3418***      0.3847***      0.3395**      0.3088**        0.1373        0.1322
                          (0.1302)      (0.1581)       (0.0548)       (0.0653)       (0.1345)      (0.1552)      (0.1436)      (0.2436)
N                           175            130            673            478           192           135           117            79
Notes: *p<.1, **p<.05, ***p<.01. Minimal education criteria equals 1 if job-seeker has obtained the equivalent of a high-school degree, 0
otherwise. Highly educated equals 1 if job-seeker has obtained at least the equivalent of a B.A. degree, 0 otherwise. Job advertisement
type equals 1 if the focus is on sports, 0 if the focus is more general. All models include city fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                32
                         Table A3: The impact of EEO statements on Women and Men

Model                         (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)
City type                   white           white          mixed          mixed           white          white          mixed           mixed

Gender                     female          female         female          female          male            male           male           male
Satisfy min.                                 yes                            yes                           yes                            yes
education criteria?
                          -0.0906**      -0.1105**        0.0070         -0.0240        -0.1145*        -0.1024         0.0541         0.0172
EEO statement
                          (0.0408)        (0.0502)       (0.0329)        (0.0393)       (0.0595)        (0.0693)       (0.0486)       (0.0574)
Minimal education          0.0654                         0.0092                         0.1358                         0.0128
criteria
                          (0.0546)                       (0.0443)                       (0.0918)                       (0.0744)
                           0.0015          0.0016         0.0009          0.0005         -0.0015        -0.0018        -0.0002         -0.0008
Highly educated
                          (0.0014)        (0.0016)       (0.0013)        (0.0015)       (0.0025)        (0.0029)       (0.0016)       (0.0019)
Job advertisement          0.0590          0.0518        0.1013**       0.1014**         -0.0374        -0.0391         0.0697         0.0591
type
                          (0.0538)        (0.0552)       (0.0407)        (0.0412)       (0.0824)        (0.0848)       (0.0663)       (0.0672)
                           0.0156          0.0107         -0.0302         0.0054         -0.0386        -0.0672       0.1476***        0.0686
Response delay
                          (0.0423)        (0.0526)       (0.0347)        (0.0416)       (0.0674)        (0.0767)       (0.0489)       (0.0575)
                                                                                                                                          -
African American           -0.0022         0.0276         -0.0468        -0.0527         -0.1323        -0.1193       -0.1235**      0.2305***
                          (0.0532)        (0.0661)       (0.0383)        (0.0448)       (0.0867)       (0.0942)        (0.0551)       (0.0658)
                                                             -                              -              -                              -
Hispanic                   0.0740          0.0408       0.1584***       -0.1501**      0.2343***      0.2522***       -0.2382**      0.3079***
                          (0.0543)        (0.0655)       (0.0604)        (0.0732)       (0.0762)        (0.0909)       (0.0934)       (0.1107)
Other                      0.1335          0.1646         0.1100          0.0510         -0.0607        -0.0721        -0.0443         0.0112
race/ethnicity
                          (0.0977)        (0.1160)       (0.1057)        (0.1353)       (0.1303)        (0.1459)       (0.1168)       (0.1339)
Constant                 0.3136***       0.3984***      0.3932***       0.4438***      0.5497***      0.7338***       0.4256***      0.5392***
                          (0.0758)        (0.0982)       (0.0565)        (0.0686)       (0.1200)        (0.1310)       (0.0890)       (0.1134)
N                            548             377            888            634             277            199             420            302

Notes: *p<.1, **p<.05, ***p<.01. Minimal education criteria equals 1 if job-seeker has obtained the equivalent of a high-school degree, 0
otherwise. Highly educated equals 1 if job-seeker has obtained at least the equivalent of a B.A. degree, 0 otherwise. Job advertisement type
equals 1 if the focus is on sports, 0 if the focus is more general. All models include city fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                     33
II. Job advertisements


1.1. Sports job advertisement

Posting Category: admin/office jobs
Title: Sports News Assistant

The {redact institution} is seeking a {insert city}-area administrative assistant to help
gather information on sports stories. The assistant will provide us with up-to-date
information on local news and views on basketball, football, baseball, soccer, Nascar,
golf, and other sports. Responsibilities for the available positions include reading
local sports-related news coverage (pro-, semi-pro, and college), and preparing short
reports. The successful candidates will also be comfortable with typical administrative
duties—light correspondence, proofreading, filing, email and phone communication,
etc.

If you are interested, please email us your CV or resume, attention: {obscure
employee name}

Affiliation
Address


1.2. News job advertisement

Posting Category: Admin/Office Jobs
Title: Administrative Assistant

The {redact employer} is hiring a {insert city}-area administrative assistant to help
gather information on a variety of local news issues in the {insert city} region. The
assistant will provide us with up-to-date information on community events, arts and
culture, business, entertainment, policy issues, crime, and other stories.

Responsibilities for the position include seeking out, reading, and summarizing local
news stories and preparing short reports. The successful candidate will also be
comfortable with typical administrative duties—light correspondence, proofreading,
filing, email and phone communication, etc.

 If you are interested, please email us your CV or resume, attention: {obscure
employee name}

Affiliation
Address




                                                                                      34
III. Job description (treatments)


2.1. Without EEO statement

Thank you for your interest in the position.

We are sending this general first response to interested applicants. We apologize if
you have any unanswered questions.

First, a little more information about the job: we have frequent deadlines, and timely
quality information from you is important. The position pays $20/hour.

If you are interested, please answer the attached interview questions and return them
to us to complete your application.

Please also include your CV or resume (if not already sent to us), and any remaining
questions you have about the position.

Best Regards,

{redact employee name}
Affiliation
Address

2.1. With EEO statement

Thank you for your interest in the position.

We are sending this general first response to interested applicants. We apologize if
you have any unanswered questions.

First, a little more information about the job: we have frequent deadlines, and timely
quality information from you is important. The position pays $20/hour.

{obscure employer} IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER.
ALL QUALIFIED APPLICANTS WILL RECEIVE CONSIDERATION FOR
EMPLOYMENT WITHOUT REGARD TO SEX, COLOR, AGE, OR ANY OTHER
PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS.

If you are interested, please answer the attached interview questions and return them
to us to complete your application.

Please also include your CV or resume (if not already sent to us), and any remaining
questions you have about the position.

Best Regards,
{redact employee name}
Affiliation
Address


                                                                                       35
IV. Interview Attachment

3.1. Sports job advertisement

Please answer the following questions.

1.     Which NBA player who is still active has made the most rebounds in his career?
2.     What is a perfect passer rating in the NFL?
3.     What is the fastest time ever for 100m running?
4.     Which team won the UEFA Champions League 2011-12: Real Madrid, FC
       Barcelona, or Chelsea?
5.     Which team has lost the most NBA finals: Los Angeles Lakers, Chicago Bulls,
       or Boston Celtics?
6.     Which MLB team(s) won the most games in a season?
7.     Where did the Olympic Summer Games take place in 2000?
8.     How many NBA titles has Michael Jordan won?
9.     Which team has won more NCAA titles: Kentucky, North Carolina, or UCLA?
10.    Which country won most Gold Medals during the 2008 Summer Olympics:
       China, the United States, or Russia?


3.2. News job advertisement

Please answer the following questions.

1.     What does MoMA stand for?
2.     Which state had the highest murder rate in 2011?
3.     Which state has the highest unemployment rate at the moment: Alaska,
       Nebraska, New York, or Nevada?
4.     Which album was sold the most in 2012: Red/Taylor Swift, Born this
       way/Lady Gaga, or Believe/Justin Bieber?
5.     Which state had the highest domestic migration in 2011?
6.     Who directed Pulp Fiction?
7.     When was Father’s Day in 2013?
8.     Which is the largest government employer?
9.     Which is the largest private employer?
10.    For how many seasons did Desperate Housewives run?




                                                                                  36
V. Job seeker surveys

Note that the two surveys were posted on the same job board and in the same category
(Admin/Office Jobs) where the job advertisements were posted.


Title: Paid Survey for Administrative Assistants

Please take part in an anonymous 10 minutes university labor market survey and earn
a $10 Amazon gift voucher.

Please click link to participate

{Institution & IRB Nr. blinded}


Once a participant clicked link they received the following:


   o Thank you for your interest in participating in this survey.
   o The survey usually takes no longer than 10 minutes.
   o As a thank you for your participation we will immediately send you a $10
     Amazon gift voucher to your designated email address.
   o To receive the gift voucher please read through the survey and fill out all
     questions.



Imagine you see the following job advertisement on {name of job board} in your
city:

Title: Administrative Assistant

The {redact employer} is hiring a {insert city}-area administrative assistant to help
gather information on a variety of local news issues in the {insert city} region. The
assistant will provide us with up-to-date information on community events, arts and
culture, business, entertainment, policy issues, crime, and other stories.

Responsibilities for the position include seeking out, reading, and summarizing local
news stories and preparing short reports. The successful candidate will also be
comfortable with typical administrative duties—light correspondence, proofreading,
filing, email and phone communication, etc.

A little more information about the job: we have frequent deadlines, and timely
quality information from you is important. The position pays $20/hour.

If you are interested, please answer the attached interview questions and return them
to us to complete your application.




                                                                                    37
Please also include your CV or resume (if not already sent to us), and any remaining
questions you have about the position.

Best Regards,

{redact employee name}
Affiliation
Address


   Survey 1


   •   What percentage of all qualified white job seekers do you believe will be
       offered a job?

   •   What percentage of all qualified African American and Hispanic job-seekers
       do you believe will be offered a job?

   •   What percentage of the current employees do you believe is white?

   •   Do you believe that it will be harder for African Americans and Hispanics to
       advance on the job?

   •   How anxious do you believe will African Americans and Hispanics be to
       perform at this job?

   •   Do you believe that African Americans and Hispanics are under special
       supervision at this job?



   Survey 2

   •   What percentage of all qualified white job seekers do you believe will be
       offered a job?

   •   Do you believe that African Americans and Hispanics are token hires for this
       job?




                                                                                   38
Imagine now you see the same job advertisement but it includes the following
statement:

“WE ARE AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER.
ALL QUALIFIED APPLICANTS WILL RECEIVE CONSIDERATION FOR
EMPLOYMENT WITHOUT REGARD TO SEX, COLOR, AGE, OR ANY OTHER
PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS.”

   Survey 1

   •   What percentage of all qualified white job seekers do you believe will be
       offered a job if it includes such a statement?

   •   What percentage of all qualified African American and Hispanic job seekers
       do you believe will be offered a job if it includes such a statement?

   •   What percentage of the current employees do you believe is white if it
       includes such a statement?

   •   Do you believe that it will be harder for African Americans and Hispanics to
       advance on the job if it includes such a statement?

   •   How anxious do you believe will African Americans and Hispanics be to
       perform at this job if it includes such a statement?

   •   Do you believe that African Americans and Hispanics are under special
       supervision at this job if it includes such a statement?


   Survey 2

   •   What percentage of all qualified white job seekers do you believe will be
       offered a job if this advertisement includes this statement?

   •   Do you believe that African Americans and Hispanics are token hires for this
       job if this advertisement includes this statement?




                                                                                   39
