                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            NON-MONETARY NEWS IN CENTRAL BANK COMMUNICATION

                                        Anna Cieslak
                                       Andreas Schrimpf

                                      Working Paper 25032
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25032


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2018




We thank Manuel Adelino, Ryan Banerjee, Ravi Bansal, Tim Bollerslev, Jordi Gali, Refet
Gurkaynak, Sam Hanson, Tim Kroencke, Michael McMahon, Chris Neely, Hyun Shin, Roland
Straub, Viktor Todorov, Brian Weller, Ken West, and seminar participants at the NBER
International Seminar on Macroeconomics (ISoM) and the Bank for International Settlements for
their valuable comments. We thank Zhongtian Chen, Hao Pang, Tania Romero, and Song Xiao
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Anna Cieslak and Andreas Schrimpf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Non-Monetary News in Central Bank Communication
Anna Cieslak and Andreas Schrimpf
NBER Working Paper No. 25032
September 2018
JEL No. E43,E58,G12,G14

                                           ABSTRACT

We quantify the importance of non-monetary news in central bank communication. Using
evidence from four major central banks and a comprehensive classification of events, we
decompose news conveyed by central banks into news about monetary policy, economic growth,
and separately, shocks to risk premia. Our approach exploits high-frequency comovement of
stocks and interest rates combined with monotonicity restrictions across the yield curve. We find
significant differences in news composition depending on the communication channel used by
central banks. Non-monetary news prevails in about 40% of policy decision announcements by
the Fed and the ECB, and this fraction is even higher for communications that provide context to
policy decisions such as press conferences. We show that non-monetary news accounts for a
significant part of financial markets' reaction during the financial crisis and in the early recovery,
while monetary shocks gain importance since 2013.


Anna Cieslak
Duke University
The Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
anna.cieslak@duke.edu

Andreas Schrimpf
Bank for International Settlements
Centralbahnplatz 2 4002
Basel
Switzerland
Andreas.Schrimpf@bis.org




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25032
The relevance of central bank communication has risen significantly over the past decade
as policy goals and associated operations have become more complex. Constrained by the
effective lower bound on policy rates, major central banks have resorted to unconventional
measures. Communicating these policies poses a challenge, as evidenced by the rise in the
verbosity of central bank statements. New empirical methods are needed to quantify the
effects of monetary policy, especially when monetary shocks can be confounded by other
information.

This paper proposes a new approach to analyze the information content of central bank
communication. Drawing on the joint dynamics of government bond yields with equity
returns around central bank releases, we quantify the importance of different economic shocks
that drive the response of financial markets to policy communication. Specifically, we classify
the information revealed by central banks into monetary policy, economic growth, and risk
premium shocks. By the latter, we mean news that affects investors’ risk valuations (via
changes in risk appetite or sentiment) separately from changes in economic fundamentals.

Our approach to dissecting the news content of central bank communication exploits both the
direction of the comovement between stocks and yield as well as the effect of news across the
maturity dimension of the yield curve. We build our intuition using a stylized macro-finance
model that delivers the following predictions. A conventional monetary policy shock affects
the real rate and induces a negative comovement of stocks and yields that is stronger at short
maturities. Both growth and risk premium shocks induce a positive comovement of stocks
and yields. However, their effects differ in the maturity dimension. Growth shocks have a
greater bearing on the short-to-intermediate segment, whereas risk premium shocks affect
more the long segment of the yield curve. While the effects of growth and monetary policy
shocks are standard, the positive comovement of stocks and yields via the risk premium
channel arises when nominal bonds hedge bad economic times. We derive restrictions on
the joint dynamics of macroeconomic factors, monetary policy and asset prices necessary to
support this intuition, and argue that these restrictions plausibly hold true during the period
of our analysis.

To gauge the comovement of stocks with the entire yield curve, we introduce the notion of
the term-structure of stock-yield covariances, i.e., covariances of stock returns with changes
in yields of different maturities. We rely on high-frequency data to construct the term
structures of covariances at the level of a single event. The sign and the maturity pattern
of those covariances allows us to determine the dominant piece of economic news revealed
by central banks across a variety of communications beyond just monetary policy decision
statements.



                                              2
To this end, we compile a novel database of time-stamped monetary policy events by the
four main central banks—the Federal Reserve (Fed), the European Central Bank (ECB),
the Bank of England (BOE) and the Bank of Japan (BOJ)—spanning the period from
the late 1990s through the end of 2017. We classify events on several dimensions. At the
basic level, we distinguish events by types of communication tools, most importantly (i)
statements of monetary policy decisions, (ii) press conferences, (ii) releases of minutes of
the policy meeting and, in the case of the BOE, inflation reports. We further introduce a
classification of unconventional policy interventions, e.g., distinguishing between the phases
of asset purchase programs. We additionally characterize announcements by whether they
are accompanied by changes in explicit forward guidance.

As the key result, we show that the non-monetary component—i.e., news about economic
activity and shocks to risk premia—dominates more than half of communication events.
We find significant differences in the news composition across communication tools and
over time. Monetary news prevails in the announcements of monetary policy decisions.
News about economic growth, instead, is the dominant piece of information gleaned by
market participants during press conferences and other communication events whose aim
is to explain the context of policy decisions. Risk premium shocks exert substantial non-
linear effects on asset prices, and their importance increases with the implementation of
unconventional monetary policies.

For example, focusing only on scheduled announcements by the Federal Open Market Com-
mittee (FOMC), we find negative stock-yield comovement for 60% of events, consistent with
the monetary policy channel; however, the remaining 40% suggest a non-trivial role of non-
monetary news as well. This distinction becomes even more pertinent to understanding
the news conveyed at the central bank press conferences. As one prominent example, press
conferences by the ECB transmit non-monetary content in about 65% of the cases, with
growth and risk premium news carrying the largest weight in terms of economic significance.
Importantly, we find that although many of the unconventional policy announcements have
a significant non-monetary content, forward guidance works as a powerful monetary policy
shock.

We document that the news content of central bank announcements varies significantly over
time. Studying the period of the financial crisis and its aftermath, we uncover a break in the
composition of central bank news that occurs around mid-2013. Specifically, non-monetary
news drives communication in the period from 2008 through mid-2013, while from mid-2013
through the end of our sample in 2017 the role of monetary news gains prominence. We
associate this shift with the market’s anticipation and then the actual announcements of the
exit from policy accommodation.


                                              3
To corroborate our news classification based on the term structure of stock-yield covariances,
we propose an alternative empirical strategy that allows us to assess the fraction of asset
price variance stemming from different shocks. Specifically, we achieve identification by
imposing two types of restrictions: sign restrictions on the comovement of stocks and yields
and monotonicity restrictions along the yield curve. We then decompose high-frequency
(reduced-form) shocks to stocks and yields around FOMC decision announcements and ECB
press conferences into monetary, growth and risk premium shocks that have the structural
interpretation we discuss above. The estimates for the Fed and the ECB are broadly
consistent with each other. The most important sources of variation are growth and monetary
shocks (in roughly equal proportions) for the two-year yield, risk premium shocks for the
ten-year yield and monetary policy shocks for the equity returns. The results from this
approach are complementary to those based on the term structure of covariances.

Our findings have several implications for understanding central bank communication and
beyond. Most importantly, common event-window identification using responses of short-
term rates confounds monetary policy shocks with other information transmitted by central
bank announcements. One natural example is the so-called path shock that is commonly
inferred from the response of yields beyond the shortest maturities (Gürkaynak et al., 2005a).
To the extent that news about growth, news about the future course of policy, and shocks to
risk premia can all affect yields at longer maturities, path shocks may arise as a combination
of several structural shocks. Our results indicate that non-monetary news dominates unless
central banks employ explicit forward guidance. Using the maturity dimension of the yield
curve together with the comovement between yields and stocks helps disentangle those
economically distinct pieces of information. Our results also suggest that caution needs to
be applied when measuring monetary policy shocks by lower frequency responses of interest
rates (e.g., daily frequencies). With monetary policy decision announcements nowadays
commonly followed by a press conference, we show that the news content of those two
communication channels can be very different despite their proximity in time. Additionally,
at daily frequencies, risk premium shocks may obscure other information effects.

Related literature. A growing literature studies the role of central bank information
effects, i.e. the notion that central bank announcements reveal relevant information about
the economy that is not in the information set of the public. Campbell et al. (2012a) doc-
ument that tightening shocks by the Fed increase output growth expectations and decrease
unemployment expectations of professional forecasters. This finding is inconsistent with the
standard monetary transmission whereby a tightening leads to a drop in output relative to
potential. In follow-up work, Campbell et al. (2017) refer to this finding as “the event-study
activity puzzle,” and argue that by observing a tightening, investors revise their economic


                                              4
projections upwards and mark up their expectations of future interest rates. Miranda-
Agrippino and Ricco (2018) show that such information effects distort the identification of
monetary transmissions. To recover a pure monetary policy signal, they control for central
bank’s private information using survey forecasts. Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) propose
a model in which monetary policy announcements convey information about both future
monetary policy and economic fundamentals; this information, in turn, affects investors’
beliefs about the natural real rate.

The studies above suggest that the central bank information effect works through short-rate
expectations. Hanson and Stein (2015) take a different view. They argue that monetary
policy affects bond risk premia and hence can exert a significant effect on long-term interest
rates. Our results help reconcile these seemingly opposing views by quantifying the impor-
tance of monetary news, growth news and news affecting investor risk appetite. Moreover,
we show that the relative importance of each of those channels varies significantly across the
communication tools used by central banks.

The idea of using the comovement of stocks and interest rates to discriminate between the
types of economic shocks builds on the work of Rigobon and Sack (2003, 2004). Rigobon
and Sack (2003) distinguish between monetary policy shocks versus shocks originating in
the stock market. They posit that the covariance between interest rate changes and stock
returns is negative when the variance of policy shocks increases, and it is positive when the
variance of stock market shocks increases. To implement their identification, Rigobon and
Sack (2004) assume that the variance of policy shocks is naturally elevated around major Fed
communication events such as days of the FOMC policy decisions. By observing stock-yield
comovement around every single event, our approach suggests that non-monetary news in
fact frequently drives asset price variation on such policy days.

Several authors exploit the comovement of stocks and interest rates to distinguish between
growth and monetary policy shocks. Matheson and Stavrev (2014) propose to use a bi-variate
VAR with sign restrictions on the structural covariance matrix of shocks. They estimate the
VAR with S&P 500 index, and 10-year US Treasury yields to study the events around the
so-called taper tantrum. Relatedly, Jarocinski and Karadi (2018) impose sign restrictions on
short-term rates and stocks, which they then embed within a more complex VAR that also
includes macro variables. Our approach complements these studies in several ways. First,
we exploit the high-frequency covariance structure of shocks to stocks and yields. Second,
we draw upon the entire maturity dimension of the yield curve, which allows us to take a
stance on the role of risk premium shocks induced by policy communication. Finally, we
document differences in the types of news coming out via distinct communication channels,
and study these channels across the main central banks.


                                              5
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section I presents a simple conceptual
framework of the joint dynamics of stocks and yields that guides the subsequent empirical
analysis. Section II introduces our database of central bank communication events and
describes the intraday data on equity and fixed income futures. Section III reviews the
reaction of stock returns and yields changes to different types of central bank communication.
Section IV discusses our core results on the effect of communication on stock-yield covariances
across the term structure. It also classifies communication events by the types of economic
news they transmit. Section V takes a closer look at stock-yield comovement during various
phases of unconventional monetary policies. Section VI quantifies the contribution monetary
policy, growth and risk premium shocks to the variation of asset prices by exploiting sign
restrictions on the comovement of stocks and yields and monotonicity restrictions across the
yield curve. Section VII concludes.


                                    I. Conceptual framework

Market commentary frequently asserts that stocks and government bond yields co-move
positively in response to news about economic activity and changes in investors’ “risk
appetite,” and negatively to news about monetary policy. A positive growth shock (good
economic news) moves yields and stocks higher; a positive monetary policy shock (tightening)
moves yields up and stocks lower; a positive risk aversion shock (decline in risk appetite)
pushes yields and stock returns down as in “flight-to-safety” or “risk-off” episodes.1

This section discusses the economic intuition behind this narrative. We summarize the
necessary restrictions on macroeconomic factors and on risk premia that determine the joint
behavior of the yield curve and the stock market. We also highlight how the maturity
dimension of the yield curve can help identify the effects of different shocks.


I.A. Reduced-form shock decompositions for yields and stocks

Let it denote the nominal one-period short-term interest rate, and let πt+1 denote the log
change in the price level from t to t + 1. The ex-ante real rate, rt , is defined as the nominal
short rate less one-period expected inflation, rt := it − Et (πt+1 ). Based on yield curve
arithmetics (e.g., Campbell and Ammer, 1993), we can link the n-period nominal yield to
inflation expectations, real rate expectations, and expected bond returns:
   1
    For example, on Sep 6, 2016, a WSJ article claimed: “A generation of traders have grown up with the
idea that stock prices and bond yields tend to rise and fall together, as what is good for stocks is bad for
bonds (pushing the price down and yield up), and vice versa.”




                                                     6
                                  n                    n−1               n−2
                  (n)       1X                 1X                 1X          (n−i+1)
                yt      =         Et (πt+i ) +       Et (rt+i ) +       Et (ext+i     ),    (1)
                            n i=1              n i=0              n i=1

         (n)                      (n−1)         (n)
where ext+1 = −(n − 1)yt+1 + nyt − it represents one-period excess return on an n-
period bond. The third term in (1)—summing expected one-period returns over the life of
the bond—is usually referred to as the term premium. The decomposition shows that yield
                        (n)
curve shocks, denoted ỹt+1 below, arise from shocks to expected inflation, shocks to expected
real rate and/or shocks to the term premium:

                            (n)       (n)             (n)        (n)   (n)     (n)
                        ỹt+1 := yt+1 − Et (yt+1 ) = uπ,t+1 + ur,t+1 + utp,t+1.             (2)

      s
Let rt+1 denote the total log return on the aggregate stock market, pdt the log price-dividend
                                                             s
ratio, and ∆dt+1 the aggregate log dividend growth rate; rt+1    and ∆dt+1 are expressed in
real terms. Following Campbell and Shiller (1988), the log price-dividend ratio is given by
                                            ∞
                             κ0    X j−1
                                      κ1 Et ∆dt+j − (exst+j + rt+j−1 ) ,
                                                                      
                     pdt =       +                                                          (3)
                           1 − κ1 j=1

where exst+1 is the stock excess return with exst+1 = rt+1
                                                         s
                                                            − rt and κ0 , κ1 are linearization
                                    s
constants. With log-linearization, rt+1 ≈ κ0 + κ1 pdt+1 + ∆dt+1 − pdt , shocks to stock returns,
  s
r̃t+1 , are driven by news about future cash-flows (dividends), real rates and excess returns
(risk premia):

                          s       s          s
                        r̃t+1 := rt+1 − Et (rt+1 ) = usd,t+1 − usr,t+1 − usex,t+1.          (4)

Equations (2) and (4) follow from present-value accounting, and have no structural inter-
pretation. Next, we discuss how meaningful economic shocks are expected to affect those
reduced-form objects.


I.B. Comovement of stocks and bond yields in response to economic shocks

To provide intuition for our empirical approach, we lay out how monetary, growth and risk
premium shocks are expected to affect stocks and yields at different maturities. In the
Appendix to the paper, we formalize this intuition using a simple macro-finance model with
a log-normal stochastic discount factor. Our discussion is tailored to the properties of the
joint dynamics of stock returns and bond yields in the sample from the late 1990s, which
is the period of focus in our empirical analysis. For simple notation, we denote monetary,
                                          g      p
growth and risk premium shocks as ǫm t , ǫt and ǫt , respectively.




                                                             7
Monetary policy shocks. Conventional monetary policy shocks operate by changing the
real short rate rt . A monetary tightening depresses stock prices by increasing the risk-
                                   ∂ r̃ s      ∂usr
free component of discount rates ( ∂ǫ m < 0 as ∂ǫm > 0). Yields increase across maturities
   (n)             (n)
( ∂∂ǫỹ m > 0 as ∂u    r
                     ∂ǫm
                         > 0). To the extent that the real rate is persistent but mean-reverting,
the effect of such shocks is larger at the short end of the yield curve than it is at the long
           (k)       (l)
end ( ∂∂ǫỹ m > ∂∂ǫỹ m > 0 for k < l).2 Such intuition of how conventional monetary policy shocks
propagate across the term structure is confirmed by a number of studies (e.g., Rigobon and
Sack, 2004; Gürkaynak et al., 2005a).

Growth shocks. We label shocks to investors’ expectations about real activity collectively
as growth shocks. Growth shocks can encompass updates to investors’s expectations about
output growth, the output gap or unemployment. According to the Gordon growth model,
positive shocks to expectations about economic growth raise stock prices via the cash-flow
                    ∂us
news channel ( ∂ǫgd > 0). This effect, however, is dampened by the degree to which such
                                                               s
shocks also lead to an increase in the real rate ( ∂u          r
                                                             ∂ǫg
                                                                 > 0). The first effect dominates
                s
(and hence ∂∂ǫr̃g > 0) if the real rate does not adjust one-for-one with growth expectations.
Empirical estimates of various specifications of the Taylor rule suggest that this condition
plausibly holds in the US data (Clarida et al., 2000; Coibion and Gorodnichenko, 2011).
The effect of real activity news on the yield curve is typically found to be hump-shaped,
declining from the short-to-intermediate-maturity segment (2–3 years) through the long-
maturity segment of the yield curve (e.g., Fleming and Remolona, 2001; Gürkaynak et al.,
                   (k1 )     (k2 )     (k3 )                      ỹ (k)
2005b) (i,e., ∂ ỹ∂ǫg < ∂ ỹ∂ǫg > ∂ ỹ∂ǫg for k1 < k2 < k3 , and ∂∂ǫ  g > 0 across maturities).


Risk premium shocks. By risk premium shocks, we mean shocks to financial risk premia
that are uncorrelated with the fundamental shocks in the economy. They can be interpreted
as shifts in the (effective) risk aversion, sentiment or risk appetite more broadly.3 In the
context of our model in the Appendix, risk premium shocks arise from changes in the market
prices of risk. To the extent that government bonds become valuable when premia on risky
asset increase (as in flight-to-safety episodes), risk premium shocks are expected to move
stocks and bond yields in the same direction. The key mechanism is that bonds provide
   2
      With the zero lower bound, the effective short-end of the yield curve shifts toward longer maturities (e.g.,
Swanson and Williams, 2014), as the central bank uses forward guidance to communicate its expectations
about, or commitment to, the path of the policy rate several quarters ahead.
    3
      Such shock to investors’ risk attitudes are a key component of models such as Lettau and Wachter (2007)
or Albuquerque et al. (2016) to explain variation in asset risk premia. Using the terminology common among
market participants, such shocks lead to “risk-on/-off” behavior frequently observed over the past decade
with investors switching between safe and risky assets (e.g., Kroencke et al., 2018). Bekaert et al. (2013) argue
that monetary policy affects investors’ risk aversion, even after controlling for business cycle movements and
uncertainty. As one possible mechanism suggested in the literature, monetary policy can affect the balance
sheets of financial intermediaries, alleviating Value-at-Risk constraints and thereby changing their effective
risk aversion (see, e.g. Adrian and Shin, 2010, and the evolving literature on intermediary asset pricing).


                                                        8
a hedge against those shocks that make stocks risky. As stocks do well in expansions,
when marginal utility is low, and poorly in recessions, when marginal utility is high, equity
                                                                            s
investors require compensation for facing recession risk ( ∂∂ǫr̃p < 0 as ∂u
                                                                s
                                                                            ex
                                                                          ∂ǫp
                                                                               > 0). When inflation
is procylical, as during the period we study (e.g., Campbell et al., 2017), nominal bonds hedge
                                                                              (n)
                                                                         ∂u
recession risk and provide insurance in bad times ( ∂ǫtpp < 0). This effect is expected to be
                                   ỹ (l)  ∂ ỹ (k)
stronger at longer maturities (so ∂∂ǫ  p < ∂ǫp < 0 for l > k).
                                                               4

                                                          g        p
The table below summarizes the expected effects of ǫmt , ǫt , and ǫt shocks on stocks and the
yield curve. The size of arrows indicates the strength of the effect at short and long yield
maturities.

                 Shock                                       Yields                 Stocks      Comovement

                                               Short/Intermed.        Long                   of stocks and yields
                 Monetary policy: ǫm t ↑                ↑               ↑             ↓               −
                 Growth: ǫgt ↑                          ↑               ↑             ↑               +
                 Risk premium:∗ : ǫpt ↑                  ↓              ↓             ↓               +
       ∗A   positive risk premium shock is normalized such that it implies an increase in the risk premium on risky assets.



In sum, stocks and bond yields co-vary negatively in response to monetary policy shocks, but
positively in response to growth and risk premium shocks. While the comovement of stocks
with a single yield of a specific maturity does not immediately allow to distinguish between
growth and risk premium shocks, such a distinction can be drawn by studying jointly the
comovement of stocks with yields across maturities.


I.C. Discussion

Our approach to news classification uses only asset prices, which reflect the information set
of investors. In contrast, the literature following Campbell et al. (2012a) relies on survey
forecasts to identify non-monetary news and exploits the differences between forecasts of the
public and policymakers. The usual approach is to project monetary policy shocks identified
from high-frequency interest rate futures on a survey-based measure of the gap between
the information set of the central bank and the public. The residual from this regression
is then used as a measure of the “pure” monetary policy surprise purged of information
effects. We circumvent the need of using survey forecasts by drawing on information not
   4
    The illustrative model presented in the Appendix provides more intuition for the effect of risk premium
shocks across the term structure. The fact that the effect of risk premia on the yield curve increases with
maturity is documented by Cieslak and Povala (2015, 2016), Hanson and Stein (2015), among others. In
support of bonds being hedges, empirical estimates of bond risk premia in the US show that they declined
and even turned negative over our sample period (Kim and Wright, 2005; Cieslak, 2018).


                                                                  9
only in yields but also in stocks, and by imposing economically motivated restrictions on
the comovement between stocks and the entire yield curve. These two elements allow us to
achieve identification of the different types of news revealed by communication.

Both approaches—survey-based and asset-price-based—have pros and cons. The survey-
based approach requires that the forecasts of the public and the policymakers be well-
synchronized with each other and measured accurately ahead of a communication event.5
Both of these requirements are rarely perfectly satisfied in practice. Private survey forecasts
are available at most at the monthly frequency and their timing relative to both central
bank announcements and policymakers’ forecasts can be ambiguous (as is the case with the
commonly used Blue Chip forecasts). This limits the number of communication events one
can study to those cases where these issues are least severe (e.g., monetary policy decision
announcements). By not relying on survey expectations, our approach allows us to study
a variety of communication events beyond monetary policy decisions (e.g., minutes, press
conferences, inflation reports, speeches) as asset prices are available at high frequencies. This
flexibility, however, comes at the cost of other identifying assumptions. Additionally, the
survey-based approach does not directly take a stance on the relative importance of shocks
to growth expectations versus shocks to risk premia, a question we address by exploiting
comovement of stocks and yields across maturities.

Our interpretation of growth shocks emanating from central bank communication agrees
with the information effects literature. In particular, the conceptual framework we build on
is consistent with the so-called Delphic forward guidance interpretation first introduced by
Campbell et al. (2012a). They define Delphic forward guidance as arising from additional
information about macro fundamentals revealed by central bank announcements: “(...) the
forecast revision following a positive policy rate innovation encompasses the revelation of
unexpectedly strong macroeconomic fundamentals as well as the contractionary effects of
the innovation itself.” Growth shocks communicated by central banks thus tend to be
entangled with the central bank reaction function, and it is important to distinguish them
from monetary policy shocks themselves. In line with the monetary economics literature,
monetary policy shocks in our framework have a structural interpretation in that they
orthogonal to economic fundamentals (see e.g., Ramey, 2016). As such, they drive the
non-systematic component of the central bank reaction function. Growth shocks, instead,
affect interest rates through the systematic part of the reaction function.
   5
    Recently, Hansen et al. (2018) propose a narrative approach to identify information effects of central
bank communication. Using the BOE’s inflation reports, they show that there is an information effect
stemming from the central bank narrative about the economic outlook, and this effect is separate from that
of quantitative forecasts.




                                                   10
Related to the Delphic forward guidance, markets can perceive monetary policy announce-
ments as being expansionary or contractionary, given the information that central banks
reveal. Consider the expansionary case in which the central bank response is weaker than
the communicated expected (and positive) output growth. The event is a combination of
both an information shock about growth ǫgt as well as a pure monetary policy shock ǫm   t . In
this scenario, equity prices increase (under conditions we discuss in Section I.B), but the
reaction of bond yields depends on the size of ǫm
                                                t . Specifically, stocks gain more (and yields
less) than upon pure growth news. While the presence of εm  t contaminates the identification
of the growth shock, we can still make a statement about which shock is the dominant one.
If the monetary policy shock is large enough as to dominate the growth news, interest rates
will move down and stocks will move up. We would classify such an event as being mainly
driven by monetary policy news. If growth news dominates, instead, interest rates and stocks
both increase, and we would classify such event as growth news.6


                                                  II. Data

II.A. Monetary policy events database

We compile a new and comprehensive database of time-stamped communication events by
major central banks. We focus on the central banks of the two main currency areas, the
Fed, and the ECB, and we complement the analysis by studying the BOJ and the BOE. Our
sample period runs from September 1997 through December 2017, although starting dates
differ across countries due to the availability of high-frequency data on futures. The overall
number of events is 1,997.

Construction of the event dataset. Our main source of communication events is the
Bloomberg economic calendar. In instances where the event coverage provided by Bloomberg
is incomplete (e.g., for the BOJ), we collect information from central bank websites. We
conduct extensive cross-checking of events in Bloomberg with both central bank websites as
well as extant studies such as Rogers et al. (2014) and Ferrari et al. (2017), complementing
the list of events where appropriate. Partly drawing and expanding upon the two above-
mentioned papers, we further compile a list of unconventional monetary policy (UMP) events,
such as news about asset purchases, provision of term liquidity for banks or forward guidance
about the future path of policy rates. We classify UMP events by type and policy phase at
   6
    Similarly, in the contractionary case, the central bank is more hawkish than the communicated expected
output growth. Similar to the case above, this event is also a combination of growth and monetary policy
news. The difference is that yields unambiguously increase (more than justified by pure growth news), and
the reaction of stocks depends on the size of ǫm       m
                                               t . If ǫt is large enough to dominate the effect of positive cash
flow news, then stocks move down. We would then say that the event is mostly driven by monetary policy
news. Otherwise, if growth news dominates, yield increases are accompanied by stock market gains.


                                                      11
a high level of granularity. During the period of our study, it has been common for central
banks to unveil major UMP news not only at scheduled policy announcements, but also
through speeches or other communication channels. We classify these events accordingly in
our data.

Type of communication. An important part of our analysis relies on distinguishing
events by types of central bank communication. The most basic classification we use is by
(i) monetary policy decisions (MPD), (ii) press conferences (PC), and (iii) releases of the
minutes of policy meetings (MIN). For the BOE, we also include the releases of the inflation
report (IR). Table I presents an overview of the number of events in these categories.

                                     [Insert Table I about here]

Fed. Our dataset covers 359 Fed events. The largest category are MPD statements (169
events) which are released immediately following the policy decision at the FOMC meeting.
The Fed holds eight scheduled meetings per year (with six unscheduled FOMC meetings
during our sample period). It also traditionally publishes, with a delay, minutes of the
policy meeting (136 events). Press conferences are a relatively new development and were
first introduced in April 2011 (28 events). Possibly because historically there were no press
conferences to provide background on the policy decision, MPD statements have been longer
than those of other central banks. They contain 12 sentences on average, and have been
increasing in length since the financial crisis. Until 2011, statements were regularly released
at 14:15 New York time. The release time changed in 2011, alternating between 12:30
and 14:15 depending on whether the meeting was followed by a press conference; currently
statements are published at 14:00, with the press conference at 14:30.7

ECB. The ECB has 609 events, the highest number among the central banks in our database,
of which 251 are classified as MPDs. Monetary policy meetings of the Governing Council
take place every 6 weeks. Unlike the other major central banks, the ECB has no history of
releasing minutes.8 By contrast, press conferences (218 events) have historically played a key
role in its communication strategy. Compared to the Fed, the ECB’s MPD statements are
short as the press conference serves to transmit further information to the public. While the
average length of the ECB’s MPD announcement is less than three sentences, transcripts of
the ECB’s press conference (including introductory statement and the Q&A part) contain
   7
      Until June 2018, the Fed held a press conference after every second FOMC meeting. At its June 2018
meeting, Chairman Powell announced that the Fed will hold a press conference after every meeting starting
from January 2019.
    8
      Since November 2015, the ECB publishes the so-called account of the monetary policy meeting. The
released information, however, is less granular than minutes published by other major central banks (e.g.,
the BOJ discloses votes of different members of the policy committee on key decisions by name).

                                                   12
on average 230 sentences.9 With a few exceptions, the ECB announces its policy decisions
at 13:45 Frankfurt time, whereas the press conference begins at 14:30.

BOE. For the BOE, our database records 578 events, with 230 MPDs. Similar to the Fed,
nowadays the BOE’s monetary policy committee meets on average 8 times per year, down
from originally 12 meetings per year prior to 2016. Publishing minutes of the policy meeting
has also been common as indicated by the 207 events in our sample. Additionally, the BOE
publishes the quarterly inflation report (79 events) which constitutes an important piece of
information that financial markets in the UK pay attention to. In recent years, the BOE
has also made increasing use of verbal communication channels to provide context to the
policy decision. Since August 2015 under Governor Carney, a press conference is regularly
held after those policy meetings when the BOE’s inflation report is published. Interest rate
decisions are announced at 12:00 London time and the press briefing begins at 12:45. Market
commentary confirms that such “Super-Thursdays”—when the policy decision is coupled
with the publication of the inflation report and the minutes—are particularly news-intensive
and, hence, market reactions are more pronounced.

BOJ. The BOJ contributes 449 events in our sample, of which 203 are MPD statements. Like
the other major central banks, the BOJ takes policy decisions 8 times per year, down from 14
policy meetings per year prior to 2015. The MPD statements are released immediately after
the meeting (yet not on a fixed time) and have traditionally been fairly detailed. The BOJ
has also regularly published minutes (179 events). Since at least 2013, but less regularly, the
BoJ also holds press conferences at 15:30 Tokyo time. The timing of the press conference in
the afternoon means that trading is usually thinner. Given measurement issues, we do not
consider the 52 PC events in our empirical analysis.


II.B. High-frequency data

We obtain high frequency data for equity and interest rate futures from TickData. The
coverage of maturities for interest rate futures differs by country. For the US, we have
Treasury bond futures with maturities of 2, 5, 10 and 30 years as well as 3-month Eurodollar
futures and S&P 500 E-mini futures. For the euro area, we obtain futures on German bonds
with maturities of 2, 5 and 10 years, as well as 3-month Euribor futures, and DAX index
futures for the stock market. The coverage of bond maturities is scarcer for the UK and
Japan. For the UK, we have Sterling 3-month futures and Long Gilt futures for bonds and
FTSE 100 index futures for stocks. For Japan, we use 10-year bond futures and TOPIX
equity futures. Table IA-1 in the Internet Appendix summarizes the available data.
  9
   Internet Appendix Figure IA-5 shows the number of sentences contained in the FOMC statements and
ECB decision announcements and press conferences.

                                                13
Bond futures are written on a hypothetical government bond paying coupon. To convert
futures returns into yield changes, we divide log futures price changes by the negative of
duration. Duration data are obtained from Bloomberg at the daily frequency using futures
equivalent duration based on the notional. While bonds underlying futures contracts are not
zero coupon, for simplicity, we label yield changes approximated this way by referencing the
maturity of the underlying.


II.C. Controlling for variation in asset prices on non-event days

Our subsequent analysis exploits high-frequency variation in asset price returns as well as
realized variances and covariances around events. It is therefore important to define the
baseline relative to which we measure the impact of those events. To control for the baseline
variation in asset prices, we construct stock returns and yield changes as well as measures
of realized variances and covariances on days without central bank news. Those controls are
always computed for the same window length as the event window we study (which differs
across event types). We avoid the dependence of the results on a particular time of day by
sampling controls three times per day at 10:00, 12:00 and 14:00 local time. This reflects the
fact that central bank announcements can occur at different times of the day. The control
group excludes all local cental bank announcements contained in our event database. Using
the US as an example, when we analyze the effect of Fed communication, our controls exclude
days with announcements by the Fed but not by other central banks.10


       III. Asset price sensitivity to central bank communication: An overview

A large literature studies how asset prices respond to central bank announcements (see,
e.g., Gürkaynak and Wright (2013) for a literature overview). In this section, we review
the evidence for the main four central banks that their communication induces significant
responses of stocks and yields. Specifically, we document how the strength of those reactions
differs by the type of communication and across the maturity dimension of the yield curve.

Since our goal is to assess the sensitivity of asset prices to communication, we focus on
changes in absolute (as opposed to signed) stock returns and yield changes around events.
For each central bank in our sample, we estimate regressions of absolute stock returns or yield
changes on a dummy variable indicating a particular communication type: monetary policy
decisions, press conferences, minutes or inflation reports. For monetary policy decisions,
returns are computed from -15 to +15 minutes around the event. For press conferences,
  10
    We have verified that excluding days with announcements by all central banks does not significantly
change the results.


                                                  14
minutes and inflation report releases, they are computed over a longer window, from -15
to +90 minutes, given that these communications tend to be more extensive and contain
broader information, and hence, they may take longer for investors to process.

Figure 1 summarizes the main results (Internet Appendix A contains the details). Bars
in each plot show the incremental effect of communication events (in basis points) relative
to the baseline variation in asset prices absent central bank news, along with 95% robust
confidence intervals. The numbers superimposed on the bars report the increase in absolute
returns (or yield changes) around a given communication event relative to other days (e.g.,
“2” means that average absolute returns are 200% higher on average around, say, press
conferences than their variation on non-announcement days).


                                      [Insert Figure 1 about here]


Fed. For the Fed, both stock returns and yield changes become significantly more volatile
around Fed communication events compared to other days (Panel A of Figure 1). The
response is the strongest around MPDs, followed by PCs11 and then by minutes releases.12
Absolute stock returns are 137% higher around MPDs and 97% higher around PCs compared
to non-event days. Yield changes are smaller in basis-point terms than stock returns, as they
normalize bond returns by duration. That said, they are large compared to the baseline
variation on non-Fed days. Around MPDs (PCs), absolute yield changes are 438% (260%)
higher at the two-year maturity and 293% (160%) higher at the ten-year maturity compared
to non-event days. Across events of different types, the yield curve displays a hump-shaped
pattern along the maturity dimension. This pattern is suggestive of the Fed announcements
containing news about the economy, rather than just monetary policy, as we explore below.13

ECB. The ECB’s press conferences induce much larger asset price reactions than actual
decision statements (Panel B of Figure 1). Absolute stock returns are about 31% higher
for the PCs, while absolute two- and ten-year yield changes are 219% and 112% higher,
respectively, than on days without ECB news. Around MPDs, instead, volatility of stocks
relative to other days is not statistically higher and represents just about a quarter of the
  11
     The regressions for the Fed’s PCs are estimated on a sample starting from 2011, i.e., the year when they
were first introduced.
  12
     However, we find that the importance of Fed minutes has increased over time. During the effective zero
lower bound (ELB) period, minutes releases have seen a market reaction approximately twice as strong as
that estimated over the whole sample. Therefore, we do not omit minutes in our subsequent analysis.
  13
     This smaller sensitivity at the short end of the yield curve is partially due to the ELB which constrained
yields at shortest maturities for a significant part of our sample. However, estimating the regressions on a
sample ending in 2007 (before the ELB) continues to show a nonmonotonic pattern with the peak of the
response located at the two-year maturity.


                                                      15
reaction around the PCs. Bond volatility picks up significantly around MPDs, with the
effect most pronounced at the very short end of the term structure. Here too, however, the
response is just a fraction of that observed for PCs. Also note that the yield curve response
to PCs is hump-shaped, with a peak around the two-year maturity.14

BOE. For the BOE, the largest reaction (in basis point terms) pertains to the release of the
inflation report (Panel C of Figure 1). We observe a similar rise in volatility around MPD
announcements. Minutes releases feature statistically significant reactions, but similar to
the Fed and the ECB, the economic effect on asset prices is smaller.

BOJ. For the BOJ (Panel D of Figure 1) we focus on policy decision announcements and
minutes releases. Perhaps not surprisingly, due to persistently low rates and subdued bond
market volatility in Japan over our sample, reactions of yields are just a fraction of a basis
point, but they remain statistically significant. More interestingly, absolute stock returns
display large increases around minutes releases.

In sum, both stocks and the yield curve register meaningful increases in volatility on central
bank communication. The results highlight significant differences across types of communi-
cation in their impact on asset prices, and across the term structure.


         IV. Stock-yield comovement and the nature of central bank news

We now turn to the analysis of monetary versus non-monetary news, drawing on the comove-
ment of stocks and yields around central bank releases. Specifically, we introduce the term
structure of stocks-yield covariances, where “term structure” refers to the maturity dimension
of the yield curve. This dimension, in addition to the direction of the comovement of yields
with stocks, facilitates the identification of economic shocks that drive the market reaction
to news.

As a convention, throughout this article, we report results in terms of the comovement
between stock returns and bond yields, while some authors report comovement between
stock and bond returns. Clearly, a positive sign for the covariance of stock returns with
yields changes implies a negative sign for covariance of stock returns with bond returns.
Using the yield convention is more convenient as it makes the term structure aspect of
covariances explicit (bond returns scale mechanically with the duration of the underlying
bond).
  14
    While our sample spans the financial crisis period, these results echo the earlier findings of Brand et al.
(2010), confirmed more recently by the analysis of Leombroni et al. (2017).




                                                      16
IV.A. Term structure of realized stock-yield covariances

Let τ denote the time of a communication event, and τ − = τ − h− and τ + = τ + h+ the
time before and after the event. Divide the interval h+ + h− into N subintervals of length
      + +h−
∆= h N      . The realized covariance of shocks around event τ is computed as:

                                                   N
                                                            (n)
                                                   X
                           RCov(n) −   +
                               τ (τ , τ , N) =           ∆yτ − +i∆ × rτs − +i∆ ,                   (5)
                                                   i=0

           (n)       (n)      (n)
where ∆yτ +k∆ = yτ +k∆ − yτ +(k−1)∆ and rτs +k∆ = psτ +k∆ − psτ +(k−1)∆ , and ps is the log stock
market index. The use of high frequency data to measure covariation of returns has been
proposed by Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2004). We construct covariances by summing
up the products of one-minute yield changes with one-minute stock returns over an event
window: from -15 minutes before to +15 minutes after the monetary policy decision, and
from -15 minutes before to +90 minutes after other communication events (press conferences,
                                                                      (n)
minutes releases, BOE’s inflation report).15 We measure both ∆yτ − +i∆ and rτs − +i∆ in basis
points, hence realized covariances are expressed in units of basis points squared.

We focus on the covariances, rather than correlations, as they allow to compare covariances
across the maturity dimension. The interpretation of correlations is complicated because
yield volatilities are also differentially affected by shocks to short-rate expectations and to
risk premia (Cieslak and Povala, 2016). Thus, scaling covariances by volatilities obliterates
the effects of shocks across the term structure.


IV.B. Non-monetary policy days and macro announcements

We begin by studying the stock-yield covariances on days without monetary policy news
and around key macroeconomic releases. This evidence serves as a point of reference for our
subsequent results on the effects of central bank communication.

Non-monetary policy days. Figure 2 presents the distributions of realized stock-yield
covariances on non-monetary policy days in the US, Germany, UK and Japan. Covariances
are computed over daily windows, excluding days with announcements by the respective local
central bank. A large literature documents that the comovement of stocks and yields switched
sign in the late 1990s from negative to positive (e.g., Andersen et al. (2007), d’Addona and
Kind (2006), among others). In line with those studies, Figure 2 shows positive average
covariance across the four major currency areas during our sample.
  15
   The robustness of our results to alternative choices of the window size is discussed in the Internet
Appendix B.



                                                  17
A new insight from Figure 2 is that covariances generally increase with maturity. This
suggests that, on most days, the stock-yield comovement stems from variation in risk premia.
Indeed, Baele et al. (2010) find that while macro fundamentals contribute little to explaining
the stock-bond correlations, other factors, especially liquidity proxies, play a more important
role. Connolly et al. (2005) relate that fact to the “flight-to-safety” phenomenon.


                                 [Insert Figure 2 about here]


Macroeconomic announcements. Ideally, we would like to study directly how stocks
and yields comove in response to news that drive investors’ expectations about economic
activity. One complication is that such news is hard to find as macro releases may also
induce risk premium variation. However, from a baseline New-Keynesian model it is known
that, absent confounding effects from the risk premium variation, output shocks affect short-
to-intermediate yields more than long-term yields (see e.g., Gürkaynak et al., 2005b). Thus,
we expect such news to generate positive comovement of stocks and yields that is more
pronounced at the shorter maturity range. We verify that stock-yield covariances around
key real activity announcements behave in a way consistent with those predictions. We
summarize the main results below and relegate regression estimates to Section C in the
Internet Appendix.

We characterize stock-yield comovement around the announcements of unemployment, GDP
growth rate and CPI inflation in the US. The time stamps for the releases (typically 8:30am
New York time) are from the Bloomberg economic calendar. To allow sufficient time for
the news to be reflected in prices after markets open, we construct covariances for the
(-15,+60) minutes window around the release time. In terms of asset price sensitivity, the
unemployment release raises volatilities of stocks and yields significantly more compared to
either the CPI or GDP release and the effect is the strongest at intermediate yield maturities.

Figure 3 plots the distribution of covariances for the three announcements. Covariances are
on average positive around the unemployment release, and significantly larger in magnitude
than for inflation and GDP growth. Compared to non-event windows in our control sample,
unemployment announcements are associated with a statistically significant increase in stock-
yield covariance, which again is the largest in the intermediate range of maturities. The
positive and non-monotonic term structure of covariances is consistent with the expected
effect of growth news laid out in our conceptual framework. Inflation announcements
lead to a small but statistically significant reduction in stock-yield covariances, which is
consistent with investors perceiving inflation news as a signal about monetary policy. GDP



                                              18
announcements increase covariances at intermediate maturities, but the difference compared
to non-announcement days is not statistically significant.16


IV.C. Selected central bank communication events

We first illustrate the behavior of stock-yield covariances around selected central bank events.
We interpret these events through the lens of our conceptual framework. Figures 4 and 5
showcase the joint stock-yield curve dynamics in response to specific ECB and Fed events.

The ECB events depicted in Figure 4 are the press conference on Feb 7, 2008, the monetary
policy decision and the press conference on Nov 3, 2011, and President Draghi’s speech on
July 26, 2012.


                                      [Insert Figure 4 about here]


In the policy decision on Feb 7, 2008, the ECB decided to leave rates unchanged, but in
the press conference President Trichet expressed concern about economic growth, saying:
“Uncertainty about the prospects for economic growth is unusually high and the risks
surrounding the outlook for economic activity have been confirmed to lie on the downside.”
As expected when growth is the key piece of news, the term structure of covariances around
the press conference is positive with a peak at two-year maturity (Panel A of Figure 4).

Nov 3, 2011 marks the first decision under the incoming President Draghi when, in the first
cut in two years, the ECB lowered its main policy rate by 25 bps. Stock markets rallied and
short-term yields declined in reaction to the news. Consistent with the conventional effect of
monetary policy news, the stock-yield covariances are negative with magnitude that declines
(in absolute value) in maturity (Panel B). Importantly, however, during the press conference
following the decision Draghi predicted that Europe is heading towards a recession, which
reversed the initial reaction of asset prices. Accordingly, Panel C shows a dramatic change
in stock-yield comovement during the press conference with realized covariances switching
to positive and strengthening with maturities. Through the lens of our framework, a more
pronounced comovement at the long end of the yield curve suggests risk premium shocks as
the main channel.

The influential speech by President Draghi on July 26, 2012 directly demonstrates how
risk premium shocks affect the covariance term structure. Notably, in that speech, Draghi
  16
    We have conducted a similar analysis for the German macro announcements. In contrast to the results
for the US, we found little evidence for increased sensitivity of asset prices around releases for inflation,
unemployment, factory orders and industrial production. Therefore, we do not discuss the details of these
results.

                                                     19
directly referenced the “risk aversion factor” and the importance of risk premia to monetary
transmission. His promise to do “whatever it takes” to save the Euro has been viewed
by many as a move to reduce risk premia on the sovereign bonds in eurozone peripheral
countries. In what was interpreted as a shift towards a major “risk-on” episode, the ten-year
German yield increased by nearly 8 bps as investors switched to risky assets (DAX futures
gained more than 2.3%). By contrast, the short end of the yield curve barely changed. As
such, Panel D displays a positive and increasing covariance term structure around that event,
similar to that in Panel C.

Turning to the Fed, Figure 5 displays stock-yield covariances at FOMC announcements on
Jan 22, 2008, Dec 16, 2008, and Aug 9, 2011. Similar to the ECB, these events feature
distinct patterns of stock-yield comovement in response to the news.


                                [Insert Figure 5 about here]


In an unscheduled move on Jan 22, 2008, the Fed lowered the target rate by 75 bps on
concerns about economic growth. Short-rates went down, but longer term yields rose as
the stock market gained at the news. This generated a negative comovement of stocks and
yields at the short end of the curve but a positive comovement at intermediate and long
maturities (Panel A of Figure 5), suggesting a combination of a monetary shock with news
about growth and/or risk premia.

On Dec 16, 2008, the Fed lowered the target rate further to the 0–25 bps range. The decision
was coupled with forward guidance about future policy suggesting “exceptionally low” rates
for “some time.” The announcement generated a negative comovement of stocks and yields,
most pronounced at the short end and declining in strength across maturities. The dynamics
indicate that investors deemed the news about monetary policy as the main content of the
announcement, likely because the anticipation of economic weakness was already impounded
into market expectations at that point.

Quite a different pattern is seen on Aug 9, 2011. The statement revealed the Fed’s negative
assessment of growth—“(...) economic growth so far this year has been considerably slower
than the Committee had expected.” The downward revision in growth expectations was
combined with explicit forward guidance about exceptionally low rates “at least thought
mid-2013.” While the growth and forward guidance elements are similar to the Dec 18, 2008
statement above, the covariance is now positive and largest at the intermediate maturity
(Panel C), which suggests that this time the updating of growth expectations drove the
market reaction.



                                             20
IV.D. Properties of stock-yield comovement around communication events

We now turn to a systematic investigation of the term structure of stock-yield covariances.
We contrast properties of covariances on non-event days (discussed above) with their prop-
erties around policy decision announcements, and separately, around those communication
events that provide background to policy decisions. We find stark differences in covariance
dynamics across types of communication and over time.

Monetary policy decisions. The release of monetary policy decisions diametrically changes
the properties of stock-yield comovement. We illustrate this fact for the MPD announcements
by the ECB and the Fed. Figure 6 superimposes the realized covariances for two event
windows: (i) pre-event window from 24 hours to 15 minutes before an MPD announcement,
and (ii) event window from 15 minutes before to 15 minutes after the announcement. The
yield maturity is five years.


                                [Insert Figure 6 about here]


While covariances are generally positive in the pre-event window, the MPD announcement
pushes them significantly lower, and most of the time, the sign switches to negative. This is
the usual effect one would expect to observe with a monetary policy shock, and it is partic-
ularly clear for the ECB. Indeed, due to their brevity, EBC decision announcements offer a
good laboratory for isolating monetary policy shocks as they are typically unconfounded by
other information.

The stock-yield covariance reactions around the release of FOMC statements are also negative
most of the time. However, around 2008, we observe a period when their sign switches to
positive. Notably, this is especially visible at the unscheduled FOMC announcements. The
more varied results for the Fed align with a broader scope of information conveyed in its
policy decision statement.

In Table II, we formally test the impact of MPDs on realized covariances, where in addition
to the Fed and the ECB, we also consider decision statements by the BOE and the BOJ.
We estimate the following regressions by yield maturity and by each central bank:

                                               (n)
                            RCov(n)
                                τ = α
                                      (n)
                                          + βMPD 1τ,MPD + ε(n)
                                                           τ .                             (6)

To control for the baseline variation in covariances on non-monetary policy days, we construct
covariances over the window of the same length as for the MPDs (i.e., -15, +15 minutes).
The constant α(n) captures the average level of covariances on non-announcement days; its
estimates are consistently positive and increase in maturity, consistent with Figure 2.

                                             21
                                   [Insert Table II about here]


MPD announcements push covariances significantly lower relative to the baseline, with the
                                                                           (n)
effect generally stronger at short maturities. The monotonic pattern of βMPD coefficients is
                                                                            (n)
clear for the ECB. For the Fed, the effect is hump-shaped, with the lowest βMPD coefficient at
the five-year maturity. This non-monotonicity is related both to the ELB as well as a more
complex information content of the FOMC statements compared to ECB’s announcements.
Policy decisions of the BOE and the BOJ also lead to a change in the sign of covariances,
but the magnitude of the effect is smaller than for the ECB and the Fed.17

Overall, these results corroborate the significance of the standard monetary policy channel
as studied by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), Gürkaynak et al. (2005a), and by a large related
literature. While this literature commonly relies on full-sample regressions of stock returns
on monetary policy shocks, and thus documents average effects, the realized-covariance
approach allows us take a conditional view and trace the effects over time. This turns
out to be important in analyzing other communication events, which we discuss next.

Communication of the context of policy decisions. A new set of insights follows from
the analysis of those communication events whose aim is to provide the public with a context
of policy decisions. Among those, we study press conferences of the ECB, minutes releases
and press conferences of the Fed, minutes releases and inflation report of the BOE, and
minutes of the BOJ.


                                   [Insert Figure 7 about here]


Figure 7 plots the dynamics of stock-yield covariances around those events. The most
important message from the graph is that stock-yield covariances switch sign in 2013—a
consistent finding across the ECB, the Fed and the BOE. The vertical lines in the plots
indicate break dates in average covariances identified with the Bai and Perron (1998) test;
detailed results of the test are provided in Table III.


                                   [Insert Table III about here]


From early 2008 through 2013, the covariances are generally positive. The strongly positive
comovement around the ECB’s press conferences in that period is particularly noteworthy, as
press conferences give almost immediate context to the actual policy decision. They are also
  17
   Figure IA-6 in the Internet Appendix characterizes the whole distribution of covariances around MPD
announcements and other communication events.


                                                 22
the most significant channel of the ECB’s communication in terms of its asset price impact
(Figure 1). A similar behavior can be seen for communications of other central banks as
well. The positive sign suggests that during the financial crisis and in the early phase of
the recovery, the market’s perception of important news telegraphed by central banks was
not mainly about monetary policy. Instead, it was dominated either by shocks to growth
expectations or to risk premia.

In contrast, from early summer of 2013, communication drives stocks and yields in opposite
directions.18 This shift in sign is directly preceded by FOMC Chairman Bernanke’s testimony
on May 22, 2013. In that testimony, he discussed the possibility of tapering asset purchases
against the backdrop of improving labor market conditions; all the while, up to that point,
asset purchases had been primarily linked to forward guidance about future policy rates. The
resulting confusion among market participants about the central banks’ reaction function led
to a significant pick up in volatility, an episode known as the “taper tantrum” (e.g., Feroli
et al., 2014).

One interpretation is that Bernanke’s statement may have led market participants to turn
away their focus from watching economy-related news for signs of the future direction of
monetary policy. In line with this interpretation, the WSJ later summarized the market
situation: “When the focus is on the discount rate used to value all assets, bond and stock
prices rise and fall together, creating the inverse relationship between bond yields and shares.
(...) Such a focus on monetary policy isn’t healthy. It leaves markets more exposed to sudden
shocks, both from changes in policy and from an economy to which less attention is being
paid” (WSJ, Sep 6, 2016).

We also study how the comovement of stocks and yields changed across the entire term
structure following the events of 2013. We find that for announcements other than policy
decisions by the Fed, ECB and BOE, the entire average term structure of covariances changes
sign from positive pre-2013 to negative post-2013. Additionally, compared to the post-2013
sample, the period from 2008 to 2012 is characterized by a larger dispersion in realized
covariances, suggesting significant heterogeneity of the news telegraphed by the central banks
(see Internet Appendix Figure IA-7).
  18
     Although the formal test for the BOE finds the break in February 2013, the large negative
covariance is registered around the minutes release on Jul 17, 2013. Interestingly, one of the most
pronounced negative covariance realizations post 2013 can be seen for the BOE on Aug 4, 2016. This
event deserves a separate note as it marks a change in the BOE’s communication as the first “Super
Thursday.” It also follows in close proximity to the Brexit vote on Jun 23, 2016. The negative covariance
suggests a significant monetary policy shock. The market commentary highlights the unexpectedly
large and diverse stimulus package by the Bank of England which provided cheap funding for banks (e.g.,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/bank-of-england-cuts-key-interest-rate-to-new-low-1470309155.)




                                                  23
IV.E. Classification of central bank news based on second moment dynamics

What is the relative importance of different types of news conveyed via central bank com-
munication? We classify events on two dimensions—by volatility of yields across maturities
and by comovement of yields with stocks. This leads to the following news classification
matrix:

                                             Central bank news classification matrix
                                                       Stock-yield cov > 0             Stock-yield cov ≤ 0
          Short/Mid               Long
  Var(y               ) > Var(y          )            (1,1) economic growth         (1,2) monetary policy
                                                                                  (conventional, via short-rate
                                                                                          expectations)
  Var(y Short/Mid ) ≤ Var(y Long )                      (2,1) risk premia          (2,2) monetary policy
                                                            (risk on/off)          (unconventional, via long
                                                                                       rates/risk premia)

Specifically, we assign events into categories based on whether (i) yields comove positively or
negatively with stocks, and (ii) short/intermediate yields vary more or less than long yields.
While an announcement can in principle convey several types of news, it is important to
acknowledge that the above classification can only help identify the dominant piece of news.

Quadrants (1,1), (1,2) and (2,1) of the above matrix label shocks according to their properties
laid out in Section I.B. Quadrant (2,2), with the “unconventional” monetary policy category,
falls outside of the types of shocks we have discussed so far—it characterizes events that move
stocks and yields in opposite directions (like a monetary policy shock), but generate more
volatility at long maturities (like a risk premium shock). Such dynamics could arise when
a central bank directly affects the long-end of the yield curve, for example, via purchases
of long-term bonds.19 We discuss examples of such shocks below, and more extensively in
Section V.

We implement this classification for the Fed and the ECB for which we have sufficient
coverage of yield maturities. Before the ELB, we categorize events based on variances at
the two- and ten-year yield maturity and the two-year covariance. After the ELB is reached
(from Jan 1, 2009 for the Fed and from Jul 1, 2012 for the ECB) through the end of our
sample, we replace the two-year maturity with the five-year maturity.20 Similar to the
  19
     Using an event study, Gagnon et al. (2011) attribute the yield reaction to initial rounds of QE by the
Fed to compression in the term premium. Based on yield curve decompositions, Christensen and Rudebusch
(2012) assign a larger role to short-rate expectations as drivers of the long-term yield response for the US,
but an important effect on term premia in case of the BOE’s QE program.
  20
     The Fed lowered the federal funds target rate to a range between 0 and 25 bps on Dec 16, 2008. The
ECB decreased its deposit facility rate to zero in July 2012; we follow Lemke and Vladu (2017) in treating
this as the moment when the euro area reached the ELB.



                                                                24
realized covariances in equation (5), realized variances around events are constructed by
summing up the squared one-minute yield changes over a given window.

For the Fed, we separately consider scheduled FOMC announcements, and we combine
minutes releases and press conferences into one group.21 For the ECB, we distinguish between
policy decisions and press conferences. Remaining events in our database are grouped as
“other.” We report the number and frequencies of events falling into each quadrant of our
classification. In addition, we also provide medians and means of stock-yield covariances by
quadrant to assess the economic significance of each news category.

                            [Insert Table IV and Figure 8 about here]

Table IV reports the results. For an easier comparison between the Fed and the ECB and
across types of communication, event frequencies and mean covariances by quadrants are
also shown in Figure 8.

Several parallels between the Fed and the ECB are worth highlighting. We first focus on
monetary policy decisions. Conventional monetary shocks (quadrant (1,2)) account for most
of the market reaction for more than half of MPD announcements. These shocks are also
the most significant channel, economically and statistically, when gauged by the average
stock-yield covariance. Growth news (quadrant (1,1)) ranks second both by frequency and
economic importance, and accounts for about a third of MPD announcements. For the ECB,
the conventional monetary channel is by a wide margin the most important one in terms of
economic significance. For example, the impact of growth news on the average stock-yield
covariance is about 9% (=7.6/82.5) of that of conventional monetary news; an analogous
number for the Fed is 68% (=98.7/144.7). A comparison of means and medians suggests
that monetary news by the ECB generates a large negative tail in realized covariances, with
few events having a dramatic impact (see also Figure 6).

The second important observation is that the importance of conventional monetary news
declines significantly in communications other than MPDs such as press conferences and
minutes. Growth news dominates in more than 50% of those cases, while conventional
monetary shocks represent only about 30%. This finding is particularly relevant for the
ECB, where the economic importance of PCs has been large relative to the MPDs.

Finally, the other two news categories—risk preference shocks (quadrant (2,1)) and uncon-
ventional monetary shocks (quadrant (2,2))—are less common, each constituting less than
20% of events across different event types. Although infrequent, these shocks can have
  21
    There are only 28 press conferences in our sample. We combine them with the minutes releases, as both
show similar dynamics of covariances (see Figure 7).

                                                   25
strong effects on asset prices. For example, for the Fed, the large negative covariance in
the unconventional policy quadrant (2,2)—visible in the top right panel of Figure 8—stems
from the March 18, 2009 quantitative easing announcement.22 The economic magnitude of
the risk premium channel is especially pronounced for the ECB’s press conferences (bottom
right panel of Figure 8), where it accounts for some of the biggest movements in covariances
during the past decade.

To summarize, the conventional monetary news channel drives the market reactions at about
a half of policy decision announcements. Non-monetary news—growth and risk premium
shocks—is the key component of those communications that provide context to policy
decisions, press conferences being a primary example.


         V. Stock-yield comovement and unconventional monetary policy

We next use the comovement of stocks and yields to discriminate between the types of news
conveyed via different unconventional monetary policies (UMP). Our classification of events
builds on a large literature,23 which we extend to include the latest events related to policy
normalization. We rely on a granular distinction by official policy programs or well-known
policy phases. We also account for whether a specific announcement contained explicit
forward guidance (FG) on the path of policy rates. We do not include communication that
just restated the objectives of a specific program or left the parameters of forward guidance
unaltered. For brevity, we refer to the various policies using the common abbreviations of
program names. These abbreviations are explained in the corresponding tables. Details of
the design and goals of the interventions are discussed in Internet Appendix D.

We estimate regressions of stock-yield covariances on dummy variables for a given UMP
program or phase, controlling for covariances on non-monetary policy days. Covariances are
measured from -15 minutes before to +90 minutes after each event.

                                     [Insert Table V about here]
  22
      On this day, the Fed announced purchases of $300bn in Treasuries, $750bn of agency MBS, increase
holdings of agency debt to $200bn. On the announcement, S&P500 futures gained more than 175 bps, yields
two-year bond futures dropped by 8 bps and on 30-year bond futures by more than 40 bps. In support of the
announcement strongly affecting yield risk premia, Cieslak and Povala (2016) show that the term premium
volatility in US Treasuries reached its 18-year peak in the week of this announcement, moving long yields
significantly more than short and intermediate yields.
   23
      See, e.g., Fratzscher et al. (2016), Krishnamurthy et al. (2017) for an analysis of the ECB’s UMPs,
and Fratzscher et al. (2018), Hattori et al. (2016), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2013), for recent
studies for the Fed, among others. A survey of the literature on the effects of unconventional policies by
the Fed is provided by Bhattarai and Neely (2016), while Borio and Zabai (2016) also cover studies on the
UMPs of other major central banks. Bauer and Neely (2014) study the international transmission of Fed
policies, while Rogers et al. (2014) study the effect of UMPs by the main four central banks.

                                                    26
Fed. Table V presents results for the Fed. Consistent with the literature that emphasizes
significant asset price responses to the early QE announcements, the largest changes in
covariances can be observed for QE1. On average, QE1 sent stocks and yields in opposite
directions, in line with those announcements triggering significant monetary shocks. Impor-
tantly, however, the most pronounced negative comovement occurred at those QE1 events
which simultaneous contained a forward guidance element (Dec 16, 2008 and Mar 18, 2009).
QE1 announcements without forward guidance actually moved stocks and yields in the same
direction, most so at the intermediate maturity, suggestive of an important growth news
component.

The effect of other policy packages is generally more muted. This is perhaps not surprising
as—in contrast to the large surprises associated with QE1—by the time QE2 and QE3
were announced, the markets may have better understood the Fed’s reaction function and
anticipated that further accommodation is needed. However, the MEP announcement shifted
stock-yield covariances higher at the long-end, indicating that non-monetary policy content
dominated the news.24

Table V further shows that starting from 2013, announcements pertaining to the Fed’s exit
from policy accommodation and to the wind-down of its balance sheet drove the stock-
yield covariances into negative territory. The break in stock-yield comovement around 2013
suggests that monetary shocks regained importance at the prospect of the monetary stimulus
being removed.

                                  [Insert Table VI about here]

ECB. Table VI reports estimates for the ECB. Unlike conventional policies, which work
primarily through the short-end of the yield curve, the results in Table VI suggest that the
ECB’s unconventional policies operated mostly by affecting longer-term yields. Hence, we
observe a stronger reaction of the longer-end of the stock-yield covariance term structure.
Indeed, the comovement of stocks with the short-end of the curve (three-month maturity)
was largely insignificant over the period of ECB’s UMPs, including the period before the
ELB. The picture looks different for maturities of two-years and beyond. As in the case of
the Fed, non-monetary news dominated during the earlier phases of unconventional policies.
This is the case for announcements related to the provision of US dollar liquidity, the early
phases of LTROs, ECB purchases of peripheral country debt under the SMP, and later
LTRO announcements. Similar to the Fed, however, announcements that contained forward
guidance induced negative covariances of stocks and yields.
  24
    The first MEP-related announcement happened on Aug 9, 2011, and covariances around that event are
depicted in Figure 5 and discussed in Section IV.C.

                                                 27
The results also suggest that the market reaction to the OMT program—to some degree
foreshadowed by President Draghi’s “whatever it takes” speech—was not about monetary
policy news per se. Instead, the upward sloping term-structure of covariances suggests a
shock to risk premia as the likely explanation of the pattern we see in the data (see also Figure
4). Following the OMT-related announcements, the flight-to-safety to German government
bonds subsided while stocks and other risk assets gained. Policies unveiled by the ECB after
the euro area sovereign debt crisis abated, e.g., its asset purchase programs (PSPP and later
CSPP), show a response consistent with monetary policy shocks as main drivers of asset
price responses.

                                 [Insert Table VII about here]

Results for the BOE and BOJ are presented in Table VII. Due to data limitations for futures
contracts, we can investigate at most two points on the stock-yield covariance term structure.

BOE. Several similarities between the BOE and the Fed and ECB are worth noting. Just
like in the case of the Fed and the ECB, non-monetary shocks dominate the financial market
transmission in the early phases of the BOE’s unconventional policies, although the statistical
significance is weaker than in the previous cases. Likewise, the negative covariance in
response to forward guidance is in line with a monetary policy shock as the underlying
driver. The most significant and negative covariance pertains to the announcements related
to APF4, which aimed to provide stimulus in the aftermath of the Brexit referendum. As
such, the response undertaken by the BOE worked as a powerful monetary policy shock.

BOJ. The estimates for the BOJ suggest that the QE measures—including those conducted
already prior to the financial crisis—were consistent with monetary policy shocks, driving
stocks and yields in opposite directions. By contrast, the reaction to the announcement of
yield curve control indicates a role for non-monetary news, albeit the economic importance
of this announcement is smaller than that of other QE measures. One caveat is that over a
large part of our sample, Japanese bond yields were affected by the ELB (even for fairly long
maturities). As such, both volatility and turnover in the market were subdued dampening
asset price reactions to BOJ’s news.


     VI. Decomposing asset price responses to central bank communication

Section I links reduced-form shocks in yields and equities to shocks that have a structural
interpretation. A natural question of interest is which fraction of variation in stock returns
and yield changes around communication events stems from each structural shock. To cast
light on this question, we rotate reduced-form shocks into monetary policy, growth and risk

                                               28
premium shocks that are consistent with the effects laid out in Section I. Our identification
exploits both the comovement of stocks and yields via sign restrictions as well as differential
effects of shocks across the maturity dimension of the yield curve.25 The results in this
section both complement and corroborate the news classification based on the term structure
of realized covariances discussed so far.


VI.A. Sign and monotonicity restrictions

Denote structural shocks as ǫt = (ǫgt , ǫm    p ′                                      2y    10y s ′
                                         t , ǫt ) , and reduced-form shocks as ut = (ỹt , ỹt , r̃t ) .
Reduced-form shocks ut contain changes in a two- and ten-year yield and stock returns within
a narrow window around announcements. We use three reduced-form shocks to identify three
structural shocks by:

                                               ut = A−1 ǫt ,                                            (7)

where A−1 is the matrix of contemporaneous dependencies of asset prices with V ar(ut ) = Σu
and V ar(ǫt ) = I3×3 with I denoting an identity matrix. To identify the structural shocks,
we require that A−1 fulfills sign restrictions given by:
                                                           
                                   a2g a2m a2p          + + −
                         A−1   =  a10g a10m a10p  =  + + −  .                                       (8)
                                                           

                                   asg asm asp          + − −

These restrictions capture the following effects: (i) a positive growth shock ǫgt increases stock
prices and yields (first column of A−1 ); (ii) a positive monetary policy shock ǫm   t increases
yields and lowers stock prices (second column of A ); (iii) a positive risk premium shock ǫpt
                                                      −1

reduces stock prices and depresses yields making bonds more valuable (third column of A−1 ).
Notice that the sign restrictions in (8) do not allow to distinguish between growth and risk
premium shocks, as both move stocks and yields in the same direction. To separate these
shocks, we additionally exploit the maturity dimension of the yield curve. In particular, we
impose monotonicity restrictions across the yield curve as follows:
  25
     Matheson and Stavrev (2014) and Jarocinski and Karadi (2018) also use sign restrictions to distinguish
growth and monetary policy news. These studies use one point on the yield curve. By including the maturity
dimension across the term structure, we are able to take a stance on how shocks propagate across maturities,
and on the relative importance of risk premium shocks.




                                                    29
                  |a2p |    <   |a10p |   2y yield responds less than 10y yield to ǫpt shock
                  |a2g |    >   |a10g |   2y yield responds more than 10y yield to ǫgt shock
                                                                                p
                  |a2m |    >   |a2p |    2y yield responds to ǫm
                                                                t more than to ǫt shock
                                                                                 p
                  |a10m |   <   |a10p |   10y yield responds to ǫm
                                                                 t less than to ǫt shock


The first two conditions reflect the notion from Section I.A that risk premium (growth)
shocks affect long-term yields more (less) than short-term yields. Empirically, we find that
the first restriction is crucial for separating growth and risk premium shocks, while imposing
the other restrictions only marginally changes the results.

We implement this approach following the algorithm of Rubio-Ramirez et al. (2010) (see also
Kilian and Lütkepohl (2017)). Here, we summarize the main findings, while Appendix E
presents the implementation details.26 Since the algorithm relies on a simulation of a large
number of matrices that satisfy the restrictions, below we report averages of the quantities
of interest across simulations; standard errors for those averages are constructed as standard
deviations across simulations.


VI.B. Results

We use the above approach to analyze the news content of scheduled FOMC announcements
and ECB press conferences. We focus on these events because they represent the key commu-
nication channels as measured by their market impact (see Figure 1). We decompose shocks
to yields and stock returns accruing around those communication events into the respective
contributions of economic shocks. We present both unconditional variance decompositions
(variance ratios) as well as historical decompositions, in which we split each reduced-form
shock into structural components over time.


                             [Insert Table VIII and Figure 9 about here]


Table VIII presents the variance ratios. The estimates for the Fed and the ECB are broadly
consistent with each other. The most important sources of variation are growth shocks
for the two-year yield, risk premium shocks for the ten-year yield, and monetary policy
shocks for equity returns. It is interesting to note that the variance of equity returns around
announcements is mostly driven by the monetary policy news component, and most visibly
  26
    Starting with a Cholesky decomposition of the covariance matrix of reduced-form shocks, V ar(ut ) = P P ′ ,
ut = P ǫCholesky
          t      , the idea is to select a rotation matrix Q (Q′ Q = QQ′ = I) such that P Q′ satisfies the
restrictions above. Then, ǫQ                                                                      ′
                              t = Qǫt represents the candidate structural shocks (as ut = P Q Qǫt ). We
simulate of a large number of candidate Q matrices and store those that satisfy the restrictions. The results
are obtained by averaging across 2000 simulations.


                                                       30
so for the FOMC announcements. This is consistent with the narrative that emphasizes the
role of monetary policy for supporting the stock market recovery in the aftermath of the
financial crisis.

Figure 9 provides a visual illustration of how different shocks contribute to the variation in
yields and stocks around the same set of announcements. Specifically, we plot cumulative
historical decompositions of yields and stock returns around announcements. Stock returns
and yield changes are demeaned, and therefore the results should be interpreted in terms
of deviations from the means. One can see that since the financial crisis, monetary policy
news at the scheduled FOMC announcements have exerted downward pressure on yields and
an upward pressure on stocks. Growth shocks, in contrast, have impacted short-term rates
negatively in the early parts of the financial crises, but since around 2013 have contributed
to their increase. The effect of ECB’s press conferences is more varied, which becomes
especially clear in the effect of monetary policy shocks on the equities. For the ECB,
monetary policy shocks explain a smaller portion of variation in stock returns compared
to the FOMC announcements. However, at least since 2012 those shocks have generally
contributed positively to stock valuations.

These results cast new light on the discussion in the literature as to whether central bank
announcements can affect risk premia, as argued by Hanson and Stein (2015), or short-rate
expectations (over relatively long horizons), as argued by Nakamura and Steinsson (2018).
The answer is that both channels are present and their importance changes with the yield
maturity. An additional implication of these results pertains to the interpretation of the
path shocks in the literature following Gürkaynak et al. (2005a). Typically, path shocks
are obtained by studying responses of yields with short to intermediate maturities. For
example, maturities between two to three years are commonly considered to reflect the
variation in market expectations of the future short rate (i.e., the path of monetary policy
over the course of several quarters). Our decomposition of the two-year yield suggests that
the effect of growth expectations can be at least as important as that of monetary policy
shocks, and therefore could be an important driver of the path factor. In this way, we
are able to quantify the importance of the so-called Delphic component of monetary policy
announcements—that reveals policymakers’ forecasts of the macroeconomy rather than just
path of monetary policy—first studied by Campbell et al. (2012b).


                                     VII. Conclusion

The joint dynamics of stocks and the yield curve at high-frequency reveal the nature of
economic shocks induced by central bank announcements. We highlight the importance


                                             31
of non-monetary news transmitted via communication channels such as press conferences
and minutes, whose goal is to provide context of policy decisions. We also document a
considerable variation in the composition of news types released by central banks over time.

In terms of breadth of events covered as well as their taxonomy, ours is probably the most
comprehensive dataset of communication by the four main central banks that has been
studied in the literature. Even so, relying on asset price behavior around selected events
likely does not capture the entirety the news telegraphed by central banks. In particular, we
abstract from the fact that central banks may exert significant effect on asset prices outside of
the public communication events, as suggested by the findings of Lucca and Moench (2015)
and Cieslak et al. (2018).

Another broad set of issues pertains to understanding the economic mechanism whereby
central banks convey new information to the public about the state of the economy. Our
contribution is to show that such effects drive a considerable fraction of asset price variation
around announcements. It is not yet resolved, however, whether the empirical evidence
should be interpreted through the lens of rational models of expectations formation in which
central banks have information advantage over the public, or whether it would be better
understood via other mechanisms (e.g., with behavioral features). These questions are a
direction for future research.




                                               32
                                           References
Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2010). Financial intermediaries and monetary economics. In Handbook
  of monetary economics, Volume 3, pp. 601–650. Elsevier.
Albuquerque, R., M. Eichenbaum, V. Luo, and S. Rebelo (2016). Valuation risk and asset pricing.
  Journal of Finance 71, 2861–2903.
Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold, and C. Vega (2007). Real-time price discovery
  in global stock, bond and foreign exchange markets. Journal of International Economics 73,
  251–277.
Ang, A., G. Bekaert, and M. Wei (2008). The term structure of real rates and expected inflation.
  Journal of Finance 63, 797–849.
Baele, L., G. Bekaert, and K. Inghelbrecht (2010). The determinants of stock and bond return
  comovements. The Review of Financial Studies 23 (6), 2374–2428.
Bai, J. and P. Perron (1998). Estimating and testing linear models with multiple structural changes.
  Econometrica, 47–78.
Barndorff-Nielsen, O. E. and N. Shephard (2004). Econometric analysis of realized covariation: High
  frequency based covariance, regression, and correlation in financial economics. Econometrica 72,
  885–925.
Bauer, M. D. and C. J. Neely (2014). International channels of the Fed’s unconventional monetary
  policy. Journal of International Money and Finance 44, 24–46.
Bekaert, G., M. Hoerova, and M. L. Duca (2013). Risk, uncertainty and monetary policy. Journal
  of Monetary Economics 60 (7), 771–788.
Bernanke, B. and K. Kuttner (2005). What explains the stock market’s reaction to Federal Reserve
  policy. Journal of Finance 60 (3), 1221–1257.
Bhattarai, S. and C. J. Neely (2016). A survey of the empirical literature on US unconventional
  monetary policy. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper No. 2016-021A.
Borio, C. and A. Zabai (2016). Unconventional monetary policies: a re-appraisal. BIS Working
  Paper No. 570.
Brand, C., D. Buncic, and J. Turunen (2010). The impact of ECB monetary policy decisions
  and communication on the yield curve. Journal of the European Economic Association 8 (6),
  1266–1298.
Burkhardt, D. and H. Hasseltoft (2012). Understanding asset correlations. Working paper,
  University of Zurich.
Campbell, J., C. Evans, J. Fisher, and A. Justiniano (2012a). Macroeconomic effects of FOMC
  forward guidance. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring, 1–54.
Campbell, J. R., C. L. Evans, J. D. Fisher, and A. Justiniano (2012b). Macroeconomic effects of
  Federal Reserve forward guidance. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2012 (1), 1–80.
Campbell, J. R., J. D. Fisher, A. Justiniano, and L. Melosi (2017). Forward guidance and
  macroeconomic outcomes since the financial crisis. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 31 (1), 283–
  357.
Campbell, J. Y. and J. Ammer (1993). What moves the stock and bond markets? A variance
  decomposition for long-term asset returns. Journal of Finance 48, 3–37.
Campbell, J. Y., C. Pflueger, and L. M. Viceira (2015). Monetary policy drivers of bond and equity
  risks. Working paper, Harvard University.


                                                33
Campbell, J. Y. and R. J. Shiller (1988). The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
  dividends and discount factors. Review of Financial Studies 1, p. 195 – 228.
Campbell, J. Y., A. Sunderam, and L. M. Viceira (2017). Inflation bets or deflation hedges? The
  changing risk of nominal bonds. Critical Finance Review 6 (2).
Christensen, J. and G. Rudebusch (2012). The response of interest rates to US and UK Quantitative
  Easing. Economic Journal 122, F385–F414.
Cieslak, A. (2018). Short rate expectations and unexpected returns in Treasury bonds. Review of
  Financial Studies 31, 3265–3306.
Cieslak, A., A. Morse, and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2018). Stock returns over the FOMC cycle.
  Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Cieslak, A. and P. Povala (2015). Expected returns in Treasury bonds. Review of Financial
  Studies 28, 2859–2901.
Cieslak, A. and P. Povala (2016). Information in the term structure of yield curve volatility. Journal
  of Finance 71 (3), 1393–1436.
Clarida, R., J. Galı́, and M. Gertler (2000). Monetary policy rules and macroeconomic stability:
  Evidence and some theory. Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 147–180.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2011). Monetary policy, trend inflation and the great
  moderation: An alternative interpretation. American Economic Review 101, 341–370.
Connolly, R., C. Stivers, and L. Sun (2005). Stock market uncertainty and the stock-bond return
  relation. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40 (1), 161–194.
d’Addona, S. and A. H. Kind (2006). International stock-bond correlations in a simple affine asset
  pricing model. Journal of Banking & Finance 30 (10), 2747–2765.
Feroli, M., A. Kashyap, K. Schoenholtz, and H. Shin (2014). Market tantrums and monetary policy.
  Chicago Booth Research Paper No. 14-09.
Ferrari, M., J. Kearns, and A. Schrimpf (2017). Monetary policy’s rising fx impact in the era of
  ultra-low rates. BIS Working paper.
Fleming, M. and E. Remolona (2001). The term structure of announcement effects. Working paper,
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York and BIS.
Fratzscher, M., M. Lo Duca, and R. Straub (2016). ECB unconventional monetary policy actions:
  Market impact, international spillovers and transmission channels. IMF Economic Review 64 (1),
  36–74.
Fratzscher, M., M. Lo Duca, and R. Straub (2018). On the international spillovers of US quantitative
  easing. The Economic Journal 128 (608), 330–377.
Gagnon, J., M. Raskin, J. Remache, and B. Sack (2011). The financial market effects of the Federal
  Reserve’s large-scale asset purchases. International Journal of Central Banking 7, 3–43.
Gürkaynak, R., B. Sack, and E. Swanson (2005a). Do actions speak louder than words? The
  response of asset prices to monetary policy actions and statements. International Journal of
  Central Banking 1, 55–93.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and E. Swanson (2005b). The sensitivity of long-term interest rates
  to economic news: Evidence and implications for macroeconomic models. American Economic
  Review 95, p. 425 – 436.
Gürkaynak, R. S. and J. H. Wright (2013). Identification and inference using event studies. The
  Manchester School 81, 48–65.


                                                 34
Hansen, S., M. McMahon, and M. Tong (2018). The long-run information effect of central bank
  narrative. Working paper, Oxford University and Bank of England.
Hanson, S. G. and J. C. Stein (2015). Monetary policy and long-term real rates. Journal of
  Financial Economics 115 (3), 429–448.
Hattori, M., A. Schrimpf, and V. Sushko (2016). The response of tail risk perceptions to
  unconventional monetary policy. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8 (2), 111–136.
Jarocinski, M. and P. Karadi (2018). Deconstructing monetary policy surprises: The role of
  information shocks. ECB working paper, No 2013.
Jotikasthira, C., A. Le, and C. Lundblad (2015). Why do term structures in different currencies
  co-move? Journal of Financial Economics 115 (1), 58–83.
Kelly, B. and S. Pruitt (2013). Market expectations in the cross section of present values. Journal
  of Finance 68 (5), 1721–1721.
Kilian, L. and H. Lütkepohl (2017). Structural vector autoregressive analysis. Cambridge University
  Press.
Kim, D. H. and J. H. Wright (2005, August). An arbitrage-free three-factor term structure model
  and the recent behavior of long-term yields and distant-horizon forward rates. Finance and
  Economics Discussion Series, Federal Reserve Board.
Krishnamurthy, A., S. Nagel, and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2017). ECB policies involving government
  bond purchases: Impact and channels. Review of Finance 22 (1), 1–44.
Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2013). The ins and outs of LSAPs. In Federal Reserve
  Bank of Kansas Jackson Hole Symposium on the Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary
  Policy, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August.
Kroencke, T., M. Schmeling, and A. Schrimpf (2018). The FOMC risk shift. Working paper,
  University of Basel.
Lemke, W. and A. L. Vladu (2017). Below the zero lower bound: a shadow-rate term structure
  model for the euro area. ECB working paper, No 1991.
Leombroni, M., A. Vedolin, G. Venter, and P. Whelan (2017). Central bank communication and the
  yield curve. Working paper, Stanford University, Boston University and Copenhagen Business
  School.
Lettau, M. and J. Wachter (2007). Why is long-horizon equity less risky? A duration-based
  explanation of the value premium. Journal of Finance 62, 55–92.
Lettau, M. and J. A. Wachter (2011). The term structures of equity and interest rates. Journal of
  Financial Economics 101, 90–113.
Lucca, D. O. and E. Moench (2015). The pre-FOMC announcement drift. The Journal of
  Finance 70 (1), 329–371.
Martin, I. (2017). What is the expected return on the market? The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 132 (1), 367–433.
Matheson, T. and E. Stavrev (2014). News and monetary shocks at a high frequency: a simple
 approach. Economics Letters 125 (2), 282–286.
Meaning, J. and F. Zhu (2011, December). The impact of recent central bank asset purchase
 programmes. BIS Quarterly Review , 73–83.
Miranda-Agrippino, S. and G. Ricco (2018). The transmission of monetary policy shocks. Working
  paper, Bank of England.


                                                35
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2018). High frequency identification of monetary non-neutrality:
  The information effect. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Ramey, V. A. (2016). Macroeconomic shocks and their propagation. In Handbook of Macroeco-
  nomics, Volume 2, pp. 71–162. Elsevier.
Rigobon, R. and B. Sack (2003). Measuring the reaction of monetary policy to the stock market.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2), 639–669.
Rigobon, R. and B. Sack (2004). The impact of monetary policy on asset prices. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 51 (8), 1553–1575.
Rogers, J. H., C. Scotti, and J. H. Wright (2014). Evaluating asset-market effects of unconventional
  monetary policy: A multi-country review. Economic Policy 29 (80), 749–799.
Rubio-Ramirez, J. F., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2010). Structural vector autoregressions:
  Theory of identification and algorithms for inference. The Review of Economic Studies 77 (2),
  665–696.
Swanson, E. T. and J. Williams (2014). Measuring the effect of the zero lower bound on medium-
  and longer-term interest rates. American Economic Review 104, 3154–3185.




                                                36
                  Table I. Overview of central bank communication events
This table provides an overview of the number of monetary policy events for the four major central banks (Federal Reserve, ECB,
Bank of Japan and Bank of England) in our study. It reports the number of events pertaining to i) monetary policy decisions
(MPD), ii) press conferences (PC), iii) the release of minutes of the policy meeting (MIN), iv) the release of the inflation report
(IR). The number of MPD events is broken down further to indicate the number of unscheduled meetings (Unsched.). Column
“Other” reports the number other central bank communication events (in particular speeches by the central bank governors or
other statements).


                                                         MPD                      PC          MIN        IR         Other       Total
                                              (Total)      (Unsched.)

      Federal Reserve (Fed)                     169                 6                28       136         –          26            359
      (30 Sep 1997 to 31 Dec 2017)

      European Central Bank (ECB)               251                 2             218          –          –          140           611
      (09 Jun 1998 to 31 Dec 2017)

      Bank of England (BOE)                     230                 2                9        207        79          53            578
      (09 Jul 1998 to 31 Dec 2017)

      Bank of Japan (BOJ)                       203                 5                52       179         –          15            449
      (15 Jul 2003 to 31 Dec 2017)




             Table II. Monetary policy decisions and stock-yield covariances
This table presents the regressions of realized covariances on monetary policy decision dummy. The event window spans from
-15 minutes before to +15 minutes after the announcement. The sample of control covariances is constructed over the same
window for days without local monetary policy news, as discussed in Section II.C. The covariances are reported in units of basis
points squared. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. We exclude unscheduled monetary policy announcements
from the regression.


                                                                   A. Fed
                                     3m                       2y                     5y                  10y                 30y

          MPD dummy                -75.1***              -52.0***                -91.5***              -70.0**               -56.2*
                                    (-3.90)               (-2.95)                 (-2.78)              (-2.11)              (-1.71)
          Constant                  2.20***              6.27***                  10.3***              10.0***              9.81***
                                    (15.68)               (23.31)                 (39.98)              (47.71)              (52.65)

                                                                   B. ECB
                                                3m                      2y                    5y                   10y

                   MPD dummy                  -44.6***              -35.2***                -25.6***             -13.6***
                                               (-3.08)               (-3.36)                 (-4.08)              (-3.84)
                   Constant                    0.85***               3.40***                 4.97***              5.19***
                                               (10.84)               (26.77)                 (37.52)              (43.24)

                                                 C. BOE                                                D. BOJ
                                                         3m                    10y                                10y

                          MPD dummy                    -54.6*                -17.2***         MPD dummy           -4.43*
                                                      (-1.83)                 (-3.12)                            (-1.67)
                          Constant                    0.31***                 3.05***         Constant           2.45***
                                                       (4.45)                 (35.88)                            (30.88)




                                                                    37
                  Table III. Test for structural breaks in event covariances
This table reports test results for multiple breaks in mean of realized covariances using the sequential test of Bai and Perron
(1998). The test is conducted over the sample from Jan 1, 2008 through Dec 31, 2017. The table provides robust F-statistics
and 10% critical values. We allow error distributions to differ across breaks. The set of communication events used in estimation
is reported in each column header. For brevity, for the Fed and the ECB we only report results for average covariances across
maturities.

                                 10% Crit val               Fed                   ECB                 BOE              BOJ
    Communication type                                  PC & MIN                  PC                MIN & IR           MIN
    Maturities                                        Avg 2, 5, 10, 30y        Avg 2,5,10y             10y             10y
    0 or 1                            7.04                  8.72*                 53.94*              33.02*           5.77
    1 or 2                            8.51                 13.31*                  7.54                4.19
    2 or 3                            9.41                  9.41


    Break dates                                           6 Jan 2010            4 Jul 2013         20 Feb 2013
                                                         19 Jun 2013
                                                          8 Jul 2015




                                                              38
               Table IV. Classification of central bank communication events
This table provides the classification on Fed’s and ECB’s announcements. Row labels (1,1) though (2,2) indicate the quadrants
of the classification matrix described in Section IV.E. For the Fed, in Panel A, we classify the news content at scheduled
monetary policy decision announcements, minutes releases and press conferences (considered jointly), and all other events in
our database (including unscheduled FOMC announcements). For the ECB, in Panel B, we conduct the analysis on monetary
policy decisions, press conferences, and all other events in our database (including speeches). Columns (1) and (2) report the
number and the fraction (in percent) of events falling into news-type quadrant, by communication type. Column (3) reports
the median covariance within each news-type quadrant, column (4) reports the t-statistics for the median, which is obtained
from a quantile regression of realized covariance on a constant (with fewer than 10 observations within a category, standard
errors are computed with bootstrap). Column (5) reports the mean covariance within each news-type quadrant, and column
(6) provides robust t-statistics for the mean. Covariances are reported in units of basis points squared.


                                         (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)

                                                              A. Fed

    News type                        No. events     Fraction(%)        Median Cov     t-Median     Mean Cov       t-Mean
    A1. Monetary policy decisions (scheduled only), window (-15,+15) minutes

    (1,1)   Growth expectations          53             32.5             46.18∗∗∗        (3.46)      98.72∗∗∗       (4.69)
    (1,2)   MP (rate expectations)       86             52.8            −51.88∗∗∗      (−5.18)     −144.70∗∗∗     (−5.11)
    (2,1)   Risk premia                  11              6.7              4.06           (0.15)      29.01∗         (1.87)
    (2,2)   MP (long-end)                13              8.0            −11.74         (−0.20)     −427.63        (−1.19)

    A2. Minutes and press conferences, window (-15,+90) minutes

    (1,1)   Growth expectations          84             51.2             21.26∗∗∗        (5.74)       53.15∗∗∗      (3.98)
    (1,2)   MP (rate expectations)       50             30.5            −17.25∗∗∗      (−3.10)       −31.58∗∗∗    (−6.20)
    (2,1)   Risk premia                  26             15.9             11.63∗∗         (2.49)       17.38∗∗∗      (5.28)
    (2,2)   MP (long-end)                 4              2.4             −8.82∗        (−2.25)        −6.07∗      (−2.42)

    A3. Other events, window (-15,+90) minutes

    (1,1)   Growth expectations          23             65.7            120.78           (1.60)      278.35∗∗∗      (3.23)
    (1,2)   MP (rate expectations)        3              8.6            −60.14         (−1.35)       −55.97       (−1.80)
    (2,1)   Risk premia                   5             14.3             40.81           (0.40)      130.74         (1.81)
    (2,2)   MP (long-end)                 4             11.4            −86.96         (−1.84)       −87.96       (−1.98)

                                                           B. ECB

    News type                        No. events     Fraction(%)        Median Cov     t-Median     Mean Cov       t-Mean
    B1. Monetary policy decisions, window (-15,+15) minutes

    (1,1)   Growth                       89             35.6              2.92∗∗∗        (4.33)        7.64∗∗∗      (5.55)
    (1,2)   MP (rate expect)             131            52.4             −5.33∗∗∗      (−4.01)       −82.46∗∗∗    (−3.43)
    (2,1)   Risk premia                  20              8.0              3.04           (1.08)        6.12∗∗∗      (3.61)
    (2,2)   MP (long-end)                10              4.0            −10.7          (−1.21)       −28.52       (−1.46)

    B2. Press conferences, window (-15,+90) minutes

    (1,1)   Growth                       118            54.1             39.9∗∗∗         (7.04)       54.68∗∗∗     (10.03)
    (1,2)   MP (rate expect)             66             30.3            −22.94∗∗∗      (−4.65)       −42.28∗∗∗    (−6.02)
    (2,1)   Risk premia                  20              9.2             39.52∗          (1.76)       78.44∗∗       (2.83)
    (2,2)   MP (long-end)                14              6.4            −36.2∗∗        (−2.87)       −47.11∗∗     (−2.45)

    B3. Other events, window (-15,+90) minutes

    (1,1)   Growth                       86             60.1             21.99∗∗∗        (3.41)       77.51∗∗∗      (5.08)
    (1,2)   MP (rate expect)             23             16.1             −4.00∗∗       (−2.42)        −6.07∗∗∗    (−5.05)
    (2,1)   Risk premia                  27             18.9             13.03           (0.52)       81.09∗∗∗      (2.90)
    (2,2)   MP (long-end)                 7              4.9             −6.23         (−0.83)       −14.75∗      (−1.92)




                                                               39
 Table V. Effect of Fed’s unconventional policy measures on joint dynamics of
                           stocks and the yield curve
Panel A reports the number of unconventional monetary policy (UMP) events, broken down by major policy programs or
policy phases. The individual programs are described in Online Appendix D. We indicate the first and last observation of key
announcements related to each program or policy phase. The subset of UMP events that contained a novel forward guidance
element is reported as “of which: FG.” Note that summing the number of events over policy programs does not necessarily yield
the total number of UMP events, as in some cases the same event may have contained news about more than one policy program.
Panel B presents the regressions of realized stock-yield covariances on dummy variables for each program, and interactions of
program dummies with a dummy for whether the announcement had a forward guidance component. Robust standard errors are
in parentheses. Covariances are measured over the (-15; +90) minute window and are reported in units of basis points squared.
The regressions are estimated over the sample from 2008 through 2017, controlling for covariances on non-Fed announcement
days.


                                                   A. Summary of UMP events

                                                                      No. annc.           First obs.           Last obs.
        UMP                                                              45              12 Dec 2007          01 Nov 2017
        of which: FG                                                     9               16 Dec 2008          18 Mar 2015

        Phases:
        QE1 (quantitative easing phase 1)                                5               25 Nov 2008          18 Mar 2009
        Exit (early)                                                     3               12 Aug 2009          04 Nov 2009
        QE2 (quantitative easing phase 2)                                5               10 Aug 2010          03 Nov 2010
        MEP (maturity extension program/operation twist)                 4               26 Aug 2011          01 Aug 2012
        QE3 (quantitative easing phase 3)                                3               31 Aug 2012          30 Oct 2013
        Tapering of asset purchases                                      2               22 May 2013          19 Jun 2013
        Exit (late)                                                      9               18 Dec 2013          29 Oct 2014
        Balance sheet wind-down                                          3                26 Jul 2017         01 Nov 2017

                                   B. Regression analysis of realized stock-yield covariances

                                            3m                 2y                 5y                   10y           30y

     QE1                                   154.9**          251.8***          415.5***            316.2***         282.8***
                                            (2.33)             (3.36)            (8.28)             (6.51)           (4.95)
     QE1 × FG                            -1098.0***        -1168.7***         -3041.8**           -2898.7*         -2753.4*
                                           (-10.54)          (-14.51)           (-2.03)            (-1.78)          (-1.72)
     Exit (early)                            38.0*               39.0              83.3              57.0              79.6
                                            (1.72)             (0.95)            (1.48)             (1.26)           (1.64)
     QE2                                     -15.8              -24.3             -12.3              7.01              14.7
                                            (-0.55)           (-0.45)           (-0.12)             (0.07)           (0.15)
     QE3                                  -12.4***           -7.87***              1.53           5.51***           13.9***
                                           (-19.68)           (-6.58)            (1.26)             (5.26)          (15.48)
     QE3 × FG                              11.4***               32.1              29.8              31.4              85.7
                                            (9.42)             (0.91)            (0.68)             (0.82)           (1.21)
     MEP                                    -36.8*              -4.80            129.8             172.2*          241.2***
                                            (-1.81)           (-0.10)            (1.01)             (1.94)           (2.73)
     MEP × FG                                -45.1             238.9             552.6              397.4            281.6
                                            (-0.89)            (1.17)            (1.02)             (0.89)           (0.73)
     Tapering of asset purchases            -5.16*           -66.6***         -146.4***          -148.8***        -121.2***
                                            (-1.65)           (-4.35)           (-3.73)            (-5.12)          (-3.84)
     Exit (late)                          -6.67***              -21.5             -33.5              -27.8            -28.7
                                            (-2.84)           (-1.41)           (-1.05)            (-1.02)          (-1.24)
     Exit (late) × FG                        -23.0          -116.6***         -307.3***           -248.2**          -181.0*
                                            (-1.46)           (-7.62)           (-3.80)            (-2.25)          (-1.90)
     Balance sheet wind-down              -14.5***           -34.9***          -41.0***           -41.8***         -34.3***
                                            (-5.92)           (-6.69)          (-10.51)           (-21.65)         (-32.67)
     Constant                              5.30***            26.3***           39.3***           36.9***           36.5***
                                            (8.40)            (21.97)           (32.31)            (35.23)          (40.59)

     R2                                    0.084              0.027               0.15                 0.18          0.20




                                                              40
Table VI. Effect of ECB’s unconventional policy measures on joint dynamics of
                          stocks and the yield curve
The table summarizes results for UMP by the ECB. The regressions are estimated over the sample from 2007 though 2017. See
caption to Table V for further details.


                                               A. Summary of UMP events

                                                                    No. annc.         First obs.      Last obs.
        UMP                                                             87          22 Aug 2007     26 Oct 2017
        of which: FG                                                     9          04 Jul 2013     21 Jul 2016
        Phases:
        LTRO1 (long-term refinancing operations   phase 1)              15          22 Aug 2007     17 Nov 2008
        USD liquidity (swap lines with the Fed)                         23          12 Dec 2007     24 Jan 2014
        LTRO2 (long-term refinancing operations   phase 2)              15          07 May 2009     06 Oct 2011
        CBPP (covered bond purchases)                                   13          07 May 2009     02 Oct 2014
        SMP (securities market program)                                  8          09 May 2010     06 Oct 2011
        LTRO3 (long-term refinancing operations   phase 3)               5          01 Dec 2011     28 Feb 2012
        OMT (outright monetary transactions)                             6           26 Jul 2012    30 Nov 2012
        PSPP (public sector debt purchase)                              21          06 Nov 2014     26 Oct 2017
        LTRO4 (long-term refinancing operations   phase 4)               8          05 Jun 2014     10 Mar 2016
        CSPP (corporate sector bond purchases)                          12          10 Mar 2016     26 Oct 2017

                                 B. Regression analysis of realized stock-yield covariances

                                        3m                     2y                    5y                10y

           LTRO1                        8.24                  66.1**                62.7**             38.9*
                                      (0.82)                   (2.14)               (2.00)            (1.79)
           USD liquidity                9.90                 154.4***             140.9***          115.5***
                                      (0.58)                   (3.27)               (2.92)            (2.81)
           LTRO2                       -17.5                     7.14                21.0              21.1
                                     (-0.72)                   (0.32)               (0.69)            (0.79)
           CBPP                       -0.067                     22.5                38.9              50.5
                                     (-0.00)                   (0.64)               (0.88)            (1.28)
           SMP                         -93.6                   102.5               215.7**          198.5***
                                     (-1.55)                   (1.56)               (2.43)            (2.59)
           LTRO3                       -20.9                     29.1             115.0***          227.8***
                                     (-1.15)                   (1.37)               (3.77)            (3.35)
           OMT                         -2.31                  67.8***             232.8***          275.0***
                                     (-0.55)                   (2.91)               (2.92)            (3.34)
           PSPP                      -19.4**                 -45.3***              -56.4**            -62.5*
                                     (-2.15)                  (-2.86)              (-2.42)           (-1.87)
           LTRO4                       -10.7                    -12.7                -31.8             -34.7
                                     (-0.42)                  (-1.01)              (-1.05)           (-0.86)
           CSPP                         26.3                     11.7               -53.1*             -62.6
                                      (1.60)                   (0.74)              (-1.74)           (-1.61)
           FG                        -24.7**                  -48.7**                -47.3             -19.3
                                     (-1.98)                  (-2.11)              (-0.84)           (-0.50)
           Constant                  2.40***                  16.3***              24.4***          26.1***
                                      (4.73)                  (27.26)              (36.34)           (41.76)

           R2                          0.006                  0.035                 0.054             0.065




                                                              41
Table VII. Effect of unconventional policy measures on joint dynamics of stocks
                      and the yield curve: BOE and BOJ
The table summarizes results for UMP by the BOE and BOJ. The regressions are estimated over the sample from 2008 though
2017 for the BOE and from 2003 though 2017 for the BOJ. See caption to Table V for further details.


                                              A. Summary of UMP events

                                                            No. events           First obs.          Last obs.
           BOE
           UMP                                                  32              19 Jan 2009         04 Aug 2016
           of which: FG                                          9              04 Jul 2013         16 Sept 2015
           Phases:
           USD liquidity (swap lines with the Fed)              17              02 May 2008         17 Jun 2014
           APF1 (asset purchase facility phase 1)               12              19 Jan 2009         04 Feb 2010
           APF2 (asset purchase facility phase 2)                5              06 Oct 2011         29 Feb 2012
           APF3 (asset purchase facility phase 3)                4               05 Jul 2012        26 Feb 2013
           APF4 (asset purchase facility phase 4)                1              04 Aug 2016         04 Aug 2016

           BOJ
           UMP                                                  39              16 Sept 2003        21 Sep 2016
           Phases:
           USD liquidity (swap lines with the Fed)              15              18 Sep 2008         29 Jul 2016
           QEP (quantitative easing phase 1)                     3              10 Oct 2003         09 Mar 2006
           Stocks / REITS                                        6              16 Sep 2003         29 Jul 2016
           QEAPP (quantitative easing phase 2)                  18              19 Dec 2008         22 Jan 2013
           QQE (quantitative and qualitative easing)             3              04 Apr 2013         19 Nov 2015
           QQE with negative rates                               2              29 Jan 2016         29 Jul 2016
           QQE with yield curve control                          1              21 Sep 2016         21 Sep 2016

                                B. Regression analysis of realized stock-yield covariances

                             BOE                                                         BOJ
                                3m              10y                                                         10y

         USD liquidity          -18.2           74.2*                USD liquidity                           11.2
                               (-0.88)          (1.84)                                                     (1.50)
         APF1                    11.4            -1.82               QEP                                  -9.99**
                               (1.25)          (-0.10)                                                    (-2.38)
         APF2                  15.2**            -41.2               Stocks/REITS                          37.6*
                               (2.03)          (-0.86)                                                     (1.65)
         APF3                    29.1            8.15                QEAPP                                  -15.8
                               (1.25)           (0.48)                                                    (-1.06)
         APF4                 -99.5***       -310.5***               QQE                                 -80.4***
                              (-98.11)       (-557.01)                                                    (-5.19)
         FG                     -0.34         -21.5***               QQE with negative rates              -154.2*
                               (-0.15)         (-3.04)                                                    (-1.76)
         Constant               0.059          20.4***               QQE with yield curve control        28.4***
                               (0.06)          (36.68)                                                   (164.12)
                                                                     Constant                            5.63***
                                                                                                          (32.57)

         R2                    0.000           0.013                 R2                                    0.041




                                                           42
Table VIII. Variance decompositions of yield changes and stock returns around
                           communication events
The table presents variance decompositions of shocks to two- and ten-year yield and to stock returns around scheduled FOMC
decision announcements (window -15 to +15 minutes) and ECB press conferences (window -15 to +90 minutes). The numbers
in each row report the variance ratio, i.e., the fraction of variance of yield changes (stock returns) explained by each structural
shock. The decomposition is obtained by imposing sign and monotonicity restrictions. The results are based on 2000 simulations
of rotation matrices that satisfy the restrictions. We report the average variance ratios across simulations. T-statistics in
parentheses are obtained by diving the average variance ratio by its standard deviation across simulations.


                                          A. Fed: scheduled monetary policy decisions

                                                 growth           monetary policy           risk preferences
                      2y yield changes             0.49                 0.43                      0.09
                                                 ( 2.79)               ( 2.51)                   ( 1.21)
                      10y yield changes            0.08                 0.35                      0.58
                                                 ( 0.89)               ( 4.37)                   ( 6.14)
                      stock returns                0.11                 0.87                      0.03
                                                 ( 0.85)               ( 7.28)                   ( 0.90)

                                                   B. ECB: press conferences

                                                 growth           monetary policy           risk preferences
                      2y yield changes             0.50                 0.42                      0.09
                                                 ( 1.82)               ( 1.66)                   ( 1.02)
                      10y yield changes            0.12                 0.25                      0.63
                                                 ( 0.96)               ( 1.94)                   ( 4.44)
                      stock returns                0.31                 0.59                      0.10
                                                 ( 1.11)               ( 2.52)                   ( 0.92)




                                                               43
                                                                               Panel A. Fed

            Abs. stock returns (bps)                                                           Abs. yield changes (bps)

                                       4
           30


                                       3

           20

                                       2


           10
                                       1


                1.37    0.97    0.13
            0                                   7.38    4.38   3.85     2.93   2.19        1.06        2.60   1.90   1.60   0.90   0.40   0.58    0.61   0.48   0.21
                                       0
                MPD     PC     MIN              3m      2y     5y 10y 30y                  3m          2y     5y 10y 30y           3m     2y       5y 10y 30y
                                                               MPD                                            PC                                 MIN



                                                                               Panel B. ECB

            Abs. stock returns (bps)                                                           Abs. yield changes (bps)

                                       2.5
           15


                                           2


           10
                                       1.5



                                           1
            5


                                           .5

                 0.15          0.31
            0                                          2.52           1.06         0.56         0.28                        3.28   2.19          1.67       1.12
                                           0
                MPD            PC                      3m             2y           5y           10y                         3m     2y            5y         10y
                                                                             MPD                                                          PC




Figure 1. Reactions of stocks and yields to central bank communication events
The figure summarizes the effect of monetary policy communication events on absolute stock market returns and absolute yield
changes (in basis points). Bars present slope coefficients from a regression of absolute stock returns (or absolute yield changes)
on a constant and a dummy variable indicating a type of communication. Those types are: monetary policy decisions (MPD),
press conferences (PC), minutes releases (MIN) and, for the BOE, releases of inflation reports (IR). The height of the bar
measures the incremental effect (in bps) of communication events relative to the baseline variation in asset prices absent central
bank news. Error bars indicate 95% robust confidence interval. The number superimposed on each bar reports the regression
slope coefficient divided by the regression intercept. For example, a ratio of 2 means that absolute returns are 200% higher
around an event relative to their baseline variation on other days (over a window of the same length as the event window). The
event window is from -15 to +15 minutes around MPDs and from -15 to +90 minutes around other events. Detailed regression
estimates are discussed in Internet Appendix A.




                                                                                          44
                                                             Panel C. BOE

                         Abs. stock returns (bps)                                                Abs. yield change (bps)

      15                                                               4




                                                                       3
      10


                                                                       2

       5

                                                                       1


           0.29                    0.27                    0.18
       0                                                                        4.94   1.40            3.95        1.24       1.56   0.65
                                                                       0
           MPD                     IR                      MIN                  3m     10y             3m          10y        3m     10y
                                                                                   MPD                        IR                  MIN



                                                              Panel D. BOJ

                         Abs. stock returns (bps)                                         Abs. yield changes (10Y yield, bps)

      50
                                                                           .3

      40
                                                                       .25


      30
                                                                           .2


      20
                                                                       .15


      10                                                                   .1


                  0.67                              1.11                                      0.54                         0.35
       0                                                               .05
                  MPD                           MIN                                           MPD                          MIN




Figure 1. Reactions of stocks and yields to central bank communication events
                                 (continued)




                                                                  45
Figure 2. Term structures of realized stock-yield covariances on non-monetary
                                  policy days
The figure presents distribution of realized stock-yield covariances across available maturities on non-monetary policy days.
Realized covariances are constructed by summing up products of one-minute stock returns with yield changes each day, and are
reported in units of basis points squared. Mean covariances are marked with circles. Box borders indicate the upper and lower
quartiles, the line within the box is the median. The whiskers identify the largest and smallest adjacent values calculated as
upper quartile +1.5×IQR (interquartile range) and lower quartile −1.5×IQR. Extreme values are not shown.




                                                             46
                 GDP growth                              Unemployment                                  Inflation
     400                                      400                                      400




     200                                      200                                      200




       0                                        0                                        0




    −200                                     −200                                     −200




    −400                                     −400                                     −400
           3m    2y      5y      10y   30y          3m    2y      5y      10y   30y          3m   2y      5y      10y   30y
                      tmp_matn                                 tmp_matn                                tmp_matn


       Figure 3. Term structure of stock-yield covariances around US macro
                                 announcements
The figure plots the distribution of the realized stock-yield covariances around macroeconomic announcements. The time stamps
of macroeconomic announcements are from Bloomberg and we use the following tickers: USURTOT Index for unemployment
rate (released together with non-farm payrolls); CPI CHNG Index for CPI inflation rate (other CPI indices are announced at
the same time); GDP CQOQ Index for GDP growth (advance announcement). Covariances are constructed over the (-15,+60)
minute window around the release. Underlying the plot, there are 243 inflation releases, 243 unemployment releases, and 81
GDP release.




                                                                47
                     A. PC on 07Feb2008           B. MPD on 03Nov2011            C. PC on 03Nov2011         D. Speech on 26Jul2012

           150                                                           600                          250
                                                 0


                                                                                                      200


           100                               −500                        400
                                                                                                      150



                                                                                                      100
            50                              −1,000                       200


                                                                                                       50


                                            −1,500
             0                                                               0                          0
                       3m 2y 5y 10y                   3m 2y 5y 10y                 3m 2y 5y 10y                 3m 2y 5y 10y




    Figure 4. Term structures of stock-yield covariances: selected ECB events
The figure presents the term structure of realized stock-yield covariances around selected ECB communication events:
press conference on Feb 7, 2008; monetary policy decision (rate cut) and press conference on Nov 3, 2011 (Draghi’s first
communications as the President of the ECB), and Draghi’s speech on July 26, 2012. Covariances are reported in units of basis
points squared.




                     A. MPD on 22Jan2008 (unsched.)              B. MPD on 16Dec2008                  C. MPD on 09Aug2011

           2,000                                            0                                  500




           1,000                                                                               400



                                                                                               300
                 0                                      −500


                                                                                               200
          −1,000


                                                                                               100
                                                       −1,000
          −2,000

                                                                                                  0
                         3m 2y 5y 10y 30                         3m 2y 5y 10y 30                      2y      5y   10y    30




     Figure 5. Term structures of stock-yield covariances: selected Fed events
The figure presents the term structure of realized stock-yield covariances around Fed communication events: unscheduled
FOMC decision announcement on Jan 22, 2008 and two scheduled FOMC announcements on Dec 16, 2008 and Aug 09, 2011.
Covariances are reported in units of basis points squared.




                                                                        48
                                                        Panel A. ECB

      2800
                                                                             08oct2008
      2000
      1200

                   before MPD: −24h to −15min
      1000
                   At MPD: −15min to +15min




       500


                                                                             15oct2008
         0



     −500
                                                                             08oct2008


    −1000
                1998                            2003                 2008                      2013                           2018


                                                         Panel B. Fed
      6500
      5500                                                                   08oct2008
      4500
      3500
      2500                                                                                 09aug2011
                                                                            16sep2008
                                                                             29oct2008
      1500
      1300                                                                   08oct2008                 before MPD: −24h to −15min
      1000                                                               22jan2008                     At MPD: −15min to +15min



       500

         0              15oct1998          17sep2001
                                      03jan2001

     −500

                                        18apr2001
    −1000
    −1300
    −3000
    −4000
                                                                               18mar2009
    −5000
                1998                            2003                 2008                      2013                           2018



 Figure 6. Realized covariances of stocks with 5-year yield 24 hours before and
                        at the monetary policy decision
The figure presents realized covariances of stocks and five-year yields from 24 hours before policy decision to -15 minutes before
(gray triangles) and from -15 minutes to +15 minutes around the decision (red circles). The y-axes are broken to accommodate
outliers. The realizations at unscheduled MPD announcements are indicated with black-filled markers. Those dates are Oct
8 and Oct 15, 2008 for the ECB and Jan 2, 2001; Apr 18, 2001; Sep 9, 2001; Jan 22, 2008; Oct 8, 2008 for the Fed. The
black-filled triangles mark covariances in the 24 hours before an unscheduled announcement.



                                                               49
                              ECB: PC (5y yield)                                                                           Fed: PC and MIN (5y yield)

   600                                                                                          1000
                                                                                                                                             07oct2008
                                                                                                 750




                                                                 4jun2013
                                                                                                                                              19nov2008
                                                                                                 500
                                                                                                 300




                                                                                                                                                                   19jun2013
                                                                                                                                                 1jun2010




                                                                                                                                                                                     8jul2015
   400

                                                                                                 200


   200
                                                                                                 100



                                                                                                      0
     0


                                                                                                −100
                                                                                                                                                      19jun2013                21aug2013
  −200                                              04jul2013                                                                                                                  10jul2013
                                                                      10mar2016
                                                               22oct2015                                                           MIN         PC
                                                               03dec2015
                                                                                                −200

          1998         2003            2008             2013                             2018                1998     2003            2008                     2013                             2018


                         BOE: IR and MIN (10y yield)                                                                         BOJ: MIN (10y yield)

                                                                                                                                                            17mar2011
                                                                                                200
                                                           20feb2013




   100



                                                                                                150
     0


                                                                                                                                            06nov2008
                                                                                                100                                                                   14jun2013

  −100                                                                      17jul2013




                                                                                                 50
  −200



                                                                                                  0
                                  IR          MIN                      04aug2016
  −300
          1998         2003            2008             2013                             2018             1998      2003             2008                     2013                              2018




     Figure 7. Realized stock-yield covariances around communication events
The figure presents the realized covariances of stocks and yields around central bank communication events. We consider the
following events: press conferences for the ECB, minutes’ released and press conferences for the Fed, minutes’ releases and
inflation report releases for the BOE, and minutes releases for the BOJ. Covariances are computed using a window from -15 to
+90 minutes of the time-stamp of the event. Vertical lines indicate break dates in average covariances identified with Bai and
Perron (1998) test (see Table III for details).




                                                                                        50
                                                                           Panel A. Fed
                             80                                                                                       400




                                                                                     Mean covariance (bps−squared)
                                                                                                                      200
                             60
    Fraction of events (%)




                                                                                                                        0
                             40



                                                                                                                     −200
                             20


                                                                                                                     −400

                             0
                                     MPD             MIN/PC         OTHER                                                          MPD      MIN/PC             OTHER

                                      (1,1) Growth         (1,2) MP (rate expect)                                    (2,1) Risk premia   (2,2) MP (long−end)


                                                                          Panel B. ECB

                             60                                                                                       100
                                                                                     Mean covariance (bps−squared)




                                                                                                                       50
    Fraction of events (%)




                             40


                                                                                                                        0



                             20
                                                                                                                      −50




                                                                                                                     −100
                             0
                                     MPD              PC            OTHER                                                          MPD         PC              OTHER

                                      (1,1) Growth         (1,2) MP (rate expect)                                    (2,1) Risk premia   (2,2) MP (long−end)




                                  Figure 8. Classification of central bank communication events
The figure accompanies the results reported in Table IV, and displays frequencies of events and mean covariance by news type.




                                                                                    51
                            Panel A. Fed: scheduled monetary policy decision announcements



50                                            40                                             0
40                                            30                                           -100

30                                            20                                           -200

20                                                                                         -300
                                              10
                                                                                           -400
10                                             0
                                                                                           -500
 0                                            -10
                                                                                           -600
-10                                           -20
                                                                                           -700
-20                                           -30
                                                                                           -800
                                              -40
       2000   2004   2008    2012   2016             2000   2004   2008   2012   2016              2000   2004   2008   2012   2016




                                           Panel B. ECB: press conferences



                                                                                            300
                                              15
30
                                                                                            200
                                              10
20                                                                                          100

                                               5                                             0
10
                                                                                           -100
                                               0
 0                                                                                         -200
                                               -5                                          -300
-10
                                              -10                                          -400

-20                                                                                        -500
      2000    2004   2008    2012   2016            2000    2004   2008   2012   2016             2000    2004   2008   2012   2016




        Figure 9. Historical decompositions of yields changes and stock returns
The figure presents historical decompositions of shocks to two- and ten-year yields and stock returns around scheduled FOMC
decision announcements (window -15 to +15 minutes) and ECB press conferences (window -15 to +90 minutes). Shocks are
normalized to have zero mean and are cumulated over time. The decomposition is obtained by imposing sign and monotonicity
restrictions.




                                                              52
                                            Appendix

                                          Illustrative model

To formalize the intuition underlying Section I and our interpretation of the empirical results, we
present a stylized model for the joint dynamics of stocks and nominal yields in this Appendix.
We assume there are four state variables that describe the economy: expected inflation τt , expected
growth gt , a monetary policy factor ft , and a price-of-risk factor xt . All state variables follow AR(1)
processes with independent shocks. Written compactly Ft = (τt , gt , ft , xt )′ ,

                                        Ft+1 = µ + ΦFt + Σεt+1 ,                                      (A.1)

where Φ, Σ are diagonal matrices with elements φk , and σk on the diagonal, k = {τ, g, f, x}, and
εt+1 = (ετt+1 , εgt+1 , εft+1 , εxt+1 )′ . We assume that Ft is stationary with elements 0 < φk < 1. To
keep the model simple, the conditional covariance matrix of shocks ΣΣ′ is constant.27 The nominal
                    (1)
short rate it := yt is:

                                      it = δ0 + δτ τt + δg gt + δf ft .                               (A.2)

The nominal log SDF which prices nominal assets is mt+1 = −it − 0.5Λ′t Λt − Λ′t εt+1 , where Λt is
a linear function of Ft , where market prices of risk are Λt = Σ−1 (λ0 + Λ1 Ft ), where λ0 is a (4×1)
vector and Λ1 is a (4×4) matrix of parameters (restrictions to be specified below). The real log
SDF which prices real assets is mrt+1 = mt+1 + πt+1 , where πt+1 is one-period realized inflation (log
change in the price level).
Realized inflation equals expected inflation plus an orthogonal shock πt+1 = τt + επt+1 , thus
τt = Et (πt+1 ). Similarly, the real dividend growth rate evolves as expected growth plus an
orthogonal shock ∆dt+1 = gt + εdt+1 , thus gt = Et (∆dt+1 ). Shocks επt+1 and εdt+1 are uncorrelated
with other shocks in the economy.
We assume that investors require compensation for facing shocks to expected growth εgt+1 and to
expected inflation ετt+1 (shocks to realizations, επt+1 and εdt+1 , are not priced), and that risk premia
move on a single price-of-risk factor xt . This means that the only non-zero elements in Λ1 are
elements (1,4) and (2,4), which we denote as λτ x and λgx , respectively. We additionally set λ0 = 0
for simplicity, implying that the non-time component of risk premia is tied to the unconditional
mean of xt . Under these assumptions, shocks to the nominal log-SDF have the form:
                                                                             
                                                     1       τ      1      g
                        − (mt+1 − Et (mt+1 )) =        λτ x εt+1 + λgx εt+1 xt .                    (A.3)
                                                    στ              σg

Several comments are in order. The short rate equation (A.2) captures the intuition of forward
looking Taylor rules. The variable ft is a reduced-form way of summarizing the effect of monetary
policy on interest rates beyond just iid monetary policy shocks.28 The ex-ante real rate, rt =
  27
     While there is clear evidence of time-varying volatility of stock returns and the yield curve, the link
between volatility and risk premia remains debated. Using a rich model with time-varying volatility, Cieslak
and Povala (2016) show that the cross-section of yields is well modelled with purely Gaussian dynamics, and
factors driving volatility of yields have a minimal impact on the cross-section of yields.
  28
     For example, Cieslak (2018) shows that monetary policy affects short rate expectations in a persistent
fashion beyond the systematic policy response to macroeconomic factors. Modeling the short rate with a

                                                     53
it − Et πt+1 , is rt = δ0 + (δτ − 1)τt + δg gt + δf ft . Note that when δτ = 1, the ex-ante real rate only
depends on expected growth and the monetary policy factor, but not expected inflation. If δτ > 1,
the ex-ante real rate is affected by expected inflation, introducing inflation non-neutrality.
The price-of-risk factor xt determines the variation of risk premia in the model. Its shocks can
be viewed as shocks to preferences that are not related to fundamentals.29 This specification is
grounded by the empirical facts. There is ample evidence by now that conditional risk premia on
stocks and bonds move on a higher frequency than the typical business cycle frequency and are
therefore hard to explain with macroeconomic fundamentals.30 The price-of-risk factor xt does not
affect the short rate, i.e. δx = 0, which implies that the central bank does not directly respond to
variation in risk premia.


Nominal yield curve
                                                       (n)
Bond yields have the well-known affine form: yt = An + Bn′ Ft , with A1 = δ0 and B1 = δ1 . The
model decomposes shocks to yields in equation (2) as
              (n)        (n)
            yt+1 − Et (yt+1 ) = Bn′ Σεt+1 = Bnτ στ ετt+1 + Bng σg εgt+1 + Bnf σf εft+1 + Bnx σx εxt+1 .   (A.4)

To understand how shocks affect the cross-section of yields, we analyze Bn coefficients as function
of maturity n. Equations (A.1), (A.2) and (A.3) together lead to the following loadings of yields
on the state variables:
                                     δk 1 − φnk
                               Bnk =              for k = {τ, g, f }                                      (A.5)
                                     n 1 − φk
                                     n−1                    g
                               Bnx =            τ
                                           (−Bn−1   λτ x − Bn−1        x
                                                                λgx + Bn−1 φx ),                          (A.6)
                                       n
Equation (A.5) shows that as long as the state variables have a positive effect on the short rate
(δk > 0) and are persistent but stationary (0 < φk < 1), Bnk loadings are also positive. In this case,
yields covary positively with expected inflation, expected growth and with the monetary policy
factor. The positive loadings δτ and δg are consistent with Taylor rule estimates. These estimates
also suggest that 0 < δg < δτ , and δg < 1, whereas δτ could be above unity (akin to the so-called
Taylor principle), depending on the monetary policy regime. Coefficient δf is a reduced-form way
of modeling the strength with which the central bank can affect the yield curve.
The persistence of state variables determines their effects across maturities. With high persistence
(φτ close to 1), expected inflation has a “level” effect on the term structure, i.e. Bnτ is nearly
flat across maturities. Less persistent variables that are the main driver of the real rate (gt and

monetary policy shock and a smoothing component would not qualitatively change the intuition arising from
this setting.
  29
     Models with a single source of variation in the price of risk and only a subset of shocks that are priced
have been studied by Lettau and Wachter (2011), Campbell et al. (2017), Ang et al. (2008), among others.
In these models, the price of risk is assumed to follow a univariate process that is independent of other state
variables. The role of independent preference shocks for explaining stock market valuations has been also
highlighted by Albuquerque et al. (2016).
  30
     See Kelly and Pruitt (2013) and Martin (2017) for evidence on equity market risk premia and Cieslak
and Povala (2015) for evidence on bond risk premia. In particular, Cieslak and Povala (2015) find that risk
premium dynamics in bonds are orthogonal to both real rate and inflation expectations.


                                                        54
ft ) vary at a higher, business-cycle, frequency. Accordingly their Bn -loadings decline faster across
maturities than Bnτ .31
The price-of-risk factor xt determines the variation in bond risk premia (and yield term premia):

                           (n)    1         (n)               τ           g
                     Et (ext+1 ) + V art (ext+1 ) = −(n − 1)(Bn−1 λτ x + Bn−1 λgx )xt .                      (A.7)
                                  2
Intuitively, positive shocks to xt lead to a decline in the bond risk premium if coefficients λτ x and
λgx are positive (as both Bnτ > 0 and Bng > 0). Positive signs of λτ x and λgx capture the notion
of expected growth and expected inflation being procyclical, and bonds providing insurance in bad
times.32 In that case, positive shocks to the price-of-risk factor xt decrease yields more at longer
maturities (Bnx decreases with maturity). In general, this effect survives, albeit weakens, if only
shocks to expected growth are priced with λgx > 0, as in a regime when inflation expectations are
very stable.33


Stocks

Under model assumptions, the log price-dividend ratio is also affine in the state vector, pdt =
As + Bs′ Ft . Using log-linearized returns, unexpected stock returns can be decomposed as:

         rs,t+1 − Et (rs,t+1 ) = κ1 Bs′ Σεt+1 + εdt+1                                                        (A.8)
                              = κ1 (Bsτ στ ετt+1 + Bsg σg εgt+1 + Bsf σf εft+1 + Bsx σx εxt+1 ) + εdt+1 ,    (A.9)

with loadings

                                1 − δτ                1 − δg                        δf
                         Bsτ =           , Bsg =              ,        Bsf = −             ,                (A.10)
                               1 − κ1 φτ            1 − κ1 φg                    1 − κ1 φf
                               −κ1 (Bsτ λτ x + Bsg λgx )
                         Bsx =                           ,                                                  (A.11)
                                      1 − κ1 φx
where the linearization constant κ1 is slightly less than one and depends only on the unconditional
average of pdt .
Stocks are unaffected by expected inflation (Bsτ = 0) if δτ = 1. If δτ > 1 positive shocks to expected
inflation decrease stock prices (Bsτ < 0) via the discount rate channel as they raise the real short
rate. Shocks to growth expectations raise stock prices (Bsg > 0) if 0 < δg < 1, i.e. the real short
rate increases less than one for one with growth expectations. Monetary policy shocks decrease
stock prices as Bsf < 0 if δf > 0. Similar to bond risk premia, stock risk premia vary with xt :
  31
     This intuition is confirmed by the calibration in Cieslak and Povala (2015).
  32
     With procyclical inflation, inflation is low when marginal utility is high and covt (στ ετt+1 , mt+1 −
Et (mt+1 )) = −λτ x xt < 0. This means λτ x > 0 assuming that xt , the volatility of the SDF, is a positive
process. Similar logic applies to the pricing of growth shocks.
  33
     The result is overturned with countercyclical inflation (when λτ x < 0), such as in the US in the 1970s and
80s. However, data from late 1990s, the period we analyze, support the assumption of procylical inflation
(e.g., Burkhardt and Hasseltoft, 2012; Campbell et al., 2015). Given the high correlation of inflation dynamics
across advanced economies in this period (Jotikasthira et al., 2015), the evidence extends to other countries
in our sample outside the US.




                                                         55
                                       1
                         Et (exst+1 ) + V art (exst+1 ) = κ1 (Bsτ λτ x + Bsg λgx )xt .             (A.12)
                                       2
With market price of risk parameters λτ x > 0 and λgx > 0, positive price-of-risk shocks lower stock
prices (Bsx < 0) and increase stock risk premia ((Bsτ λτ x + Bsg λgx ) > 0) if the pricing of growth shock
dominates the inflation effect (as with δτ ≤ 1). In this case, stocks are risky assets and bonds are
safe; thus, upon a positive price-of-risk shock, negative stock returns are coupled with lower yields
(and higher bond prices).




                                                      56
