                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE ECONOMETRICS AND ECONOMICS OF
                 THE EMPLOYMENT EFFECTS OF MINIMUM WAGES:
              GETTING FROM KNOWN UNKNOWNS TO KNOWN KNOWNS

                                        David Neumark

                                      Working Paper 25043
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25043


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 2018, Revised November 2018




This paper was given as the keynote address for the EVA-MIN conference “Evaluation of
Minimum Wages” at DIW Berlin on July 4-5, 2018 and was prepared for the special issue on
Minimum Wages in the German Economic Review. I am grateful to William Wascher for long-
standing research collaboration, and to Jeff Clemens, Kyle Colangelo, Matthew Harding,
Jonathan Meer, Joan Monras, David Powell, Carsten Schroeder, Evan Totty, and Weilong Zhang
for helpful comments and discussions of this paper. Some of the material in this paper is covered,
in much less detail, in Neumark (2018). The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Econometrics and Economics of the Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Getting
from Known Unknowns to Known Knowns
David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 25043
September 2018, Revised November 2018
JEL No. J23,J38

                                         ABSTRACT

I discuss the econometrics and the economics of past research on the effects of minimum wages
on employment in the United States. My intent is to try to identify key questions raised in the
recent literature, and some from the earlier literature, which I think hold the most promise for
understanding the conflicting evidence and arriving at a more definitive answer about the
employment effects of minimum wages. My secondary goal is to discuss how we can narrow the
range of uncertainty about the likely effects of the large minimum wage increases becoming more
prevalent in the United States. I discuss some insights from both theory and past evidence that
may be informative about the effects of high minimum wages, and try to emphasize what
research can be done now and in the near future to provide useful evidence to policymakers on
the results of the coming high minimum wage experiment, whether in the United States or in
other countries.


David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
I. Introduction

        The United States is embarking, in at least some regions, on an experiment of using high

minimum wages to try to increase incomes of workers and to reduce poverty. Figure 1 shows state

minimum wages as of Jan. 1, 2018. There are now 29 states (plus the District of Columbia) with

minimum wages above the federal minimum wage, with an average difference across states of 30.2

percent. As a result, the federal minimum wage now provides a floor for an increasingly narrow set of

states, concentrated in the South (see Figure 2). Moreover, California, Massachusetts, New York, Seattle,

and Washington, DC have legislated either current or future minimum wages of $15, other localities may

follow, and a change in the national political alignment could result in a $15 national minimum. 1

        Some economists claim with confidence that a $15 minimum wage will not result in job loss

(e.g., Reich, 2016). Others argue that a $15 minimum wage will lead to huge job losses (e.g., Even and

Macpherson, 2017). These divergent views are also reflected in the media. For example, conflicting

titles in articles from Forbes and The American Prospect read, respectively, “A Statewide $15 Minimum

Wage is a Bad Idea,” 2 and “Why a $15 Minimum Wage is Good Economics.” 3

        I regard such confidence regarding the effects of a $15 minimum wage as badly misplaced, for

two reasons. First, although one might think that we know pretty much everything about the employment

effects of minimum wages in the United States, given the scores of papers written, using ever-richer data

and more-refined empirical techniques, the debate among researchers about whether minimum wages

reduce employment, and if so by how much, remains intense and unsettled. Second, even if one has a

strong view of what the U.S. literature says about the employment effects of past minimum wage

increases, this may provide much less guidance in projecting the consequences of much larger minimum

wage increases than those studied in the prior literature. 4 Predicting the effects of minimum wage



1
  A $15 federal minimum wage was part of the Democratic Party platform in the 2016 elections.
2
  This was in reference to Virginia. See https://www.forbes.com/sites/adammillsap/2017/03/10/a-statewide-15-
minimum-wage-is-a-bad-idea/#4817ea465d4a (viewed June 24, 2018).
3
  See http://prospect.org/article/why-15-minimum-wage-good-economics (viewed June 24, 2018).
4
  The past literature may also be less informative about the effects of minimum wages at a more limited geographic
scale, such as cities. For example, there may be more scope for business relocation (or choosing alternative
locations for new businesses) in response to a local minimum wage.

                                                         1
increases of many dollars, based on research studying much smaller increases, is inherently risky for the

usual statistical reasons. But the problem is potentially exacerbated because the reduced-form estimates

on which the prior literature is based may fail to capture changes in underlying behavior as high minimum

wages affect a far greater share of workers. 5 The same issues carry over to large minimum wage

increases elsewhere, such as the recent introduction of a minimum wage in Germany in 2015, starting at a

relatively high 8.50 Euro.

        My main goal in this paper is to delve into the econometrics and the economics of past research

on the effects of minimum wages on employment in the United States. My intention is not to relitigate

the debate about research on minimum wages and employment, which has been synthesized and reviewed

extensively. Instead, my intent is to try to identify key questions raised in the recent literature, and some

from the earlier literature, which I think hold the most promise for understanding the conflicting evidence

and arriving at a more definitive answer about the employment effects of minimum wages.

        My secondary goal is to discuss how we can narrow the range of uncertainty about the likely

effects of the large minimum wage increases becoming more prevalent in the United States. I discuss

some insights from both theory and past evidence that may be informative about the effects of high

minimum wages. Although one might argue that we first need to do more to settle the question of the

effects of past, smaller increases on which we have more evidence (hence my first goal), I also try to

emphasize what research can be done now and in the near future to provide useful evidence to

policymakers on the results of the coming high minimum wage experiment.

        My review and discussion focus on the U.S. context and evidence. The U.S. experience

dominates the literature because of three-plus decades of significant cross-state variation in minimum

wages; and the very large minimum wage increases we are likely to see even more of in the United States

will likely spur even more work on U.S. minimum wages. But the roadmap to future research on

minimum wages should go through other countries as well, for three reasons. First, such evidence will



5
 For example, Holtz-Eakin and Gitis (2015) estimated, based on 2014 data, that 55.1 million workers would have
been directly affected by raising the federal minimum wage to $15 by 2020.

                                                       2
allow researchers to test, in a different context, explanations and hypotheses that arise in studying

minimum wages in the United States. Second, policymakers in other countries need evidence on the

effects of the minimum wages they adopt. Third, and most important, research in other countries can

provide evidence that the U.S. setting cannot provide, such as effects of different institutions for setting

minimum wages (like the U.K. Low-Pay Commission, or collective bargaining in other countries), and

the effects of implementing a minimum wage where there previously was not one – as in Germany, where

the newly founded Minimum Wage Commission will monitor the effects and give policy

recommendations in the future.

II. A Brief Research Overview

II.1. A Broad Summary

        Regardless of one’s precise view of what the U.S. minimum wage literature says about the

employment effects of minimum wages, and which studies one finds most convincing, it is clear that there

is considerable variation in the magnitude of estimated employment effects across studies.

        The evidence for United States has been summarized and reviewed extensively over the past few

decades. See Brown et al. (1982), Card and Krueger (1995), and Neumark and Wascher (2007, 2008) for

earlier reviews, and Belman and Wolfson (2014, 2016) for the most recent comprehensive reviews. 6

Based on this research, the debate regarding the U.S. evidence is often characterized as being about

whether the elasticity for low-skilled groups is equal to (or more precisely indistinguishable from) zero, or

more likely in the range of −0.1 to −0.2. But there are also larger negative estimates in the literature (e.g.,

Clemens and Wither, 2016, and see Table 1 below), and occasional large positive estimates (most

notably, Card and Krueger, 1994). 7

        Although my focus in this paper is on U.S. evidence, it is interesting to compare the above survey

with evidence for European countries, although I leave it for future work to synthesize the European


6
  There are also a few recent meta-analyses of the employment effects of minimum wages. See Neumark (2016) for
references to some of these, as well as criticism of their methods.
7
  While this study is frequently cited as showing no evidence of employment effects from minimum wages (e.g.,
Schmitt, 2015), their results indicate that the increase in New Jersey’s minimum wage led to faster employment
growth, with an elasticity of 0.73.

                                                       3
literature to try to identify the key reasons for differences across studies. There is no systematic survey of

the large and growing body of European evidence, but some observations can be made. First, it seems

fair to say that the debate about minimum wage effects in these countries – as reflected in the literature –

is similar to that in the United States, with a number of studies finding either no employment effects or

disemployment effects in the range of U.S. studies, but also some outliers. We also might expect more

variation in the international evidence, given that labor market institutions vary across countries, and the

lack of subnational minimums in most countries implies that different identification strategies are used. A

brief discussion of some studies (with no claim of being comprehensive) illustrates these points.

        The Canadian setting is most like the United States in that minimum wages vary across provinces

and over time. In a paper using a pre-specified research design (following Neumark, 2001), Campolieti et

al. (2006) focused on 16-24 year-olds (and subsets thereof), and estimated elasticities that ranged from

about −0.14 to −0.44 and were centered on about −0.3. Focused more on low-wage youths, Campolieti et

al. (2005) find large negative effects from the minimum wage, with implied overall employment

elasticities for youths between −0.33 and −0.54.

        The largest body of non-U.S. evidence is for the United Kingdom, and the U.K. evidence is

mixed. Early work on minimum wages set by Wages Councils in the United Kingdom found positive

employment effects of minimum wages (Machin and Manning, 1994; Dickens et al., 1999), although this

was an institutional setting in which minimum wage setting could have been strongly endogenous.

Based on evidence from the abolition of the Wages Council, Dolado et al. (1996) suggested there was no

evidence of employment effects, although Neumark and Wascher (2008) suggested their employment

data were more consistent with employment growing where Wages Councils were abolished.

        More recent evidence – and evidence more relevant to thinking about the introduction of a

minimum wage in Germany – comes from the introduction of a national minimum wage in the United

Kingdom in April 1999. Machin et al. (2003) surveyed low-wage residential care homes (nursing homes)

just before and just after the minimum wage was implemented, and estimated employment elasticities of

ranging from −0.08 to −0.39, most of which were statistically significant. Galindo-Rueda and Pereira



                                                      4
(2004) also study the introduction of the new minimum wage. One analysis provides some evidence

pointing to significant disemployment effects for services but not for manufacturing, and a different

analysis identifying minimum wage effects from variation in wage levels across regions finds negative

and significant effects in four of the eight low-wage sectors they study, and negative and insignificant

effects in three others. 8

         Finally, updating the overall evidence from the United Kingdom, a recent meta-analysis by

Leonard et al. (2014) concludes that there is no overall “practically significant adverse employment

effect,” but that there is variation in estimates, and adverse employment effects in the residential home

care industry.

         A few recent papers for other European countries illustrate a range of findings. Caliendo et al.

(2018) find that the new German minimum wage led to moderate effects on overall employment, driven

by a sharp decline in marginal employment – broadly consistent with the U.S. literature finding effects

concentrated among those most affected by a higher minimum wage. 9 Exploiting age discontinuities in

the minimum wage in the Netherlands, Kabátek finds sharp increases in separation rates near young ages

when the minimum wages increase sharply.

         Finally, a couple of papers use minimum wage variation across OECD countries to estimate

minimum wage effects. Neumark and Wascher (2004) found little clear evidence of youth

disemployment effects in countries with restrictive labor standards and generous employment protections,

but elasticities in the −0.2 to −0.4 range in countries with the least regulated labor markets. However, a

later paper by Sturn (2018) disputes these conclusions and suggests that the findings of negative effects

are fragile.

II.2. Key Issues in Recent Research

         Returning to the U.S. evidence, in the most recent research two key econometric issues underlie




8
  Based on other information on entry and exit, the authors interpreted the combined evidence as suggesting that the
introduction of the minimum wage had relatively little effect on already employed workers, but exerted more impact
through its effect on job creation in low-wage sectors.
9
  Papers in this issue present additional evidence for Germany.

                                                         5
the different answers researchers obtain about whether higher minimum wages reduce employment of

low-skilled workers. One concerns the proper specification of control areas (or counterfactuals), given

the potential endogeneity or non-randomness of minimum wage increases. Most methods of addressing

this problem continue to find negative employment effects. But methods using geographically-close

controls tend not to – which leaves us with an open question as to why. The second concerns the

inclusion of trends for treated and control areas, and the sensitivity of estimates to those trends. This

sensitivity can leave us with little guidance as to which estimates should be preferred.

        I focus a good deal of attention on these two issues, to try to indicate how we might progress in

making sense of the conflicting estimates in this recent literature. But independently of these two issues

emphasized in recent research, there is long-standing evidence of differences in estimated employment

effects of minimum wages across studies. In my view, more serious considerations of the economic

factors that may help explain these differences could be very fruitful in resolving some of the

contradictions in past research. Moreover, since this question has more to do with economics than

econometrics, consideration of the factors underlying differences in minimum wage effects across studies

may prove useful in thinking about the effects of much higher minimum wages.

III. Treatment and Control Areas and Identification Strategies

        Estimating causal effects of policy based on past responses to policy changes requires choosing

appropriate controls to provide a counterfactual for what would have happened absent the minimum wage

increase. In recent decades, the traditional “workhorse” in the empirical literature on the employment

effects of state minimum wages in the United States has been the standard two-way fixed effects model

with state and time dummy variables – a continuous difference-in-differences (DD) estimator that

compares changes in low-skilled employment in states where the minimum wage increased more to states

where it increased less (or not at all). Evidence from this estimator (consistent with the earlier time-series

literature) is the source of the oft-cited conclusion that the elasticity of employment of low-skilled groups

(especially teens) with respect to the minimum wage is in the −0.1 to −0.2 range – a range of estimates

that is replicated across many studies, including those discussed below that first report such estimates



                                                      6
before criticizing the two-way fixed effects estimator and exploring other methods.

III.1. Close Controls

         In two recent influential papers, Allegretto et al. (2011, ADR) and Dube et al. (2010, DLR) raised

the concern that cross-state minimum wage variation could be correlated with shocks that also affect

employment of low-skilled workers. They compare estimates using the standard two-way fixed effects

model in which all states could potentially serve as controls – which yield “conventional” negative

elasticities – to estimates based on using only geographically-close areas in different states as controls –

which yield estimates closer to and statistically indistinguishable from zero. 10

         The idea motivating the use of “close controls” is that the states (or subareas of states) affected by

minimum wage increases may experience the same economic shocks to low-skill labor markets as nearby

areas unaffected by these increases, and thus comparisons between the treated areas and close controls

may more reliably identify the causal effects of minimum wages. The standard two-way fixed effects

estimator is

         Est = βMWst + Xstγ + Dsθ + Dtλ + εst.                                                               (1)

         Typically, E is the log of the employment rate or level for a low-skill group like teenagers. MW

is the log of the state minimum wage. 11 X is a vector of controls. 12 And the D vectors are state and year

dummy variables (fixed effects). I assume that the data are collapsed to the state by year level (indexed

by s and t), but one could use micro-data as well. 13




10
   Card and Krueger (1994) is a precursor of this approach. Other studies that use close controls in a similar fashion
to ADR find, not surprisingly, similar results (Addison et al., 2013; Gittings and Schmutte, 2016; and Slichter,
2016). (Addison et al. do find stronger evidence of disemployment effects for teens during the Great Recession.)
An exception is Liu et al. (2016), who restrict their close controls to counties in the same BEA “Economic Areas”
(but in different states); BEAs are supposed to delineate regionally-integrated markets. Liu et al. find evidence of
disemployment effects for the youngest group covered in their data (14-18 year-olds) using the standard two-way
fixed effects model, but these are diminished only slightly – to an elasticity of −0.17 – within Economic Areas. One
question is whether the Liu et al. approach actually does a better job of controlling for local economic shocks.
11
   Some research divides the nominal minimum wage by an average wage measure.
12
   As Neumark and Wascher (1994) suggest, given the reduced-form specification, these controls should include
exogenous shifters of both labor supply and labor demand.
13
   While almost every paper in the literature studies employment outcomes directly, Cengiz et al. (2017) instead
estimate effects on the shares of workers with wages just below or just at or above the minimum wage. The authors
suggest that this approach can avoid biases from changes in employment unrelated to the minimum wage, and
generally do not find evidence of job loss. One curious finding, though – a very large positive implied employment

                                                          7
         The concern raised by ADR and DLR is that ε is correlated with MW in equation (1). In the

context of a state-level analysis (as in ADR), for example, let r index regions that includes subsets of

states. Then as long as the shocks are common to regions, one can control for them by augmenting the

model with interactions between year and region dummy variables, as in

         Est = βMWst + Xstγ + Dsθ + Dtλ + Dt∙DrTη + εst. 14                                                 (2)

         As long as there is within-region variation in the minimum wage, β is identified – from these

regions. The approach in DLR is the same, except that they use county-level data, where r indexes sets of

bordering counties across state lines, and identification comes from the county “pairs” where the

minimum wage variation differs on the two sides of the border. DLR use employer data, and hence focus

on low-wage industries (like restaurant workers) rather than teenagers.

         The implication from the evidence in both papers that estimated minimum wage effects are less

negative (and insignificant) when using close controls implies that minimum wages tend to be increased

where there are negative shocks to employment in low-skill labor markets. Later, I discuss whether this is

likely and what other evidence implies. The results of these and other recent studies discussed below are

summarized in Table 1.

III.2. Responses to Concerns about Non-Random Minimum Wage Variation

         There have been three kinds of responses to the legitimate concern about the non-random nature

of minimum wage variation (conditional on state and year fixed effects). First, research has explored the

validity of the controls ADR and DLR used (Neumark et al., 2014a; Neumark and Wascher, 2017). 15

Second, researchers have pushed further the development of synthetic control methods (Abadie et al.,

2010) to select or construct appropriate control areas (most notably, Powell, 2016). And third, several

studies have adopted alternative identification strategies to isolate the effects of minimum wage increases

from shocks that are potentially correlated with them.



elasticity for high school dropouts – suggests that the method may not be immune from spurious effects. I leave it to
future work to consider this approach more fully.
14
   Depending on how many region-by-year interactions are omitted, these interactions could subsume the year fixed
effects.
15
   See the response to this research in Allegretto et al. (2017).

                                                         8
         In the latter category, the approach used most widely in reduced-form analyses of policy effects,

generally, is triple-differences (DDD) estimators that isolate the effect of the policy change by

introducing another group in the same state that is “exposed” to the same policy change but is less

affected by it (or not at all affected), and is assumed to experience the same shock – which is the

identifying assumption. Thompson (2009), which predates ADR and DLR, helps motivate this approach,

although he does not use a full DDD approach. Thompson focuses only on variation generated by the two

federal minimum wage increases in 1996 and 1997, restricted to the states where the federal minimum

wage was binding. He generates minimum wage variation by differentiating counties by the extent to

which the minimum wage is binding. Indexing counties by c, defining H to be an indicator that minimum

wages are more binding in a county, and defining POST as an indicator for the period after the federal

minimum wage increases, he estimates models of the form

         Ecst = βPOSTt∙Hcs + Xcstγ + Hcsψ + Dsθ + POSTtλ + εcst.                                             (3)

         Equation (3) is a difference-in-differences (DD) estimator, identifying β from the differential

change in employment in counties where the minimum wage increase affected more workers (H = 1)

versus fewer workers (with a focus on young people and teenagers). This estimator should avoid

endogenous minimum wage changes at the state level by comparing regions within a state, and by using

only federal variation. Thompson finds large disemployment effects in counties where minimum wages

are more binding because wages are lower, and workers are lower skilled. (The second panel of Table 1

covers strategies different from the “close-controls” approach, including Thompson’s.)

         One could use this approach in a DDD framework by using a period with state variation in

minimum wages, and identifying the effects from differential impacts across more- and less-affected

subareas of states, allowing for a full set of state-by-year interactions, as in

         Ecst = βMWst∙Hcs + Xcstγ + Hcsψ + Dsθ + Dtλ + Dt∙DsTη + εcst. 16                                    (4)

         Clemens and Wither (2016) follows this strategy of including state-by-period fixed effects to


16
   In this specification, the main effect of the minimum wage is subsumed in the state-by-year interactions. The full
DDD specification would include other interactions I have omitted, such as Dt∙Hcs. This is the approach taken, in a
slightly different context (the effects of minimum wages on automatable jobs) in Lordan and Neumark (2018).

                                                          9
control for state-specific shocks. They estimate the effects of the 2007-2009 federal minimum wage

increases, comparing changes in employment for the lowest-wage workers whose wages were

differentially affected by the federal increases (because of prior variation in state minimum wages), to

changes in employment for workers who earned wages that were low, but high enough that the federal

minimum wage increases had little impact on them. 17 Thus, Hcs in equation (4) becomes an indicator for

the lowest-wage workers. They estimate a large employment elasticity for directly affected workers

(about −0.97 based on Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) data). 18

         As an alternative strategy for addressing shocks potentially correlated with state minimum wage

increases, Baskaya and Rubinstein (2015) use an instrumental variables (IV) approach (in estimating the

effects of minimum wages on teen employment). Their IV is the interaction between the federal

minimum wage and a measure of the historical propensity for each state to let the federal minimum wage

bind, which is intended to purge the estimated minimum wage effect of bias from states endogenously

choosing their minimum wage in response to shocks to state-level economic conditions. I view this IV as

particularly clever; when I thought about IV strategies in the past, most candidate IVs (such as the

political orientation of a state) would be fully absorbed by state and year fixed effects.

         Their first-stage equation is

         MWst = φFsMWFt + Xstγ + Dsθ + Dtλ + εst.                                                            (5)

         MWFt is the federal minimum wage, and Fs is the fitted value from a model for the probability

that legislators allow the federal minimum to bind in the state

         Fs = P(Zsπ).                                                                                        (6)

         Z includes measures of cross-state differences in standards of living and political preferences, as

well as the proportion of years earlier in the sample when the federal minimum wage was binding. 19


17
   Similar to Thompson (2009), the use of contemporaneous variation generated by federal policy likely also reduces
problems of endogenous minimum wage variation.
18
   Foreshadowing the discussion below, the magnitude is likely larger than other studies because it is calculated for a
more directly-targeted group of workers (compared to teenagers or restaurant workers, only some of whom are paid
at or near the minimum wage). Indeed, Clemens and Wither show that the elasticity is smaller when using a
treatment group that includes higher-wage workers and hence is “less intensively” treated.
19
   In these earlier years, many states had minimum wages lower than the federal level applied to workers not covered
by the FLSA, who were quite numerous before expansions of coverage of the FLSA in 1977 (Brown et al., 1982).

                                                          10
        Their IV elasticity estimates for teenagers are in the range −0.3 to −0.5. These estimates exceed

the OLS (standard two-way fixed effects) estimates, which is consistent with policymakers raising

minimum wages when youth labor market conditions are strong, and contrasts with the direction of bias

implied by the close-controls estimates in ADR and DLR.

        The approaches considered thus far rely, in large part, on a priori specification of alternative

controls or a priori assumptions about how to construct a valid counterfactual. For example, ADR and

DLR assert that geographically-close controls are better than the larger set of control states used in the

standard two-way fixed effects estimator. Baskaya and Rubinstein (2015) rely on an a priori assumption

regarding the validity of their instrumental variable. And Clemens and Wither (2016) rely on the

assumption that slightly higher-wage workers provide valid controls. 20

        In contrast, synthetic control methods (Abadie et al., 2010) rely on a more data-driven approach

to construct controls. The synthetic control model can be motivated by a factor model that is less

restrictive than the standard two-way fixed effects model

        Est = βMWst + Xstγ + τtθsT + εst.                                                                 (7)

        τt is a row vector of period factors and θsT is a column vector of region factors. If, for example, τt

= (1s φt) – a row vector of 1’s for each state s and time fixed effects – and θs = (ωs 1t) – a row vector of

state fixed effects and 1’s for each year t (transposed in the equation) – then we get the standard two-way

fixed effects model. However, with greater flexibility the state fixed effects need not be constant across

time (for example), in which case taking differences across time does not eliminate the state fixed effects.

Still, equation (7) entails some restrictions; for example, the state factors can only be multiplied by

common factor in a given year.

        The synthetic control approach can provide an unbiased estimate in this more general setting (as




20
  The papers tend to present indirect evidence in support of their approaches. For example, ADR and DLR suggest
that estimators that do not use their close controls are more contaminated by “pre-trends” that could reflect
endogeneity of minimum wage increases with respect to shocks to low-skill labor markets (although Neumark et al.
(2014a) and Neumark and Wascher (2017) raise questions about this evidence). And Clemens and Wither present
evidence based on wage effects that are consistent with their assumption, although they cannot directly test their
assumption with respect to employment.

                                                        11
well as even more general settings), using a weighted set of control regions that matches pre-treatment

data in the treated regions to provide an estimate of how the outcome would have evolved in the treated

regions absent the treatment. For example, the synthetic control model allows time-varying state effects –

consistent with the more flexible factor model in equation (7) – but assumes that how they vary in the

post-treatment period is similar in the treated region and the synthetic control regions.

         The original application of synthetic control methods in Abadie et al. (2010) was to a single,

categorical treatment in one region (a tobacco control program in California), with many possible control

states. 21 However, the application to minimum wages is typically more problematic, because there are

potentially scores of minimum wage increases, these increases vary in magnitude, and potential pre-

treatment controls may be contaminated by prior minimum wage increases (including possibly lagged

effects). 22 In this setting, synthetic control methods have been used in a few ways.

         Neumark et al. (2014a) did not focus directly on estimating minimum wage effects, but instead on

a “first-stage” synthetic control analysis asking whether the synthetic control method would pick out the

close controls that ADR and DLR advocated using. For example, ADR use state data and define their

close controls as states in the same Census divisions (and hence include Census division-by-year

interactions in equation (2)). If there are common shocks within Census divisions, but not across Census

divisions, then the synthetic control method should put most of the weight on same-division states that

would better match the prior variation in the treatment states. In contrast, if the analysis puts relatively

less weight on same-division states, this would imply that those states are not the best controls, and that

restricting the identifying information only to within-division variation in minimum wages may be less

likely to identify the true effect of minimum wages.

         As an illustration, Table 2 reports results from matching on three different forms of the dependent

variable, each defined over the four pre-treatment quarters. This matching is done for states without


21
  Another example is Bohn et al.’s (2014) analysis of Arizona’s 2007 anti-immigration law.
22
  Researcher have used synthetic control methods to estimate the effects of a single minimum wage increase.
Jardim et al. (2017) and Reich et al. (2017) estimate the effects of Seattle’s $2 minimum wage increase in 2016 (to
$13, on the way to $15). And Sabia et al. (2012) and Hoffman (2016) study the impact of New York’s 2005
minimum wage increase.

                                                         12
minimum wage increases in that period. This allows 129 unique treatments in the sample period used, for

which 50 have potential control donors in the same Census division, covering six divisions. The weights

from the matching process on states in the same division are reported in columns (1)-(3). Except for the

West North Central division, these weights are generally well below one. In 13 out of the 18 cases they

are below 0.30, and in some cases, they are quite close to zero, implying that most of the weight chosen

by the synthetic control method is on states outside the division. 23

         Calculations based on this analysis demonstrate that there is generally little reason to prefer the

same-division states as controls relatively to randomly-chosen states. For the analysis in columns (1)-(3),

the average weight per same-division donor state is higher than the random threshold of 1/(number of

potential donors) in only 24, 17, and 19 cases (out 50 cases in column (1), and 49 and 44 and cases in

columns (2) and (3), owing to some loss of observations from the lagged variables). That is, for most

Census divisions, states outside the Census division tend to be better control observations, militating

against the ADR and DLR criticism of the two-way fixed effects model.

         Other analyses have tackled the challenge of trying to use synthetic control methods to estimate

employment effects using a broad set of U.S. minimum wage increases. Neumark et al. (2014a, 2014b),

in a manner explicitly acknowledged as ad hoc, estimated the effects of a large set of minimum wage

increases by first using the two-way fixed effects model to estimate minimum wage effects, and then

matching on the estimated regression residuals; to try to bound the estimates, they used the same

procedure assuming that the minimum wage effects were zero. This analysis led to evidence of

disemployment effects in both the state and county context. Dube and Zipperer (2015) used a different

method of using multiple (but far fewer) minimum wage increases in a synthetic control framework.

They restrict attention to potential controls with no minimum wage increases in the prior two years,




23
   Columns (4)-(6) report the average number of divisions and states in the donor pool, and the average number of
states in the same division, and show that the low weight on states in the same division is not attributable to a small
number of potential donor states from the same division. For example, Pacific has a low number of potential donors
from the same division relative to all potential donors, but relatively high weight, and South Atlantic has a high
number of potential donors from the same division relative to all potential donors, but relatively low weight.

                                                          13
allowing them to study 29 minimum wage increases out of 215 in their sample period. 24 They find

smaller and statistically insignificant negative employment effects.

         Most recently, in what appears to be the most satisfactory and flexible approach, Powell (2016)

develops and uses a method that can be applied to multiple treatments with continuous variation, and that

simultaneously estimates the treatment effect and the weights on the control states. His method avoids

the problem of selecting minimum wage increases with clean controls, and hence can use all the data.

Powell finds a statistically significant estimated elasticity for teens of −0.44.

         Totty (2017) uses a linear factor model that also does not impose close controls but is more

restrictive than Powell’s synthetic control approach. He finds small (and insignificant) negative

employment effects for restaurant workers and teens. However, although the idea behind this approach

(see, e.g., the common correlated effects, or CCE, estimator of Pesaran, 2006) is to avoid specifying the

form of the unobserved heterogeneity (see, e.g., Totty, p. 1716), Totty always includes state and year

fixed effects and uses the CCE (and another estimator) to allow for other forms of heterogeneity. The

standard two-way fixed effects estimator yields elasticities of −0.14 for restaurant employment and −0.18

for teen employment, while his alternative estimators yield smaller and insignificant elasticities. Totty

argues for including the two-way fixed effects a priori to address the specific debate in the minimum

wage literature – discussed later – about including jurisdiction specific trends along with the traditional

two-way fixed effects. He states that “the factor model results are essentially unchanged if the two-way

fixed effects are removed from the specification” (footnote 15). Based on estimates he provided to me,

this is true for the results for teens, but not for restaurant workers, for whom the less restrictive approach

yields elasticities of −0.048 to −0.066 (significant at the 5-percent or 10-percent level), in contrast to the

insignificant estimates of about −0.01 to −0.02 reported in Table 3 of his paper.

         In related work, Colangelo and Harding (in progress) explore the two-way fixed effects model

using data from ADR. For 16-17 year-olds (they never find an employment effect for 18-19 year-olds),



24
  An important feature of this approach is correct (indeed, exact) statistical inference, whereas Neumark et al.
(2014a) acknowledged an inability to compute correct standard errors for their two-step approach.

                                                          14
they show that using CCE after first assuming fixed state and year effects gives an employment effect that

is smaller than the two-way fixed effects estimate (the latter is significant, the former is not), whereas

using CCE without first imposing this structure on the unobservables yields a negative and significant

employment effect that is very close to the two-way fixed effects estimate; the implication is that the two-

way fixed effects estimate is not biased. However, the negative hours effect obtained from the two-way

fixed effects specification is not robust to using the CCE estimator. Thus, there appears to be some

remaining uncertainty about the implications for minimum wage effects of estimating models with

weaker a priori restrictions imposed on the structure of the unobservables.

        The factor model originally appeared to have some advantages, given the difficulties of applying

the synthetic control approach to an unrestricted analysis of minimum wages. However, the Powell study

appears to surmount these difficulties, and hence is probably more compelling.

        The results discussed above, and some others from the recent literature, are summarized in Table

1. In my view, this table establishes the rather clear result I alluded to earlier: Studies using close controls

generally find small disemployment effects that are indistinguishable from zero. But other identification

strategies – differencing estimators that control for state-specific shocks, IV estimates that purge the

minimum wage variable of correlation with these shocks, as well as the most advanced synthetic control

estimator (Powell, 2016) – tend to find larger disemployment effects.

III.3. Should We Be Convinced by the Absence of Disemployment Effects from Close-Control Strategies?

        This evidence poses two questions: Why do the different strategies generate different results?

And which strategy or strategies is most reliable? I do not have a complete answer, but I discuss two

additional lines of inquiry that have been suggested in the literature – aside from the question considered

in Neumark et al. (2014a) of whether close controls are better controls. 25 These lines of inquiry have

focused on the validity of the close-controls approach, although of course the validity of all of the

methods merits attention.



25
 For further exchanges on these findings, see Neumark et al. (2014b), Allegretto et al. (2017), and Neumark and
Wascher (2017).

                                                       15
           One issue, raised by Neumark et al. (2014b), is that minimum wage increases within similar

geographic areas could be more endogenous with respect to economic shocks, rather than less. Other

factors that differ more substantially between states in different regions, and that provide exogenous

variation – such as unionization or politics – likely play less of a role for close controls, implying that

differences in economic conditions between treatment states and close controls, even if smaller, may

matter more for determining minimum wages. As Jeffrey Clemens once remarked, “If the regions are so

damn similar, why do they have different minimum wages?”

           A useful analogy comes from Griliches’ (1979) seminal work on twin or sibling estimates of the

economic returns to schooling. The simple intuition is that if we include family fixed effects, or

equivalently look only at within-family variation in schooling and wages, then bias from omitted

unobservables at the family level is reduced. Griliches noted, however, that whether bias in the estimated

return to schooling is reduced in the within-family differences depends on what generates variation within

versus across families. For example, if family influences or “background” common to both siblings or

twins are relatively important in determining schooling, then the remaining within-family differences can

be more reflective of ability differences to which schooling responds, in which case the within-family

estimate of the return to schooling can be more biased than an estimate using across-family variation.

           For the simplest analogy to estimating minimum wage effects, suppose we have only two years of

data, form the first differences between treated states (s) and bordering states (s’), and estimate

           (ΔEs − ΔEs’) = βΔMWs + (ΔXs − ΔXs’)∙γ + (Δεs − Δεs’). 26                                    (8)

           Suppose there is a shock correlated with ΔMWs – denote it Δμs. If we assume the shock in the

first difference for state s’ (Δμs’) is the same, then it drops out of equation (8) and we obtain an unbiased

estimate of β . In contrast, if we use control states further away, the shocks are less likely to be the same,

and estimators that do not rely solely on close controls will be biased. This is the rationale for close-

controls estimators.

           But like the assumption that identical twins (the strongest case) have identical unobservables, the


26
     ΔMWs’ = 0, since s’ denotes the untreated states.

                                                         16
assumption that the shock is identical in the treatment and close-control states is likely not strictly true.

That is, there is an omitted variable in equation (8) equal to (Δμs − Δμs’). The simple intuition that might

still rationalize the close-controls estimator is that the difference in shocks must be a good deal smaller

than between a treatment state and some other (not close) state or set of states. However, this does not

imply less bias. The omitted variable bias in equation (8), ignoring the X terms, is

           Cov(Δμs − Δμs’,ΔMWs)/Var(ΔMWs). 27                                                            (9)

           The only assertion about the shocks in different sets of states that is compelling a priori is that

Var(Δμs − Δμs’) is smaller for nearby states than farther way states. But equation (9) shows that two

different magnitudes form the bias in the close-controls estimator.

           First, is Cov(Δμs − Δμs’,ΔMWs) necessarily lower for close states? This takes us back to the

question of what drives minimum wage variation between nearby states. Here is one possibility in which

the covariance would be higher for nearby states. Suppose policymakers respond to changes in low-skill

labor markets in setting minimum wages, but they also respond to other factors. In two distant states,

because they differ on many dimensions, the other factors (or, more precisely, changes in those factors),

vary more. In contrast, in bordering states, because of their assumed homogeneity, the other factors do

not differ. In that case, even though Var(Δμs − Δμs’) is higher for the farther state pairs, Cov(Δμs −

Δμs’,ΔMWs) is higher for the bordering states.

           Second, the denominator in equation (9), Var(ΔMWs), is generally lower for nearby states,

because of a strong regional component to minimum wages; for example, New England states are more

likely to border other New England states that tend to have higher minimum wages. This, in itself, will

exacerbate the bias in the close-controls estimator.

           This discussion about potential bias in the close-controls estimator is speculative. (At the same

time, the claim that the close-controls approach is necessary to get unbiased estimates of minimum wage

effects is also speculative.) But since I am already speculating, let me take it a bit further.

           My hypothesis about influences of labor market conditions on minimum wages is that some


27
     Formally, this is the inconsistency, derived from taking probability limits.

                                                             17
policymakers like to increase the minimum wage, maybe because they think it is a good idea, but also

because minimum wages are popular. 28 But policymakers also know that they get blamed for poor

economic developments that coincide with the policies they choose, regardless of whether the policies are

to blame. Thus, policymakers will tend to raise minimum wages when there are positive shocks to low-

skilled labor markets. 29 The average positive pre-trend prior to minimum wage increases that Monras

(2015) estimates is consistent with this story, as is the stronger disemployment effect that Baskaya and

Rubinstein (2015) estimate using their IV.

         More importantly, if we couple this with the argument above – that minimum wage variation

between nearby states is more correlated with shocks to low-skilled labor markets than is minimum wage

variation between non-close states, then this contributes to greater positive bias in the estimates of β from

the close-controls approach. The alternative, of course, is that the close-control estimates are the unbiased

ones, in which case we would have to believe that policymakers tend to raise minimum wages when low-

skilled labor markets are deteriorating, which I find less plausible, and which is less consistent with other

evidence.

         What we need, clearly, is research that gets beyond this speculation. This research needs to better

illuminate the determination of minimum wage variation, as well as how the determination of this

variation influences the different estimators. Of course, if we have a means of implementing a synthetic

control estimator across all minimum wage increases, as in Powell (2016), then maybe this point is now

moot with respect to the U.S. evidence, because we do not need to rely on a priori assumptions about

which controls are valid. Still, it would be better to uncover – if we can – an empirically-grounded,

behavioral basis for specifying control areas. More generally, researchers seem to accept cross-border

research designs as valid, rather uncritically. 30 It seems useful, then, to think about economic analyses of


28
   See, e.g., https://www.thirdway.org/memo/americans-want-to-raise-the-minimum-wage-but-not-the-way-dc-
thinks (viewed June 30, 2018).
29
   It has to be a little more complicated than this because the error term of interest in this discussion is typically from
a model for low-skill labor market outcomes conditional on an aggregate cyclical measure. Also, the last federal
increases in the United States coincided with the Great Recession, hardly a time of improving labor markets.
However, my hypothesis is intended to help explain the local variation at issue in most of the recent literature.
30
   For two recent examples in other contexts, see de Blasio and Poy (2017) and McVicar et al. (2018). There are a
number of other examples in the tax literature.

                                                            18
cross-border policy variation that might tell us when such designs are more likely to be useful.

        This is a good segue into another issue related to using close controls – the potential role of

spillovers between treated and control areas. A recent theoretical contribution by Zhang (2017) models

such spillovers in a search model of minimum wages and demonstrates why such spillovers could

generate bias against finding disemployment effects in close-control research designs. In his model, there

are two areas between which workers can commute or migrate, one of which raises its minimum wage.

Workers are heterogeneous (high and low skilled). Workers initially are randomly distributed across the

two areas, but firms decide where to post jobs. Search is random, so workers in both locations are

contacted by firms at the same rates. The bargained wage depends in part on the worker’s quality and is

truncated by the minimum wage. Workers also make commuting or migration decision based on the

trade-off between the wage offers they receive and the moving cost they need to pay.

        A higher minimum wage on one side of the border attracts neighboring high skilled workers to

move or commute in, due to higher wages. Local firms therefore create more job vacancies, because the

greater proportion of high-quality workers makes those vacancies more likely to be filled with high-

quality workers and thus become more productive. At the same time, there is some gross disemployment

falling on low-skilled workers as a higher minimum wage leads marginally productive matches to end. In

equilibrium, the higher minimum wage area experiences an influx of high-quality workers and an outflow

of low-quality workers, and the latter generates negative externalities for low-quality workers in the area

where the minimum wage did not increase.

        Cross-border designs can therefore understate disemployment effects for two reasons. First,

unemployed workers migrate from the treated area, obscuring the lower employment rate in the treatment

areas. Second, they move to or commute to the control area, reducing the employment rate and perhaps

employment there (the latter from fewer vacancies), contaminating the control group in a way that further

obscures job loss in the treatment area relative to the control area.

        Zhang presents two types of supporting evidence. First, lower-quality workers (based on




                                                      19
education) tend to migrate or commute from counties where minimum wages increase.31 Second, he

presents calculations suggesting that the diminution of the disemployment effect from using neighboring

counties as control areas can be due to labor mobility, rather than the spatial heterogeneity that Dube et al.

(2010) (and Dube et al., 2016) emphasize. Zhang also presents empirical evidence consistent with this

argument, showing that the diminution of the disemployment effect from using cross-border counties as

controls is stronger where moving costs are lower (because of distance). 32,33

        Thus, I think there are two possible positions regarding using close-control research designs to

estimate minimum wage effects. The favorable position is that these methods uncover unbiased estimates

of the disemployment effects of minimum wages, which are near zero. Other methods, including those

that try to account for the potential correlation between minimum wage changes and shocks to low-skilled

labor markets, generate biased estimates that suggest disemployment effects. This is presumably because

policymakers tend to raise local minimum wages in concert with negative shocks to low-skilled labor

markets, and the other methods used in recent literature for some reason do not capture this mechanism.

The alternative position is that the close-controls approach is biased against finding disemployment

effects, perhaps because of mobility and spillover effects, and/or because close-control designs exacerbate

positive endogeneity bias in estimated disemployment effects of minimum wages.

        In my view, there is more evidence for the latter position. This includes the evidence in Neumark

et al. (2014a) suggesting that close controls are not better controls, reinforced by the evidence from

Powell (2016) that a comprehensive synthetic controls analysis produces rather strong disemployment

effects. It also includes the evidence in Zhang (2017) – predicted by his model – that mobility and

spillover effects generate a bias towards zero in close-controls estimates of disemployment effects.

Finally, the evidence from recent research using different methods of controlling for endogenous



31
   Pérez Pérez (2018) reports similar evidence, finding that when minimum wages increase along a border, low-
wage commuting into the affected area declines, and the low-wage employment share declines.
32
   The minimum wage and cross-border flows have also been studied by McKinnish (2017) – who reports evidence
consistent with Zhang’s – Kuehn (2016), and Shirley (forthcoming). More general evidence on minimum wages
influencing migration (focusing on location decisions of low-skilled immigrants) is reported in Cadena (2014).
33
   Another potential reason that cross-border designs can understate disemployment effects is policy spillovers to
wages across the border (Jardim et al., in progress).

                                                        20
minimum wages (i.e., not close controls) finds stronger disemployment effects of minimum wages

(Baskaya and Rubinstein, 2015; and Clemens and Wither, 2016) – consistent with the opposite direction

of bias generated by endogenous policy responses from that suggested by close-controls designs.

           At the same time, I think we are quite far from a definitive answer. More research assessing the

reasons for different estimates of employment effects of minimum wages from different research designs

would be very valuable.

IV. Trends

           Another issue highlighted in recent work – related to the construction of the counterfactual but

not in as transparent a way – is the inclusion of trends in models estimating the employment effects of

minimum wages. This issue arises in using the standard two-way fixed effects model, and in models for

employment growth that are motivated by new theoretical models of minimum wage effects.

IV.1. Including Trends in the Standard Panel Data Model

           In reduced-form, panel data analyses of policy effects it is quite standard to include linear time

trends specific to the states (or other jurisdictions) under study. This is intended to correct for violations

of the “parallel trends” assumption by controlling for cross-state differences in the evolution of outcomes

that were present absent the policy change. However, recent work has demonstrated that estimated

employment effects of minimum wages can be quite sensitive to the inclusion of state-specific time

trends. 34 For example, in the standard two-way fixed effects model, ADR showed that estimated

employment effects were quite sensitive to including state-specific linear trends (going to near zero in this

case). However, Neumark et al. (2014a) showed that this conclusion was fragile; when higher-order

trends were included, the estimated employment effects reverted to being negative. At a minimum, this

illustrates that we should do more than just check the sensitivity of estimates to including linear trends.

           The broader point, though, is that the inclusion of trends (especially for outcomes that are not

naturally trended, like employment rates) is ultimately a profession of our ignorance, in two dimensions.

(I am putting aside the notion that including trends corrects for policy endogeneity. I cannot think of a


34
     See Allegretto et al. (2011, 2017), Neumark et al. (2014a), and Neumark and Wascher (2017).

                                                          21
good reason why trends – linear or otherwise – would capture explicit endogeneity. And the kinds of

approaches discussed in the previous section are more appropriate for addressing this issue.)

         First, the appeal to including trends is typically based on the hypothesized influence of omitted

variables that underlie these trends. 35 This suggests that more compelling evidence will come from

expanding the variables used in minimum wage studies to include the hypothesized omitted variables.

And we should have extra motivation to pursue this line of inquiry given that results are non-robust across

different ways of including time effects to capture these unmeasured variables. Most employment

equation specifications in the minimum wage literature use quite parsimonious controls, often including

only an aggregate labor market indicator and a relative supply variable (like the share of the young

population in the total population). This is rather striking relative to research on other topics where a

much more extensive list of controls is typically included. I think the reason for this parsimony is that

research papers try to build incrementally on past work – changing the estimation method, for example,

and not wanting to confound the effects of doing this with the effects of varying the control variables

relative to earlier literature. But the sensitivity of estimates to the inclusion of trends suggests that a

change in strategy might be warranted. Indeed, a couple of recent papers introduce richer sets of controls

(Clemens and Wither, 2016; and Clemens and Strain, forthcoming). 36

         The second dimension of our ignorance concerns how to introduce and estimate trends when we

still want to include them. One issue is functional form. There is nothing sacred about linear trends. In

fact, Neumark et al. (2014a) suggest that linear trends can be particularly problematic when business

cycles affect the estimated trends, and in some contexts linear trends can lead to impossible implied

values of dependent variables (such as an employment rate below zero or above one). A second issue is

how we distinguish between trends and treatment effects – an issue discussed in more detail in the next

subsection. We should probably explore estimating trends using only the pre-treatment period and using

these estimated trends to detrend the post-treatment data, to avoid confounding policy effects and


35
   For example, Allegretto et al. (2011) refer to unmeasured changes in technology leading to teens experiencing
increased competition from adults for low-skilled jobs.
36
   In the latter, adding richer controls tends to strengthen adverse employment effects estimated for 16-21 year-olds.

                                                          22
estimation of trends. As an example, Monras (2015) removes the trend fitted to the pre-treatment period

for a specific number of periods. 37

IV.2. Dynamic Models

         In recent work, Meer and West (2016) demonstrate in a dramatic way the problem that trends can

absorb treatment effects. They do this in the context of estimating effects of minimum wages on

employment growth, although the same holds true for more conventional models focused on levels. 38

Most prior research has not studied effects of minimum wages on employment growth. However, recent

models using a “putty-clay” approach to technology have suggested that minimum wages may have small

initial effects on employment but increasing effects over time, as new technology comes on line that uses

less low-skilled labor (e.g., Sorkin, 2015).

         To see the basic idea in Meer and West in a simple way, suppose that the minimum wage can

change both the level and the rate of growth of employment, so that the correct model absent trends is

         Est = β∙MWst + β’∙t∙MWst + Xstγ + Dsθ + Dtλ + εst.                                                 (10)

         If the growth effect (t∙MWst) is omitted, and one instead estimates the standard two-way fixed

effects model, then part of the effect of t∙MWst will load onto the simple effect of MWst. To simplify

further, suppose there are two states, and there is a single minimum wage that starts to increase in one

state beginning in in period t’, which is between t = 1 and t = T. Then as long as the panel is somewhat

long, some of the growing shortfall in employment (assuming β’ < 0) in the treated state will be captured

in the estimate of β, when t∙MWst is omitted.

         But suppose that, in addition to omitting t∙MWst, a researcher includes state-specific trends, so the

model becomes

         Est = β∙MWst + Xstγ + Dsθ + Dtλ + Ds∙tψ + εst.                                                     (11)

         In this case, the included trends can pick up the effect of the omitted variable t∙MWst, even if


37
   Monras also estimates a separate post-treatment trend, which he alternately considers as part of the treatment
effect (à la Meer and West, 2016, discussed below) or not part of the treatment effect.
38
   Of course, the effects of minimum wages in a model for employment growth also involves the issue of trends,
since now the data are detrended by first-differencing, with the difference that the effect of minimum wages is
modeled as an effect on the growth rate of employment (log differences).

                                                         23
there are no true state-specific trends in the model. This is less likely if t’ is close to T and far from 1,

because then there is a long pre-treatment period with which to identify the parameter ψ that captures the

trend difference between changes in Est in the treatment and control states. Put differently, if the

minimum wage increases start late in the panel, then the correlation between t∙MWst and Ds∙t is relatively

weak, and less of the minimum wage effect will load onto the estimate of ψ. But if t’ is close to 1, there is

only a short pre-treatment period, and more of the effect of t∙MWst will load onto the estimate of ψ,

obscuring the minimum wage effect.

           The problem is mitigated, of course, by estimating the correct (or, at least, unrestricted) model

           Est = β∙MWst + β’∙t∙MWst + Xstγ + Dsθ + Dtλ + Ds∙tψ + εst.                                         (12)

           The results in Meer and West are consistent with the problem highlighted by equations (11) and

(12). Their standard two-way fixed effects estimate of the employment elasticity is −0.15, significant at

the 1% level. But adding state time trends reduces this elasticity to a small and insignificant −0.013 (their

Table 2). Of course, this evidence is equally consistent with equation (11) being the correct model, and

the negative minimum wage effect being a spurious reflection of state-specific time trends.

           However, Meer and West present three types of evidence against the latter interpretation, and

instead in favor of model misspecification from omitting the dynamic effect of minimum wages. First,

they add leading minimum wage effects to the model. These effects are small and insignificant, and do

not change the estimated main effect appreciably, suggesting that “if preexisting underlying trends are in

fact different between states, they are not different by very much and are unlikely to be a key driver of the

overall result” (p. 513). Second, they estimate long-difference specifications over different numbers of

periods. If the minimum wage effect grows over time, as in equation (10), then the long-difference

estimate should grow with the length of the difference (although perhaps leveling out as a new

equilibrium is reached). This is exactly what Meer and West find, with a small and insignificant −0.02

elasticity for a one-year first difference, growing to (and stabilizing at) an elasticity of around −0.05 as the

differences get longer. 39 Finally, they estimate distributed lag estimates that show that, indeed,


39
     Moreover, when they then add state-specific time trends to these models, the long-difference estimates are

                                                           24
contemporaneous minimum wage effects are small, but the lags cumulate to a larger effect.

         The evidence in Meer and West (2016) is a departure from the larger literature in two dimensions.

The first, already discussed, is their focus on dynamic effects. Their evidence points to dynamic effects

consistent with “putty-clay” models. Aaronson et al. (2018) generate this type of evidence from a

calibrated model for the restaurant industry, but also find evidence consistent with this framework when

studying firm entry and exit behavior. Second, Meer and West look at aggregate employment (in three

different data sets, one in the paper, and two in on-line appendices), in contrast to the usual focus on low-

skill groups or industries. However, in their on-line appendices, they show results for industries in two of

the three data sets (for which industry is identified) and find that their evidence is driven more by

industries with higher concentrations of low-wage workers (Meer and West, n.d.). Together, this work

raises the question of whether the literature should move toward more emphasis on dynamic and hence

longer-run models for estimating the employment effects of minimum wages. To be clear, if we find

additional evidence of adverse effects on aggregate employment when we look at longer-run models, the

policy implications of minimum wages – and especially much higher minimum wages – will likely

become much more negative.

V. Variation in Results across Studies – Economic Factors

         The preceding sections focus on the how econometric methods influence estimated minimum

wage effects, in part to help understand the sources of variation in effects across studies. In this section, I

turn to the potential role of economic factors in explaining this variation. It is harder to draw specific

conclusions, but there are some hints that economic factors may also play a role. A sharper focus on

understanding the relationships between estimated employment effects of minimum wages and

underlying economic factors may be particularly important in the current and pending high minimum

wage environment in the United States, by identifying potential channels that could change employment




sensitive to the length of the difference and become small as the difference length grows. If there were no true
minimum wage effect, the estimates with trends should be consistently zero. In contrast, the diminution of the
estimated effects is consistent with the trends soaking up the true effect.



                                                         25
effects at much higher minimum wage levels and suggesting how simply scaling up existing elasticities

by larger increases could therefore be misleading.

V.1. The “Bite” of the Minimum Wage

         The issue that is perhaps most important in thinking about the effects of much higher minimum

wages, and that may inform the literature more generally, is the “bite” of the minimum wage – i.e., how

much the minimum wage binds. This question has received relatively little attention in the research

literature.

         One type of evidence on a much larger bite comes from an earlier study by Castillo-Freeman and

Freeman (1992), who estimated the effects of the minimum wage in Puerto Rico – a U.S. territory that is

bound by the U.S. federal minimum wage but has much lower wage levels, and hence where the

minimum wage has much more bite. They reported very large aggregate employment effects and

particularly adverse effects on low-wage industries, consistent with stronger disemployment effects where

the minimum wage binds strongly. This evidence was revisited by Krueger (1995), who found evidence

of disemployment effects from time-series data but not cross-industry analyses and concluded that

evidence of disemployment effects was fragile. But, surprisingly, to the best of my knowledge the

evidence on Puerto Rico has not been revisited. 40

         Neumark and Wascher (2002) take a different approach, adopting techniques from the market

disequilibrium literature (applied to labor markets in, e.g., Rosen and Quandt, 1978). They specify a

labor demand and labor supply curve and fit a model that estimates the parameters of these curves as well

as the probability that an observation is on the demand curve (the short side of the market when, in the

standard model, the minimum wage is set too high), or instead at market equilibrium. The estimates of


40
   Of course, evidence for one jurisdiction suffers from the absence of a control group – the same concern regarding
the earlier time-series evidence for the United States that fueled the interest in minimum wage research using the
cross-state variation in state minimum wages that emerged in the late 1980s (and which motivated the cross-industry
analysis in the two Puerto Rico studies). The same challenge arises in estimating minimum wage effects in
European and other countries with only a national minimum wage. As a consequence of this problem, research on
European countries often distinguishes between areas or industries strongly affected by a minimum wage increase
and areas or industries not so much affected, with the latter serving as controls for shocks potentially correlated with
minimum wages. For example, recent research on the implementation of Germany’s new minimum wage focuses
on regional variation in the bite of the minimum wage – which was much greater, generally, in formerly East
Germany (e.g., Caliendo et al., 2018).

                                                          26
this model are used to compute these probabilities for samples and data used in other studies, asking

whether the absence of minimum wage effects (in particular, in Card (1992a and 1992b)) could be

attributable to minimum wages being largely non-binding. 41

        However, the approach is based on homogeneous labor, and as such misses what is likely the key

issue regarding much higher minimum wages – how the effect changes as the share of workers affected

increases. Card’s (1992a) approach of specifying the minimum wage variable as the fraction affected by

given minimum wage increases, rather than the minimum wage level or its ratio relative to a measure of

mean or median wages, may be more useful for projecting the effects of much higher minimum wages,

especially if we think we can reliably capture potential non-linearities in the effect of the fraction

affected. On the other hand, Baskaya and Rubinstein (2015) suggest that this kind of fraction affected

variable is particularly prone to endogeneity with respect to local labor market shocks, and is procyclical

and hence leads to bias against finding a disemployment effect. Thus, incorporation of measures of the

bindingness of minimum wages may not be straightforward.

        Of course, the fraction-affected approach (putting aside endogeneity concerns) would still run

into problems in projecting the effects of minimum wages well outside the range of sample variation.

However, in very recent years, variation in minimum wages across states has become sufficiently strong

that it should be possible, using recent data, to start to obtain more reliable estimates of the effects of

minimum wages that bind for a much larger share of workers. Still, the highest minimum wages have

been applied in higher-wage states, leaving extrapolation to lower-wage states more problematic.

        A different perspective on the bite of the minimum wage that has been explored in recent work is

for how long firms expect a minimum wage increase to raise the relative cost of low-skilled labor. This

issue has been highlighted by Sorkin (2015), who notes that firms may have reasonably expected the kind

of non-indexed, often infrequent minimum wage increases enacted in the United States to be offset by




41
  A second model introduced the three regimes in the textbook “company town” monopsony model – the marginal
cost of labor curve, the labor supply curve, and the labor demand curve, and found some evidence that the
monopsony model fits the data better – although the textbook monopsony model is a far less plausible depiction of
labor markets than more modern monopsony models based on search (Manning, 2005).

                                                        27
rising nominal wages (and prices) over time, reducing the incentive for firms to invest in alternative

production technologies that economize on low-skilled labor. In contrast, indexed minimum wages,

which are becoming increasingly common in American states, 42 may generate more adverse longer-run

employment effects for low-skilled workers. Recent evidence consistent with stronger disemployment

effects of indexed minimum wages is reported in Brummund and Strain (2016). Much larger minimum

wage increases, especially in a low-inflation environment, could well be perceived by firms as creating

large, longer-term relative increases in the cost of low-skilled labor, even aside from indexation.

V.2. Affected Workers

           Closely related to the question of the bite of the minimum wage is the extent to which studies

identify the effects of minimum wages on affected workers. Understanding how minimum wages impact

the employment of the most directly affected workers is a substantively important policy question, since

these are the workers the policy is intended to help. Minimum wage-employment elasticities for

teenagers or other low-skill groups are often characterized as “small” or “modest.” This is often a vague

characterization but is intended to suggest that the net benefits for affected workers must be large. I

believe that the most concrete statement of this view is in Freeman (1996). He first notes that “[I]f the

elasticity of demand for minimum wage workers exceeds one [in absolute value], the minimum wage will

reduce rather than increase the share of earnings going to the low-paid” (p. 641, italicized text added).

However, he goes on to state that “No study in the United States or the United Kingdom has found that

increases in minimum wages reduce total employment with an elasticity near unity” (p. 642). It is true

that much of debate in the literature – in the United States in particular – is about whether the elasticity is

zero, or instead in a range of perhaps −0.1 to −0.2. Freeman’s suggestion is that because the latter

estimates are well below 1, the earnings of affected workers, on the whole, will rise substantially when

the minimum wage is increased.

           But the fact that the existing research often does not focus solely on affected workers means that

the elasticity of income of affected workers with respect to the minimum wage must be larger in absolute


42
     See http://www.ncsl.org/research/labor-and-employment/state-minimum-wage-chart.aspx (viewed June 13, 2018).

                                                        28
value than is implied by the kinds of employment elasticities that dominate the literature. To illustrate,

we can simplify and write the minimum wage elasticity estimated for all teenagers (the most common

type of estimate) as a weighted average of the elasticity for teenagers directly affected by a change in the

minimum wage and the elasticity for teenagers currently earning above the minimum wage, or:

        e = eA⋅ pA + eNA⋅ (1−pA)                                                                     (13)

where e is the estimated elasticity for teenagers as a whole, eA and eNA are the minimum wage elasticities

for affected and unaffected teens, and pA is the proportion directly affected by the change in the minimum

wage. If we assume that the elasticity for unaffected workers is zero, then the minimum wage elasticity

for affected teens (eA) can be written:

        eA = e/pA                                                                                    (14)

        It follows that the minimum wage-employment elasticity for affected teenage workers is greater

than the employment elasticity estimated for teenagers as a whole.

        In addition, the estimated employment elasticity from the usual minimum wage study will tend to

understate the employment elasticity of demand for affected workers because the size of the average wage

increase associated with a higher minimum wage will be smaller than the minimum wage increase itself,

given that some affected workers already earn more than the old minimum wage. Letting ΔWA denote the

average wage change of those workers whose wages are directly affected by the change in the minimum

wage, and ΔMW the legislated increase, the relevant demand elasticity for affected workers (that is, the

elasticity with respect to the induced change in their wage) is

        eA = (e/pA)/(∆WA/∆MW)                                                                        (15)

        Given that (∆WA/∆MW) < 1, the elasticity in equation (14) clearly gets blown up to some extent.

The possibility that the employment elasticity for affected worker exceeds −1 is consistent with the

evidence from Seattle showing average earnings declines (Jardim et al., 2017). And as noted earlier,

Clemens and Wither (2016) estimate an elasticity of −0.97; because they focus on directly affected

workers, e and eA may be quite close, and ∆WA may be closer to ∆MW.

        Thus, empirical research providing a tighter link between workers affected by the minimum wage



                                                     29
and the employment effects they experience can sharpen our understanding of the policy implications of

higher minimum wages. Neumark and Wascher (2007), in their narrative review of minimum wage

research on employment effects since the early 1990s, argued that studies that focused on the least-skilled

workers tended to find the sharpest evidence of disemployment effects. However, this argument was

based on a qualitative assessment of the evidence across studies, rather than systematic empirical

evidence comparing studies. More systematic evidence would be useful.

         The most common group considered in studies of the employment effects of minimum wages is

teenagers. This is a logical group to study, as teenagers generally earn very low wages because of their

low skills and represent a vastly disproportionate share of minimum wage workers. 43 However, with the

rich microdata now available to labor economists, it is possible to focus directly on workers affected by

the minimum wage. Examples of minimum wage studies that try to identify impacts on affected workers,

based on their wages, include Neumark et al. (2004) and, more recently, Clemens and Wither (2016).

         One limitation of this approach, however, is that we cannot as easily classify non-workers as

affected or not, because we do not observe their wages, which can lead us to miss the effects of minimum

wages on transitions from non-employment to employment. Changes in the rate of entry into

employment, however, could be a quite important channel of employment adjustments. First, low-skill

workers have very high turnover. 44 Second, there is evidence from data on worker flows that minimum

wages lower the rate at which workers separate from firms and lower the rate at which workers are hired

(Dube et al., 2016; Gittings and Schmutte, 2016; Gopalan et al., 2018). 45 Thus, ignoring the effects of

minimum wages in reducing the flows of workers into jobs may well miss a potentially important channel

by which higher minimum wages reduce employment of low-skilled workers.



43
   For example, in 2016, teens were nearly 21 percent of workers paid hourly whose wages were at or below the
federal minimum wage, but less than 6 percent of the total of workers paid hourly. (See
https://www.bls.gov/opub/reports/minimum-wage/2016/home.htm, viewed May 10, 2017.) The representation of
teens among minimum wage workers would, of course, decline at much higher minimum wages, and is likely to be
lower in states with higher minimum wages.
44
   See Choi and Fernández-Blanco (2016).
45
   Like with the general literature on employment effects, there is conflicting evidence on whether or not the relative
magnitudes of these two effects lead, on net, to employment declines. Also, note that Kabátek’s (2015) evidence for
the Netherlands differs in finding a separation effect of minimum wage increases at specific ages.

                                                          30
           One can of course study the effects of minimum wages on transitions from non-employment to

employment (see Clemens and Wither, 2017). But our ignorance of likely offer wages for non-employed

workers is a challenge. Selection-type models that predict wages for the low-skilled, non-employed could

in principle be used, although given the relatively low explanatory power of wage regressions, it seems

unlikely that such methods would accurately identify the lowest-wage workers. Longer-term panel data

can tell us something about wages workers earned on previous jobs, which could potentially prove useful,

although that information, too, may be available only for a subset of currently non-employed workers.

           There may be other dimensions that influence how likely minimum wages are to affect certain

groups of workers. For example, Lordan and Neumark (2018) study the effects of minimum wages on

low-skill workers in jobs that are more easily automated, and find adverse employment effects for older

workers, and for workers in some industries where we tend not to think minimum wages have much

effect, like manufacturing.

           Understanding how estimated minimum wage effects depend on variation in the identification of

the impact from affected workers, and which affected workers, may also help clarify the underlying

economics. For example, if the evidence of disemployment effects really is stronger and more robust

when studies focus on directly affected workers, this would bolster the predictions of the standard

neoclassical model’s prediction of job loss from substitution away from the least-skilled workers (as well

as scale effects), and also help explain why some studies find weaker evidence of job loss (for example, in

studies that focus on industries that pay low average wages but have a good share of higher-wage

workers). In contrast, if there is an absence of a consistent pattern of larger disemployment effects when

these effects are estimated for the lowest-skilled workers whose wages are pushed up by minimum wages,

the neoclassical model’s prediction would be harder to sustain.

           In addition, sharper evidence on how minimum wage effects vary depending on the extent to

which effects are identified from affected workers may give us a better handle on predicting effects of

much higher minimum wages that will affect more workers. 46 I view this as a critical challenge. At a


46
     Still, a potential difficulty in predicting such effects is that the impacts on affected workers may also depend on

                                                             31
minimum, labor economists should be using the available microdata to try to identify skill and

demographic groups likely to be affected by minimum wages, moving beyond just teenagers or workers

in low-wage industries. 47 And it may be particularly useful to explore using panel data with wage

information, or other methods, to directly identify workers and non-workers most affected by higher

minimum wages and how minimum wage increases affect their flows into and out of employment. One

potentially large-scale source of data that could be used is Unemployment Insurance records for the

subset of states that report quarterly hours as well as earnings, from which wages can then be estimated –

conditional on states making the data available to researchers, like in the recent study of the Seattle

minimum wage. 48

V.3. Labor-Labor Substitution

         Studies that include both affected and unaffected workers can do even more to mask

disemployment effects of minimum wages if there is labor-labor substitution. In a model with workers of

different skill levels, a minimum wage that is binding for some workers is likely to generate some

substitution towards higher-skill workers. One implication is that evidence on the employment effects of

minimum wages that combine negative employment effects for the least-skilled with positive employment

effects for those who benefit from labor-labor substitution will understate the net effects on the first

group. A second implication is that such evidence will obscure the positive impacts on those workers

who benefit from labor-labor substitution.

         There is some evidence of labor-labor substitution, from research on both minimum wages (e.g.,

Neumark and Wascher, 2003; Clemens et al., 2018) and on living wages (Fairris and Bujunda, 2008). 49



the share of workers affected, as we might anticipate that firms find it easier to make adjustments other than
employment levels for small changes in minimum wages than for large changes in minimum wages. That is, there
can be nonlinear effects of the share affected by minimum wage increases.
47
   For example, Monras (2015) presents some evidence of negative employment effects on the share of employment
or full-time employment among those with a high school degree or less, without regard to age. (This is apparent
only from de-trended estimates, using a method described earlier.)
48
   See Jardim et al. (2017).
49
   Living wages were a policy that arose in many cities (and other local jurisdictions) in the United States in the mid-
1990s. Living wages typically imposed wage floors much higher than minimum wages but limited to much
narrower sets of workers (city contractors, and firm receiving financial assistance from cities). For details and
recent evidence, see Neumark et al. (2012).

                                                          32
But there is virtually no research that tries to use information on workers across a larger swath of the skill

distribution to provide a fuller accounting of who gains and who loses from a higher minimum wage.

Neumark et al. (2004) estimate wage, hours, employment, and income effects at different points of the

wage distribution and find some evidence of hours increases a bit above the minimum, but also of wage

declines (which could be attributable to labor supply increases, or to scale effects outweighing

substitution effects).

        Note, also, that this kind of evidence is likely to be informative about the effects of much higher

minimum wages. The ability to substitute away from labor whose price is directly increased by the

minimum wage seems likely to be diminished as the minimum wage affects the wages of a larger share of

workers. At the same time, the larger price increases implied by less labor-labor substitution imply may

make it more likely that scale effects become important.

V.4. Predictions from Monopsony Models

        Finally, spurred in part by studies that do not find evidence of disemployment effects of minimum

wages, and occasionally even find positive effects, minimum wage researchers have sometimes appealed

to monopsony search models as a better characterization of the low-skill labor market (beginning with

Card and Krueger, 1995, and developed to a much greater extent in Manning, 2005). Understanding the

underlying model is obviously central to identifying economic factors that can explain variation in the

employment effects of minimum wages across studies.

        Search models can, indeed, predict a positive effect of minimum wages over some range. This

was first pointed out in Stigler (1946), albeit in the case of a textbook single-buyer monopsony model.

Brown et al. (2014) show in a fairly simple way how this result emerges in a modern search model that

instead generates rising marginal costs of labor from frictions.

        It is possible that search-monopsony models can account for the variation in estimated

employment effects of minimum wages across studies. However, establishing this requires much more

than noting that these models are consistent with such variation. As I have emphasized above, there are

many reasons to expect variation in employment effects when the neoclassical model characterizes low-



                                                      33
skill labor markets. I would find more convincing the claim that monopsony models can account for the

variation in estimates – and therefore also the implication that minimum wages can sometimes increase

employment – if there were evidence that directly tied variation in minimum wage effects to the

predictions of these models. Christl et al. (forthcoming) report evidence of a nonlinear minimum wage

effect – first increasing and then decreasing – which is potentially consistent with these models. But

evidence on more direct implications of these models would be more compelling. In particular, can we

find evidence that the studies that find zero or even positive effects do this in settings where monopsony

search models predict positive effects, and similarly find negative effects when the models predict

negative effects – based, perhaps, on variation in the extent of frictions, in the level of the minimum

wage, in the time frame (short- versus longer-run), etc.?

        Of course, by the same token, the neoclassical model should not simply be taken as the default in

the absence of more compelling evidence that search-monopsony models can explain the variation in

employment effects across studies. In line with much of the discussion above, the neoclassical

characterization of low-skill labor markets would be bolstered by more convincing evidence that variation

across studies in estimated employment effects can be explained in the context of this model.

        There is a direct way in which more evidence on the appropriate model may help in predicting the

effects of much larger minimum wage increases. While the empirical methods used in past research on

the employment effects of minimum wages are useful in studying the effects of past increases, a well-

known limitation of these reduced-form methods is that they are less valuable in predicting the effects of

different kinds of policy changes than are present in past data. Although large minimum wage increases

naturally share some features with smaller increases, some of the considerations discussed above – such

as the likely closing off of other margins of adjustment to higher minimum wages – suggest that structural

models may have some value in projecting the effects of large minimum wage increases. One example is

the calibrated model in Reich et al. (2015), although these authors have not provided, to the best of my

knowledge, a detailed explication of the model they use, and have focused more on the predictions it

generates. One problem, however, at least with models that are calibrated rather than estimated, is that



                                                     34
the evidence on past minimum wage increases needed to calibrate the model is contested.50 It would

therefore surely be useful to gauge the sensitivity of these kinds of exercises to calibrations that reflect the

larger employment elasticities that many recent studies find, and perhaps even more useful to push this

approach further, including estimation of structural models that could at least provide complementary

evidence on predicted effects of out-of-sample minimum wage increases.

VI. Conclusions, and Questions for a Continuing Research Agenda on the Employment Effects of

Minimum Wages

         Although this paper is not intended as a review and assessment of all the evidence on minimum

wages, it is nonetheless useful to summarize the key conclusions that one can, in my view, draw from the

literature on the employment effects of minimum wages.

         First, the evidence on the disemployment effect of minimum wages is contested, and there clearly

are studies that find no employment effect – both in the United States and in other countries. However,

the preponderance of evidence indicates that minimum wages reduce employment of the least-skilled

workers. Earlier estimates suggested an “elasticity” of about −0.1 to −0.2. Many estimates are still in this

range, some are closer to zero, and some are larger. To be clear, some researchers may have reason to put

more store in the types of estimates that tend to find no employment effects – typically the research

designs that I have labeled “close controls.” I have indicated reasons I am somewhat skeptical of these

designs, but also indicated that the jury is still out. More definitively, though, it is indisputable that there

is a body of evidence pointing to job losses from higher minimum wages. Characterizations of the

literature as providing no evidence of job loss are simply inaccurate. 51

         Second, there are two kinds of changes in minimum wages about which we know a lot less. The



50
   This is evidenced, for example, by the numerous simulation studies Michael Reich and co-authors have written,
appealing to a “structural model” to project the effects of proposed high minimum wage increases in various cities.
The studies typically project little if any job loss. For example, Reich et al. (2016) predict that a $15 minimum wage
in San Jose and Santa Clara Counties (California), phased in by 2019, would cost 960 jobs in San Jose, and only 80
fewer jobs over the broader region. However, as they point out, their model is calibrated to “be consistent with the
very small effects that researchers find for the smaller pre-2015 increases in federal and state minimum wages”
(Reich et al., 2016, p. 20). Clearly this view of the evidence is not shared by everyone.
51
   For example, Paul Krugman (2015) has claimed “There’s just no evidence that raising the minimum wage costs
jobs, at least when the starting point is as low as it in in modern America.”

                                                         35
first change is the adoption of much higher minimum wages – as is happening in the United States with

serious movement towards a $15 minimum. There is a great deal of uncertainty about the employment

effects of a $15 minimum wage. One thing we do know is that it would impact far more workers than the

current minimum wage, especially in lower-wage states and lower-wage areas of most states. More

speculatively, my sense is that the costs of a much higher minimum wage are likely to be understated by

simply scaling up the effects based on employment elasticities in the existing literature, because the much

higher share of workers affected will reduce employers’ ability to partially offset minimum wage

increases by changes in margins other than employment.

        The second kind of change about which we know relatively little concerns the introduction of a

new minimum wage – like in Germany. There is some evidence from the introduction of a new minimum

wage in the United Kingdom. Some of this evidence points to job loss, but the evidence is mixed. And,

of course, the institutional setting is not the same.

        Finally, given that the key goal of this paper is to identify important questions to improve our

understanding of the employment effects of minimum wages, I conclude by listing what I view as the

most productive questions to pursue, based on the research I have reviewed:

    1. Why do identification strategies based on close geographic controls tend to find weak or no

        evidence of disemployment effects of minimum wages, in contrast to other methods?

    2. Which type of identification strategy should be viewed as most convincing, and why should

        conflicting evidence from other strategies be viewed more skeptically?

    3. Can we develop a better understanding of what determines minimum wage policy, and can this

        help us narrow the set of compelling strategies for identifying the employment effects of

        minimum wages?

    4. To what extent can theoretical modeling, such as search models, help us understand variation in

        results across identification strategies?

    5. How can we move beyond the inclusion of little-understood trends in our models of employment

        effects, to capture influences predicted by our models that can be measured in the data, or to



                                                        36
    refine estimates when we are limited to including trends in some way?

6. Should we move away from models focusing on short-term effects of the minimum wage on the

    level of low-skilled employment, and towards a focus on longer-term dynamic effects?

7. If we move to dynamic models, what does the evidence say, and do we really find robust

    evidence of effects of minimum wages on aggregate employment?

8. How can we generate more systematic evidence on the relationship between the bite of the

    minimum wage and estimated employment effects?

9. Does variation across studies in the focus on affected workers help explain variation in results,

    and how can we use longitudinal data on workers to better isolate affected workers?

10. Does labor-labor substitution help explain variation in estimated employment effects across

    studies?

11. Can monopsony in labor markets really account for the variation in estimated employment effects

    across studies?

12. Can we use evidence on the bite of the minimum wage, the share of affected workers, labor-labor

    substitution, and monopsony models to help predict the effects of much larger minimum wage

    increases?




                                                37
                                              References

Aaronson, Daniel, Eric French, Isaac Sorkin, and Ted To. 2018. “Industry Dynamics and the Minimum
    Wage: A Putty-Clay Approach.” International Economic Review, Vol. 59, No. 1, February, pp. 51-84.
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. “Synthetic Control Methods for
    Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Program.” Journal
    of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 105, No. 490, February, pp. 493-505.
Addison, John T., McKinley L. Blackburn, and Chad D. Cotti. 2013. “Minimum Wage Increases in a
    Recessionary Environment.” Labour Economics, Vol. 23, August, pp. 30-9.
Allegretto, Sylvia A., Arindrajit Dube, and Michael Reich. 2011. “Do Minimum Wages Really Reduce
    Teen Employment? Accounting for Heterogeneity and Selectivity in State Panel Data.” Industrial
    Relations, Vol. 50, No. 2, April, pp. 205-40.
Allegretto, Sylvia A., Arindrajit Dube, Michael Reich, and Ben Zipperer. 2017. “Credible Research
    Designs for Minimum Wage Studies.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 70, No. 3, May,
    pp. 559-92.
Baskaya, Yusuf Soner, and Yona Rubinstein. 2015. “Using Federal Minimum Wages to Identify the
    Impact of Minimum Wages on Employment and Earnings across U.S. States.” Unpublished paper.
Belman, Dale, and Paul J. Wolfson. 2016. “15 Years of Research on U.S. Employment and the
    Minimum Wage.” Tuck School of Business Working Paper No. 2705499.
Belman, Dale, and Paul J. Wolfson. 2014. What Does the Minimum Wage Do? Kalamazoo, MI:
    Upjohn Press.
Bohn, Sarah, Magnus Lofstrom, and Steven Raphael. 2014. “Did the 2007 Legal Arizona Workers Act
    Reduce the State’s Unauthorized Immigrant Population?” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
    96, No. 2, May, pp. 258-69.
Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. 1982. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
    Employment and Unemployment.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 20, No. 2, June, pp. 487-
    528.
Brown, Alessio. J. G., Christian Merkl, and Dennis J. Snower. 2014. “The Minimum Wage from a Two-
    Sided Perspective.” Economics Letters, Vol. 124, pp. 389-91.
Brummund, Peter, and Michael R. Strain. 2016. “Real and Permanent Minimum Wages.” AEI Economics
    Working Paper 2016-06.
Cadena, Brian C. 2014. “Recent Immigrants as Labor Market Arbitrageurs: Evidence from the Minimum
    Wage.” Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 80, March, pp. 1-12.
Caliendo, Marco, Alexandra Fedorets, Malte Preuss, Carsten Schroeder, and Linda Wittbrodt. 2018. “The
    Short-Run Employment Effects of the German Minimum Wage Reform.” Labour Economics, Vol.
    53, pp. 46-62.
Campolieti, Michele, Tony Fang, and Morley Gunderson. 2005. “Minimum Wage Impacts on Youth
    Employment Transitions, 1993-1999.” Canadian Journal of Economics. Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 81-104.
Campolieti, Michele, Morley Gunderson, and Chris Riddell. 2006. “Minimum Wage Impacts from a
    Prespecified Research Design: Canada 1981-1997.” Industrial Relations, Vol. 45, No. 2, pp. 195-216.
Card, David. 1992a. “Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects of the Federal Minimum
    Wage.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1, October, pp. 22-37.
Card, David. 1992b. “Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of California, 1987-
    1989.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1, October, pp. 38-54.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1995. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum
    Wage. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-
    Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.” American Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 4,
    September, pp. 772-93.
Castillo-Freeman, Alida, and Richard B. Freeman. 1992. “When the Minimum Wage Really Bites: The
    Effect of the U.S.-Level Minimum on Puerto Rico.” In George. J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman,
    Eds., Immigration and the Workforce: Economic Consequences for the United States and Source
    Areas. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 177-211.
Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer. 2017. “The Effect of Minimum Wages
    on the Total Number of Jobs; Evidence from the United States Using a Bunching Estimator.”
    Unpublished paper, http://sole-jole.org/17722.pdf (viewed June 30, 2018).
Choi, Sekyu, and Fernández-Blanco, Javier. 2016. “A Note on U.S. Turnover.” Unpublished paper.
Christl, Michael, Monika Köppl-Turnya, and Dénes Kucsera. “Revisiting the Employment Effects of
    Minimum Wages in Europe.” Forthcoming in German Economic Review.
Clemens, Jeffrey, Lisa B. Kahn, and Jonathan Meer. 2018. “Impacts of the Minimum Wage on Skill
    Requirements: Evidence from Vacancy Postings.” Discussion paper, Yale University.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael R. Strain. “The Short-Run Employment Effects of Recent Minimum Wage
    Changes: Evidence from the American Community Survey.” Forthcoming in Contemporary
    Economic Policy.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael Wither. 2017. “Additional Evidence and Replication Code for Analyzing
    the Effects of Minimum Wage Increases Enacted During the Great Recession.” ESSPRI Working
    Paper Series, Paper #20173.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael Wither. 2016. “The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession: Evidence of
    Effects on the Employment and Income Trajectories of Low-Skilled Workers.” Unpublished paper.
Colangelo, Kyle, and Matthew Harding. In progress. “How Much Should We Trust Fixed Effects in Long
    Term Program Evaluation?”
de Blasio, Guido, and Samuele Poy. 2017. “The Impact of Local Wage Regulation on Employment: A
    Border Analysis from Italy in the 1950s.” Journal of Regional Science, Vol. 57, No. 1, January, pp.
    48-74.
de Linde Leonard, Megan, T.D. Stanley, and Hristos Doucouliagos. 2014. “Does the UK Minimum Wage
    Reduce Employment? A Meta-Regression Analysis.” British Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol. 52,
    No. 3, pp. 499-520.
Dickens, Richard, Stephen Machin, and Alan Manning. 1999. “The Effects of Minimum Wages on
    Employment: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 1-22.
Dolado, Juan, Francis Kramarz, Stephen Machin, Alan Manning, David Margolis, Coen Teulings, Gilles
    Saint-Paul, and Michael Keen. 1996. “The Economic Impact of Minimum Wages in Europe.”
    Economic Policy, Vol. 11, No. 23, pp. 317-72.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2016. “Minimum Wage Shocks, Employment
    Flows, and Labor Market Frictions.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 34, No. 3, July, pp. 663-704.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. “Minimum Wage Effects across State
    Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties.” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 92, No. 4,
    November, pp. 945-64.
Dube, Arindrajit., and Ben Zipperer. 2015. “Pooling Multiple Case Studies using Synthetic Controls: An
    Application to Minimum Wage Policies.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 8944.
Even, William E., and David A. Macpherson. 2017. “California Dreamin’ of Higher Wages.”
    Employment Policies Institute, https://www.epionline.org/wp-
    content/uploads/2017/12/EPI_CaliforniaDreamin_final.pdf (viewed June 24, 2018).
Fairris, David, and Leon Fernandez Bujunda. 2008. “The Dissipation of Minimum Wage Gains for
    Workers through Labor-Labor Substitution: Evidence from the Los Angeles Living Wage
    Ordinance.” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 75, No. 2, October, pp. 473-96.
Freeman, Richard B. 1996. “The Minimum Wage as a Redistributive Tool.” Economic Journal, Vol. 106,
    No. 436, May, pp. 639-49.
Galindo-Rueda, Fernando, and Sonia Pereira. 2004. “The Impact of the National Minimum Wage on
    British Firms.” Final (Draft) Report to the Low Pay Commission on the Econometric Evidence from
    the Annual Respondents Database.
Gittings, R. Kaj, and Ian M. Schmutte. 2016. “Getting Handcuffs on an Octopus: Minimum Wages,
    Employment, and Turnover.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 69, No. 5, October, pp.
    1133-70.
Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Barton Hamilton, Ankit Kalda, and David Sovich. 2018. “State Minimum Wage
    Changes and Employment: Evidence from One Million Hourly Wage Workers.” Unpublished paper,
    Washington University.
Griliches, Zvi. 1979. “Sibling Models and Data in Economics: Beginnings of a Survey.” Journal of
    Political Economy, Vol. 87, No. 5, Part 2, October, pp. S37-S64.
Hoffman, Saul D. 2016. “Are the Effects of Minimum Wage Increases Always Small? A Reanalysis of
    Sabia, Burkhauser, and Hansen.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 69, No. 2, March, pp.
    295-311.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, and Ben Gitis. 2015. “Counterproductive: The Employment and Income Effects of
    Raising America’s Minimum Wage to $12 and to $15 per Hour.” American Action Forum, July 27,
    https://www.americanactionforum.org/research/counterproductive-the-employment-and-income-
    effects-of-raising-americas-min/ (viewed June 24, 2018).
Jardim, Ekaterina, Mark C. Long, Robert Plotnick, Emma van Inwegen, Jacob Vigdor, and Hilary
    Wething. 2017. “Minimum Wage Increases, Wages, and Low-Wage Employment: Evidence from
    Seattle.” NBER Working Paper No. 23532.
Jardim, Ekaterina, Mark C. Long, Robert Plotnick, Emma van Inwegen, Jacob Vigdor, and Hilary
    Wething. In progress. “The Extent of Local Minimum Wage Spillovers.”
Kabátek, Jan. 2015. “Happy Birthday, You’re Fired! The Effects of Age-Dependent Minimum Wage on
    Youth Employment Flows in the Netherlands.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 9528.
Krueger, Alan B. 1995. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage When It Really Bites: A Reexamination of the
    Evidence from Puerto Rico.” Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 14, pp. 1-22.
Krugman, Paul. 2015. “Liberals and Wages.” New York Times, July 17,
    https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/17/opinion/paul-krugman-liberals-and-wages.html.
Kuehn, Daniel. 2016. “Spillover Bias in Cross-Border Minimum Wage Studies: Evidence from a Gravity
    Model.” Journal of Labor Research, Vol. 37, No. 4, December, pp. 441-59.
Liu, Shanshan, Thomas J. Hyclak, and Krishna Regmi. 2016. “Impact of the Minimum Wage on Youth
    Labor Markets.” LABOUR, Vol. 30, No. 1, March, pp. 18-37.
Lordan, Grace, and David Neumark. 2018. “People versus Machines: The Impact of Minimum Wages on
    Automatable Jobs.” Labour Economics, Vol 52, June, pp 40-53.
Machin, Stephen, and Alan Manning. 1994. “Minimum Wages, Wage Dispersion and Employment:
    Evidence from the UK Wages Councils,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 47, No. 2, pp.
    319-29.
Machin, Stephen, Alan Manning, and Lupin Rahman. 2003. “Where the Minimum Wage Bites Hard:
    Introduction of Minimum Wages to a Low Wage Sector.” Journal of the European Economic
    Association, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 154-80.
Manning, Alan. 2005. Monopsony in Motion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
McKinnish, Terra, 2017. “Cross-State Differences in the Minimum Wage and Out-of-State Commuting
    by Low-Wage Workers.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 64, May, pp. 137-47.
McVicar, Duncan, Andrew Park, and Seamus McGuinness. 2018. “Exploiting the Irish Border to
    Estimate Minimum Wage Impacts in Northern Ireland.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 11585.
Meer, Jonathan, and Jeremy West. 2016 “Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment Dynamics.”
    Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 51, No. 2, pp. 500-22.
Meer, Jonathan, and Jeremy West. n.d. “Online Appendices for Effects of the Minimum Wage on
    Employment Dynamics.”
    https://uwpress.wisc.edu/journals/pdfs/JHRv51n02_article08_MeerWest_Appendix.pdf (viewed June
    29, 2018).
Monras, Joan. 2015. “Minimum Wages and Spatial Equilibrium: Theory and Evidence.” IZA Discussion
    Paper No. 9460.
Neumark, David. 2018. “The Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Some Questions We Need to
    Answer.” Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance.
    http://economics.oxfordre.com/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780190625979.001.0001/acrefore-
    9780190625979-e-137 (viewed July 1, 2018).
Neumark, David. 2016. “Policy Levers to Increase Jobs and Increase Income from Work after the Great
    Recession.” IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 5:6 (on-line).
Neumark, David. 2001. “The Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Evidence from a Prespecified
    Research Design.” Industrial Relations, Vol. 40, No. 1, pp. 121-44.
Neumark, David, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014a. “Revisiting the Minimum Wage-
    Employment Debate: Throwing out the Baby with the Bathwater?” Industrial and Labor Relations
    Review, Vol. 67, Supplement, pp. 608-48.
Neumark, David, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014b. “More on Recent Evidence on the Effects
    of Minimum Wages in the United States.” IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 3:24 (on-line).
Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. 2004. “Minimum Wage Effects Throughout
    the Wage Distribution.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 39, No. 2, Spring, pp. 425-50.
Neumark, David, Matthew Thompson, and Leslie Koyle. 2012. “The Effects of Living Wage Laws on
    Low-Wage Workers and Low-Income Families: What Do We Know Now?” IZA Journal of Labor
    Policy, 1:11 (on-line).
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2017. “Reply to Credible Research Designs for Minimum Wage
    Studies.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 70, No. 3, May, pp. 593-609.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2008. Minimum Wages. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Neumark, David, and William L. Wascher. 2007. “Minimum Wages and Employment.” Foundations and
    Trends in Microeconomics, Vol. 3, Nos. 1-2, pp. 1-182.
Neumark, David, and William L. Wascher. 2004. “Minimum Wages, Labor Market Institutions, and
    Youth Employment: A Cross-National Analysis.” ILR Review, Vol. 57, No. 2, pp. 223-48.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2003. “Minimum Wages and Skill Acquisition.” Economics of
    Education Review, Vol. 22, No. 1, February, pp. 1-10.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2002. “State-Level Estimates of Minimum Wage Effects: New
    Evidence and Interpretations from Disequilibrium Methods.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 37,
    No. 1, Winter, pp. 35-62.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1994. “Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum
    Wages: Reply to Card, Katz, and Krueger.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 47, No. 3,
    April, pp. 497-512.
Pérez Pérez, Jorge. 2018. “City Minimum Wages.” Unpublished paper, Brown University,
    http://jorgeperezperez.com/files/Jorge_Perez_JMP.pdf (viewed July 19, 2018).
Pesaran, M. Hashem. 2006. “Estimation and Inference in Large Heterogeneous Panels with a Multifactor
        Error Structure.” Econometrica, Vol. 74, No. 4, July, pp. 967-1012.
Powell, David. 2016. “Synthetic Control Estimation Beyond Case Studies: Does the Minimum Wage
    Reduce Employment?” RAND Labor & Population Working Paper WR-1142.
Reich, Michael. 2016. “A $15 Wage Won’t Cost New York Jobs.” New York Daily News, March 11,
    http://www.nydailynews.com/opinion/michael-reich-15-wage-won-cost-new-york-jobs-article-
    1.2560449 (viewed June 24, 2018).
Reich, Michael, Sylvia Allegretto, and Anna Godoey. 2017. “Seattle’s Minimum Wage Experience 2015-
    16.” Center for Wage Dynamics Policy Brief, University of California, Berkeley.
Reich, Michael, Ken Jacobs, Annette Bernhardt, and Ian Perry. 2015. “The Proposed Minimum Wage
    Law for Los Angeles: Economic Impact and Policy Outcomes.” Center on Wage and Employment
    Dynamics Policy Brief, University of California, Berkeley.
Reich, Michael, Claire Montialoux, Sylvia Allegretto, Ken Jacobs, Annette Bernhardt, and Sarah
    Thomason. 2016. “The Effects of a $15 Minimum Wage by 2019 in San Jose and Santa Clara
    County.” Center on Wage and Employment Dynamics Policy Brief, University of California,
    Berkeley.
Rosen, Harvey S., and Richard E. Quandt. 1978. “Estimation of a Disequilibrium Aggregate Labor
    Market.” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 60, No. 3, August, pp. 371-9.
Sabia, Joseph J., Richard V. Burkhauser, and Benjamin Hansen. 2012. “Are the Effects of Minimum
    Wage Increases Always Small? New Evidence from a Case Study of New York.” Industrial and
    Labor Relations Review, Vol. 65, No. 2, April, pp. 350-76.
Schmitt, John. 2015. “Explaining the Small Employment Effects of the Minimum Wage in the United
    States.” Industrial Relations, Vol. 54, No. 4, October, pp. 547-81.
Shirley, Peter. “The Response of Commuting Patterns to Cross-Border Policy Differentials: Evidence
    from the American Community Survey.” Forthcoming in Regional Science and Urban Economics.
Shirley, Peter. 2017. “The Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment: Evidence from a Hierarchical
    Bayes Framework.” Unpublished paper.
Slichter, David. 2016. “The Employment Effects of the Minimum Wage: A Selection Ratio Approach to
    Measuring Treatment Effects.” Unpublished paper.
Sorkin, Isaac. 2015. “Are There Long-Run Effects of the Minimum Wage?” Review of Economic
    Dynamics, Vol. 18, No. 2, April, pp. 306-33.
Stigler, George J. 1946. “The Economics of Minimum Wage Legislation.” American Economic Review,
    Vol. 36, No. 3, June, pp. 358-65.
Sturn, Simon. 2018. “Do Minimum Wages Lead to Job Losses? Evidence from OECD Countries on Low-
    Skilled and Youth Unemployment.” ILR Review, Vol. 71, No. 3, pp. 647-75.
Thompson, Jeffrey P. 2009. “Using Local Labor Market Data to Re-examine the Employment Effects of
    the Minimum Wage.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 62, No. 3, April, pp. 343-66.
Totty, Evan. 2017. “The Effect of Minimum Wages on Employment: A Factor Model Approach.”
    Economic Inquiry, Vol. 55, No. 4, October, pp. 1712-37.
Zhang, Weilong. 2017. “Distributional Effects of Local Minimum Wage Hikes: A Spatial Job Search
    Approach.” Unpublished paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Figure 1: Percent Differences between State and Federal Minimum Wages, 2018
                        Jan. 1, 2018 (30 states; average % difference
                                           = 30.2%)


                 80.0

                 70.0

                 60.0

                 50.0
  % difference




                 40.0

                 30.0

                 20.0

                 10.0

                  0.0
                         NJ



                         NE




                         HI




                         NY
                        NM




                        NV
                          IL



                        OH



                        WV
                         AR




                         MI
                         AK




                        OR

                          RI




                        WA
                         SD

                        MD



                        ME




                         AZ
                        MO
                        MN
                         FL
                         DE



                        MT




                         CT
                        CO




                         VT

                        MA
                         CA



                         DC
Figure 2: States (and Territories) with Higher vs. Federal Minimum Wage, Jan. 1, 2018




Source: https://www.dol.gov/whd/minwage/america.htm (viewed June 24, 2018). In states shaded light
gray, the federal minimum wage prevails for workers covered by the Fair Labor Standard Act. The state
minimum wage is higher in the other states.
Table 1: Recent Estimates of Minimum Wage Effects on Unskilled Employment
Authors            Employment elasticity and groups studied                    Data/approach
Geographically-proximate designs
Dube, Lester, and Near zero for teens and restaurant workers.                  Data: Quarterly Census of Employment
Reich (2010)                                                                   and Wages (QCEW).
                                                                               Approach: Paired counties on opposite
                                                                               sides of state borders.
Allegretto, Dube,   Near zero for teens.                                       Data: Current Population Survey.
and Reich (2011)                                                               Approach: States compared only to those
                                                                               in same Census division.
Addison et al.      Varying sign, more negative, generally insignificant for   Data: QCEW, CPS, and American
(2013)              restaurant workers and teens; stronger negative at         Community Survey (ACS).
                    height of Great Recession (−0.34).                         Approach: Similar methods to Dube et al.
                                                                               (2010) and Allegretto et al. (2011)
                                                                               restricted to 2005-10 period.
Gittings and        Near zero for teens; larger negative elasticities in       Data: Quarterly Workforce Indicators
Schmutte (2016)     markets with short non-employment durations (−0.1 to       (QWI).
                    −0.98) and smaller positive elasticities in markets with   Approach: States compared only to those
                    long non-employment durations (0.2 to 0.46).               in same Census division.
Slichter (2016)     -0.04 (teens).                                             Data: QWI.
                                                                               Approach: Comparisons to bordering
                                                                               counties and other nearby counties.
Liu et al. (2016)   −0.17 (14-18 year-olds).                                   Data: QWI.
                                                                               Approach: Comparisons within Bureau of
                                                                               Economic Analysis (BEA) Economic
                                                                               Areas (EA) that cross state lines, with
                                                                               controls for EA-specific shocks.
Other approaches
Thompson (2009)     −0.3 (for teen employment share).                          Data: QWI.
                                                                               Approach: Low-wage counties vs. higher-
                                                                               wage counties in states.
Neumark et al.      −0.14/−0.15 for teens, −0.05/−0.06 for restaurant          Data: QCEW and CPS.
(2014a, 2014b)      workers.                                                   Approach: States compared to data-driven
                                                                               choice of controls (synthetic control), and
                                                                               state panel data.
Baskaya and         −0.3 to −0.5 for teens.                                    Data: CPS.
Rubinstein (2015)                                                              Approach: States, using federally-induced
                                                                               variation as instrumental variable.
Dube and            −0.051 (mean) and −0.058 (median) for teens.               Data: CPS.
Zipperer (2015)                                                                Approach: States compared to data-driven
                                                                               choice of controls (synthetic control).
Clemens and         Appx. −0.97, for those directly affected by minimum        Data: Survey of Income and Program
Wither (2016)       wage increase.                                             Participation, CPS.
                                                                               Approach: Targeted/affected workers
                                                                               versus other low-wage workers in states
                                                                               affected by federal increases
Powell (2016)       −0.44 for teens.                                           Data: CPS.
                                                                               Approach: States compared to data-driven
                                                                               choice of controls (synthetic controls,
                                                                               estimated simultaneously with
                                                                               employment effect).
 Authors               Employment elasticity and groups studied                      Data/approach
 Totty (2017)          −0.01 to −0.03 for restaurant workers; −0.03 to −0.07         Data: QCEW and CPS.
                       for teens.                                                    Approach: States compared to data-driven
                                                                                     choice of controls (factor model).
Notes: The table reports my best attempts to identify the authors’ preferred estimates reported in the papers. The Thompson
estimate cannot be compared directly to other elasticity estimates because there is no population count in the data source used.
The Clemens/Wither elasticity is based on a 6.6 percentage point decline (p. 27), divided by a 70.2 percent employment rate (or a
9.4 percent employment decline), divided by a 9.7% minimum wage increase (50 cents, from p. 14, divided by $5.15). (These
numbers are reported in a 2016 version of the study.)
Table 2. Weights on States in Same Census Division from Synthetic Control Method, CPS Data at State by Quarter
Level, 1990 – 2011:Q2
                                   Proportion of weight on states in same division
                                                     Matching on:
                                Log teen            One-quarter           Four-quarter
                             employment-         difference in log      difference in log    Avg. #       Avg. #     Avg. # states in
                             to-population      teen employment-       teen employment- divisions in     states in    donor pool in
                                  ratio         to-population ratio to-population ratio donor pool donor pool         same division
 Division                          (1)                  (2)                    (3)             (4)          (5)             (6)
 New England                      0.209                0.163                  0.185            6.9         30.4             1.9
 Middle Atlantic                  0.134                0.455                  0.168            5.5         20.0             1.0
 East North Central               0.000                0.016                  0.015            9.0         39.5             3.5
 West North Central               0.823                0.698                  0.464            3.7          7.7             1.7
 South Atlantic                   0.290                0.075                  0.222            6.9         26.8             4.9
 Pacific                          0.339                0.279                  0.297            5.3         21.1             2.1
 Aggregate                        0.323                0.264                  0.251            6.1         24.0             2.5
Notes: Results are reported for the 50 unique minimum wage treatments (out of a total of 129 increases based on criteria described in
the text) for which there is at least one potential donor state from the same Census division. The numbers in columns (4)-(6) refer to
the matching on residuals or the log teen employment-to-population ratio. There are somewhat fewer minimum wage treatments
when matching on the one- or four-quarter differences in the employment-to-population ratio because the earliest lags are not
available at the beginning of the sample period. The aggregate row reports the means across all treatment units.
Source: Neumark et al. (2014a).
