                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF CONTROLS:
                                AMERICAN SUGAR




                                Anne 0. Krueger




                             Working Paper No. 2504




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 February 1988




 research reported here is part of the NBERs research program in International
dies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
eau of Economic Research.
                                                                           NBER Working Paper #2504
                                                                           February 1988




                                    The Political Economy of Controls:
                                              American Sugar




                                                  ABSTRACT


                      This    paper outlines the salient cnaraoteri stios           o oonpetnn
        nodal     s of economic recul ata on ann controls.           It then cc ani nec trie a ci
        ti on         of the Pseri can sugar progr am tron      lf4 to 1 fOTi n    iqhc   of   t nesa


        models.              While lobbying   and other features of traditional eodeis were
        clearly          important,     otter cienente also played         a key role.     In par—

        ti    nil er, a technocracy developed, and conpi ea i ta of regul ati or served an
        an important factor perpetuattng the sugar               program. Sinilarly, buoying
        and the role on vastec I ntereste en clearly important in toe end uti on

        of the progi-en orca it oegan              Out there   was an element of 'acudert in

        the prograe.s initiation.               Once it   eoieted.   it became an netrunvnt to

        be captured and used by pci iticians, technocrats! ano e:onooio toterenta

        a 1    k a.




nne 0. Krueger
epartment of Economics
uke University
urham, N.C. 27706
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF CONTROLS: AMERICAN SUGAR
                 Anne 0. Krueger

       National   Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
        Working Paper Number 2504,   February   1988



                     ERRATA, June 1988




    P. 1: In the acknowledgment footnote, please
insert "Harvard University" in the last line after
the University of North Carolina.

      P. 5: Fourth line, strike "the" before
"resources".

    P. 10: Second from last line, insert "unless
of course the price falls so low that harvesting
proves unprofitable" after "output".

      P. 16: Second line from bottom of text — 10
should be 30.

   P. 30: There's a typo in the first line of the
first full paragraph: "enused" should be
"ensued".

   P. 32: Fourth line, first full paragraph:
Please replace "The Canadians" with "Some Canadian
+ i r m s"


    P. 33: Three lines from bottom of text:
Please change 1986 to 1987. Also, please change
the last two sentences in that paragraph to read:
If sugar prices are to be maintained at their
present levels, production controls will have to
be instituted, stocks will have to mount, or
subsidized exports will have to start.   If the
political process is unwilling to accept any of
these three options, price supports will have to
be lowered.
                The Political Economy of Controls: American Sugar


                                Anne 0. Krueger*


    In economic theory, it is relatively straightforward to analyze the impact
of politically-imposed controls over economic activity. Whether the control is
over feedgrain prices in Egypt, the quantities of imports of individual iteimns
in India, price controls over "old" oil, or the "voluntary" reduction in the
number of automobiles exported from Japan to the United States, several con-
clusions follow straightforwardly. First and foremost, those controls (and
most others) at best achieve their objectives in a a more costly manner than
would alternative mechanisms. Second, the presumed beneficiaries of controls
are often quite different from those (if any) actually benefitting. Third, the
costs of controls seem to be largely ignored or misunderstood in political
decision— making, at least in the first instance.


      Despite these well-established results, controls seem to persist. A major
challenge confronting those concerned with these costs is therefore to attempt
to understand the reasons why the politial process often generates and per-
petuates high—cost solutions to stated objectives. To establish an understand-
ing of the political economy of controls would therefore appear to be a formi-
* 1  am heavily indebted to Paul Pecorino for valuable research assistance in
preparation of this paper. Al Reifman was extremely generous with assistance
in providing material from the Congressional Research Service. Richard Snape
was exceptionally helpful and generous in commenting on the entire manuscript
and in sharing his extensive knowledge of the international sugar economy.
Helpful comments and suggestions were made by members of the Political Economy
Workshop at Duke University, and the International Economics Workshops at Vir-
ginia Polytechnic and State University and the University of North Carolina.


                                        1
dable, but important, challenge, if means are to be sought to attain political
objectives      through least—cost means.

       Ian Little has been in the forefront among professional economists using

their analytical tool       kit   to   demonstrate the costs of controls in a variety
of    settings. His work has been instrumental in convincing the vast majority of

the    economics profession that the economic costs of controls are far greater
than was generally thought two or three decades ago. lt is therefore ap-
propriate that an essay in his honor attempt to further understanding of the
political economy of economic policy. To that end, this paper sets forth the
various hypotheses that are implicitly or explicitly made by economists about
the determinants of controls and regulations. It then subjects those
hypotheses to scrutiny by examining how well they perform in explaining the
political      economy of one particualar set of controls, those pertaining to

American sugar.

      To   that end, Section 1 contains a brief survey of the literature pertaining
to the political mechanisms generating controls. The next several sections
cover the essentials governing the production and distribution of sugar (Sect.
2),    the origins of the Americtn sugar Program (Section 3), and its evolution

over the period from 1948 to 1987 (Sections 4 through 6). Section 7 then

provides a critical examination of the evolution of the program from the view-

point of the various hypotheses laid out in Section 1. A final section

provides some tentative conclusions.



Sect. 1. Models of Econonic Policy Formulation



      The absence among economists' of a widely—accepted          nodel of economic


1.   There is a large literature among political scientists focussing on the



                                              2
policy formulation is readily illustrated by the divergent implicit and ex-
plicit assumptions about the nature of intervention underlying policy anaysis
in the various subfields in economics. In international trade, the tradition
was for long to assume that policy makers were uninformed and that failure to
adopt Pareto-optimal policies reflected ignorance on their part. International
economists assumed that a benevolent government would, once informed of the
benefits of free trade, immediately undertake policy reform. Considerable be-
wilderment then resulted from the many departures from Pareto—optimal policies
in circumstances where infant-industry and monopoly power in trade did not
apply.
    Several    models of   political-economic   interaction in   policy formulation

have   been   set forth in an effort to understand the persistence of some

policies. Notable among them were Brock and Magee (1978), who modelled

politicians   as needing money to win elections but simultaneously losing votes
if they support lobbyists' causes too ardently: an equilibrium      occurs when the
revenue from lobbying at the margin increases votes by the same      amount as that

lobbying activity loses votes.       Corden (1974), by contrast, attempted to ex-

plain international   economic policy as a consequence of a 'conservative social
welfare   function": politicians attempt to protect peoples' income streams, and



determinants of policy formulation. I am heavily indebted to Robert Bates for

long and useful discussions about      this   literature. In this section, I focus

only on the economics literature on the subject, in part because of my own

comparative advantage, but in part because the intent of the paper is to focus

on political—economic interactions, and the role of market forces in affecting

the outcomes of policies adopted by politicians, topics largely neglected in

both the economics   and   the political science literature.




                                          3
thus provide assistance to those who are adversely affected by shifts in

prices and competitive positions. Finally, Bhagwati and Srinivasan (1980)

modelled       "directly unproductive activity",   in which lobbyists spend resources

in seeking legislation equal in value to the value of the protection to them.

      In public economics, there has been a similar tradition: a presentation of

economic efficiency conditions for optimality, with the accompanying assertion

that nonfulfillment of these conditions — such as the presence of exter-

nalities -      represented a case of market    failure and therefore   justified market

intervention. Underlying these sets of policy prescriptions is the notion once

again    of government as a benevolent guardian, hampered only by ignorance of
proper    economic policy as it seeks disinterestedly in maximizing Benthamite
social   welfare.

      In the field of industrial organization, by contrast, the tradition until

the    l960s   was to assume that government bureaucrats were in fact pursuing the

public   interest      in regulating whatever was regulated — transport, communica-
tions, public utilities, and       the like. This view was challenged, and largely
overthrown      in the 1970s by Stigler, Peltzman, and others, who instead posited

full rationality of all actors. In this view, all political agents are ra-

tional    and use the political process     to effect wealth transfers. Thus, the

view   of the regulatory process chnnged fundamentally, as it was seen as a ra-
tional outcome to private maximization through the political process. All par-
ticipants were seen to be fully rational and acting in their own self inter-
est. In    this model, policy analysis by economists would serve no useful pur-

pose, as additional information would not change the behavior of any               par-
tic ipant in the regulatory process.
   An interesting variant on the Stigler-Peltzman approach has been set forth
by Becker, who assumes that political interest groups fona in their own self
interest, and that politicians rationally choose policies in response to the

                                            4
competing pressures these groups can exert. With competition among groups, and
the assumption that anything   which   benefits one group   must   either be financed
directlyby a tax or indirectly by costing another group (including dead-
weight losses), Becker concludes that the resources are allocated to the
political   process to maximize the benefits (which are for some        groups   nega-
tive) each group expects to receive.
     Yet another approach is that of Nancur Olson. Starting with the "logic of
collective action", in which the "free rider" problem prevents the effective
collusion of large groups of small losers, Olson formulated hypotheses as to
which groups would emerge and the characteristics of industries and of other
economic interest groups that would be likely to be effective. Carrying his
analysis further, Olson attempted to explain differentials in growth rates
among nations after the Second World War. In Olson's world, interest grups or-
ganize to protect their interests as growth progresses. Over time, more and
more groups and institutions are in place, and in the process economic ef-
ficienoy diminishes and growth decelerates. War destroys these groups and in-
terests, at least to some extent, so that war-devastated countries, such as
Germany and Japan are enabled to grow rapidly, freed of many of the resis-
tances to growth that arise over time in a war-free environment.2
     Olson's model   essentially posits that economically—inefficient outcomes

arise because of free rider problems: it is rational for individuals not to

join groups interested in consumer welfare, etc., because the benefits to them

are independent of their own  activites. This contrasts significantly with        the

Stigler-Becker   view in two ways: institutional means are not available          for



2.   See Mueller for a series of papers examining the empirical validity of the
Olson hypotheses regarding growth rates.



                                         5
large groups of small         pootential gainers or losers to represent their inter-
ests, and      interest   groups form gradually over time as they learn about their

interests (and possibly respond to the gains of other groups).

      The   final view of the political process is that of Buchanan    and the public

choice      group. Here, the underlying assumption is that individuals behave in
their interest in the political ,       as well as the economic, arona, but that the

"rules      of the gone" in the political arena may permit choices that,    while in-

dividually rational, could clearly be improved upon by a different decision

rule.    As Buchanan has    put it:
      "Economists   should cease proferring policy advice as if they were employed

by    a benevolent despot, and they should look to the structure within which
political decisions are made             (Buchanan,   P. 223).

  Each of these models has            testable hypotheses        underlying them. Do

politicians     anticipate the outcome of their controls? Are     they acting in their

own    self—interest, or the self—interest of the voters whom they represent in
any   sense? Do lobbyists and other pressure groups always know and act in their

self—interest?

     However, an important difficulty is that it is not obvious how one could
systematically          data that would provide for statistical estimates of,
                    collect

e.g., the fraction of time that politicians were influenced by lobbyists and
the    fraction they represented their constituents or how one could measure the
pressures confronting politicians.
    Thus, to date the variety of models of political—economic interaction have
not been subject to empirical testing. Yet empirical evidence with regard to
behavior is essential if progress is to be made in better understanding of the
political economy of controls.




                                             6
     In an effort to start providing empirical evidence, this paper is devoted
to   trading the evolution of controls in one particular market - American

sugar - over   time.   The essay covers controls over prices, production, and im-
ports   of American sugar from 1934 to the present are analyzed herein, in the
hope that an empirical understanding of one set of interactions between
markets and politicans, and of the evolution of one set of controls over time,

may be suggestive of some of the missing links in a fuller paradigm of the
political   economy of controls, and possibly   of a methodology for empirically

assessing   a number of controls to such scrutiny. In Sect.8, the competing as-
sumptions about behavior underlying the models set forth above are scrutinized
with respect to the experience with American sugar.


2. The Sugar Market
      The eonomic effects of the American sugar program have been extensively
analyzed, and are reasonably well known. In this section, the essential
characteristics of the sugar industry, and the relation of the American market
to the international sugar market are described. Emphasis is on those aspects
relevant for analyzing the political economy of controls, at least as ex-
emplified in the case of sugar.
2.1. The Production Function3
      Sugar is an unusual commodity. It can be made from either raw cane or
sugarbeets, and yet the end products of the two are perfect substitutes. Cane
can grow only in tropical or semi-tropical climates while sugarbeets are grown
in temperate climates. Both cane and beets require processing to make sugar.




3. This section draws heavily on Landell Mille (1985). The interested reader
can consult that source for considerably greater detail. The facts, however,
are in virtually all hearings pertaining to the sugar program.

                                         7
In both cases, initial processing must be undertaken within a very short time

after harvest; it must therefore be done close to where the cane or beet is

grown.

      For   beet sugar, a single stage refining process has Produced refined sugar
since the     late 1800s. In the case of cane, however, second stage refining is

nececssary     to make refined sugar; raw sugar (i.e., that processed from cane
near the site) can be refined anywhere.4 While there are a few byproducts of
cane and of beet, they are not sufficiently valuable to warrant growing the
crops in the absence of a demand for their sugar; at any event, the byproducts
made from cane and beet are similar.
      Cane and beet mills, and cane refineries are capital intensive, and ap-
parently have little or no alternative use. No farmer would consider growing
cane or sugarbeet without a processing plant nearby, and no processor (of raw
cane and of sugarbeet — cane refining is different) would consider estab-
lishing a     plant unless there were a proximate source of supply. For this

reason, there is a considerable degree of vertical integration in the in-

dustry; in Hawaii, for example, most cane is grown         in fields owned   by   the same

parties     who own the   local sugar mill for   first-stage refining.
     Mills need a    fairly steady flow of cane/beet in order to utilize their

capacity     reasonably steadily over a major part of the year. Arrangements for
harvesting sugarbeet and cane therefore include fairly detailed provisions as
to   the date of delivery of the product to the mill.



4. The United States had a tariff on raw sugar imports, and a higher tariff on
refined sugar imports throughout most of the 19th century. At that time, beet
sugar required second-stage refining.The differential in tariffs between raw
and refined sugar was high enough to make the effective rate of protection to
refining greater than 100 percent. The best means of determining whether sugar
had been refined was the "Dutch color test" which graded imports by the extent
of brown coloration        of the sugar being imported. Among the 19th century
problems     with tariff administration was the importation of brown refined
sugar.   See Taussig 1924, Pp. 101 ff. for a full description.



                                            8
2.2. The Demand for Sugar and Sweeteners.
    More than 70 percent of U.S. sugar consumption is by industrial users -
bakeries,   soft drinks, confectionary, cereals, etc.. The remaining 25-30 per-
cent of consumption goes through distribution directly to consumers (defined
as all sugar sold in bags of less than 50 pounds).
     Consumption of refined sugar in the United States peaked at about 10.7
million pounds in 1972, equivalent to about 102 pounds per capita. At that
time,   per capita consumption of all caloric sweeteners (corn sweeteners,

honey, etc.) was 13.3 million tons, or 25.1 pounds per      capita.5   By 1986,

American consumption of sugar had fallen to 7.44 million tons, or 61.1

pounds per capita, while total caloric sweetener consumption had risen to

15.898 million tons or 130.4 pounds   per capita.6


2.3 The International Sugar Economy


5. This contrasts with an estimated consumption per capita of 9 pounds in the
United States in 1822 (see Johnson, P.5). Here and throughout, the reader
should be alert to units: production is often measured in terms of tons of
cane or beet; these units (contrast Tables 2 and 3 below) are obviously dif-
ferent from those that measure the weight of refined sugar produced or con-
sumed. Since the yield of cane and beet varies from year to year and place to
place, conversion ratios are not a constant. However, the conversion factor is
close to 10:1 — for example in 1986, 28.743 tons of cane were produced, which
was 3.4 million tons of sugar, raw value. For beet, 25.229 tons were produced,
with 2.989 million tons of sugar, raw value produced. See USDA, Sugar and
Sweetener Situation and Outlook Yearbook, June 1981. For an amusing discussion
of the problems of administering an import quota set in terms of raw value,
see House Hearings 1974, Pp. 95-101.

6. Consumption of non-caloric sweeteners has also risen; in 1970 it is es-
timated that they accounted for 5.8 pounds per capita cons.nnpt ion, while by
1987 they were 18.5 pounds per capita. There are many grounds for believing
that much of the increase in consumption of noncaloric sweeteners may have
represented a shift in tastes, rather than a consequence of relative price
changes. For that reason, the evolution of noncaloric sweetener production and
consumption will not be further considered in this paper. Taking it into ac-
count would not significantly alter the argument at any stage, as total con-
sumption of noncaloric sweeteners still occupies less than 15 percent of the
combined market.


                                       9
       There are few countries in the world that do not intervene in their
domestic sugar markets. Perhaps this is because both temperate and tropical
countries    can grow sugar. Regardless of the motives for intervention, the

result is that about three quarters of sugar grown in the world is consumed in

the country of production.

      For this reason, the international market             is sonewhat thin, with about
27 million tons out of an estimated total world production of about 100 mil-

lion   tons (sugar equivalent, both cane and beet) entering into international
trmde (Sugar and Sweeteners Situation, June 1987, P. 35) in the 1985\86 crop
year. Even out of that total, the existence of a number of preferential ar-
rangements (including the American quota and Cuban-USSR trade) has meant that
the "free market" price has governed only a small fraction of transactions.
American preferences are diminishing in importance, however, as American im-
ports    have fallen, for reasons that will become evident below, from 6.2 mil-

lion tons in 1977 to an estimated 1.5 million tons in l987.

      The price of sugar has always displayed volatility on international

markets. Two       factors   contributed to this. First, there is an eighteen month

lag   between   planting of cane and       first harvesting. Thereafter, cane is usually
cut two more times at approximately six month intervals before the field is
cleared    and a new crop planted. Thus, when sugar prices rise, there is a

longer time-lag than         for annual crops    (although not as long as for some     tree
crops)    before   additional production      reaches the market. When the    sugar price

falls, it is an      even    longer time   before    the planting response is reflected in

reduced sugar output. Second, and at least as important,             the fact that   the in-

ternational     market is a residual has intensified these price swings.


7. In December 1987, the United States Department of Agriculture announced
that the permitted level of impocts for 1988 would be 750 thousand tons. See
New York Times, December 16 1987, P. 29.



                                                10
      Thus, after Cuba lost her U.S. quota in 1960, world prices rose for several
 years. Thereafter, new plantings (which took place predominantly in countries
 which received higher sugar prices because of their increased               quotas in   the
American       market)    matured,     sugar supplies rose sharply; the world
                                     and world

 price fell from a high of 8.5 cents per pound in 1963 to 1.86 cents per pound
 in   1966.    That,    in turn, apparently discouraged plantings, because     by 1969 the

sugar    price was rising again. However, because of the worldwide commodity

boom, the production response was apparently more sluggish and delayed             than in
earlier       periods    of high prices. 1-fence, the price of sugar rose continuously

until November 1974, reaching           over   40 cents per pound in that month. There

then   followed        another sharp decline in price as new supplies appeared by 1976,

and the price fell for the next two years. By 1980, however, production had

once again responded to          lower prices, and    the price again rose sharply, reach-

ing 29.02 cents per pound by the end of 1980.

      Thereafter, the world price fell           and remained depressed for a long period
as American imports declined sharply and the European Community increased ex-
ports as its production surpluses mounted. It was estimated in 1985 that, if
all countries were to adopt free trade in sugar, the world price would be
about 12 cents per pound.9 That contrasted with an actual price at the end of
that year of about 4 cents per pound and a U.S. price of 20.3 cents per pound.


8. Cuba's exports and quota constituted the vast majority of sugar imports
into the United States prior to 1960. In 1959, for example, Cuba exported
3,437,582 million tons to the United States out of total imports of 4,273,000
tons. This contrasted with domestic production of 4,702,619 million tons in
that year. By 1961, Cuba's exports to the United States were zero. See Senate
Finance Coninittee, Hearings on Extension of the        Act of 1948,1965, p.
ll.Cuba's estimated share of the world sugar trade was 28.6 percent in 1961,
and 24.67 percent in 1984. The Soviet Union replaced the limited States as the
major market for Cuban sugar in the l960s. See Tan for particulars of the
Soviet-Cuban sugar trade.
9. See Leu and Knutson for one attempt to estimate what the world price would
be in the absence of the current U.S. program. See also Landell Mills.


                                                 11
By 1987, however, the world price was once again rising fairly sharply, reach-

ing about     9.5   cents per pound by the end   of   the year despite the cutback in

American imports      and continued European   exports.



3. Origj of the              Program1°
      There have been few years in American history when sugar has not been the
object of some degree of intervention. It has always been an importable.
Starting in 1796, a tariff on imports was imposed, and until the late 1800s,
revenue was the major motive for the tariff, as domestic production was less
than ten percent of consumption, with imports supplying more than 90 percent
of the U.S.market.''
     Hawaii's relationship to the United         States in the 1870s and 1880s was

heavi   ly centered around sugar: a free—trade agreement with the United States
had   pernitted     Hawaiian sugar to be imported without duty, and had encouraged
the expansion        of Hawaiian cane growing land. The American Congress then

proceeded to rescind the duty on sugar, but to pay a bounty of 2 cents per
pound (about the same as the specific tariff earlier collected and equivalent
to    100   percent nominal protection) to American growers. The desire to have
access to the American market at favorable prices seems to have been a major
notive behind Hawaiian accession to U. S.         jurisdiction, after which the U.S.

reverted     to tariff protection and Hawaii escaped      the   sugar tariff. From the


10. This section draws heavily on Terpstra. Only those aspects of the pre-1934
sugar tariff relevant for later development are discussed here. For a full ac-
count, see Taussig 1924, Part II.
11. House Agriculture Committee Hearings of 1951; Extension of the Sugar Act
of 1948. HR 4521, Pp. 34—35.Taussig attributed the expansion of sugarcane
production in Louisiana in the 19th century to the existence of the protective
tariff, and documented U.S.D.A. efforts in the late 19th century that led to
the development of sugarbeet production in the United States. Taussig, 1924,
Chapters IV and VII.


                                           12
1890s until      1930, American tariff protection continued. Because the Hawaiians
were    exempt from the tariff (and Cuba              also   received a twenty—five percent

reduction in duty)12, they benefitted from protection in the sheltered

American       market.     The Philippine sugar industry also started under the
umbrella of American        protection.13
        The Smoot—Hawley tariff, however, raised             the rate   of duty faced   by Cuba
to 2 cents per pound (compared with a world sugar price of .73 cents a pound
in 1932), and the duty on imports from other countries to 2.5 cents per pound
for other exporting countries. In fact, however, imports from Cuba and the
Philippines met U.S. demands, and little sugar was imported from other
countries. Indeed, during some periods of the year, the sugar price fell below
the worid—price-cum duty as            Cuban     sugar was    more than sufficient to meet

demand at that price.

      During   the Great Depression, sugar prices fell drastically. Among other
consequences, the Cuban economy was extremely adversely affected, and with it,
the fortunes of American investors who owned sugar plantations there. As
part of    New Deal      legislation   attempting to cope with the        crisis, the Jones
Costigan Act      of 1934 was passed.       It   provided for a system of production and

marketing      quotas for domestic producers and import quotas for foreigners
(almost exclusively        Cuba). The intent of the Jones-Costigan Act seems to have

been primarily to shore up the Cuban                   economy and to     increase American

producers'      incomes. There was, in addition to production and import restric-



12. Cuban sugar production rose rapidly in the first three decades of the cen-
tury in response to this partial exemption. Much of the cane was planted, har-
vested, and processed (first-stage) on American-owned land and sugar mills. By
1934, it   was   estimated that Americans owned 70      percent of Cuban sugar produc-
ing capacity. (1934 Hearings, P.         106). See also House Hearings, 1952, P. 35.

13.   Again, see   Taussig,   Ch. 6.


                                                 13
tions, provision     for direct   payment to   American producers. However, there was

also a    clear intention to contain the size of the industry. ln his message to

Congress, President Roosevelt's statement was        that:
  'Steadily increasing sugar production.. .has created a price and marketing
situation prejudicial to virtually everyone interested. Farmers in many areas

are    threatened with low prices for their beets and cane, and Cuban purchases
of our goods have dwindled steadily as her shipments of sugar to this country
have declined.
      There is a school of thought which believes that sugar ought to
be    on the free list....

      "I do not at this time recommend placing sugar on the free list. I feel

that we    ought   first to try out a system of quotas with the three—fold object

of    keeping down the price of sugar to consumers, of providing for the reten-
tion    of beet and cane farming within our continental limits, and also to

provide against further expansion of this necessarily expensive industry...

Like much of the New Deal legislation, the Jones—Costigan Act was passed

quickly within several       days of its introduction and after      hearIngs lasting

only a few hours.'5For later reference, it         is   interesting to note that sugar

producers    opposed the initial act •   Beet   growers were particularly adamant in
their opposition as the act called for a 17 percent reduction in sugarbeet
production    from 1933 (See 1934 hearings, Pp. 84,118,

121, 132,145, 148, 152, 167.16

14. Sugar Beets and Sugarcane as Basic Agricultural Commodities Under the
Agricultural Adjustment       H.R.7907. February j, &flL House Hearings, P.
1. The Chief, Section of Sugar and Rice, Agricultural Adjustment Administra-
tion, testified that the domestic sugar industry was "an expensive one from
the point of view of
the consumer and that lies behind the freezing of sugar beet acreage." P. 13.

15. See Ibid.

16. Because sugar was an import, its regulation should have come under the
jurisdiction of the House Ways and Means Committee and the Senate Finance Coin-


                                           14
    Even in the 1934 legislation, sugar refiners        sought quotas   to restrict

imports of refined sugar. They claimed that the 1930 legislation (Smoot

Hawley) left them with a cost disadvantage vis-a—vis foreign producers

(because    the Congress had assumed   that it took one ton of raw sugar to make a

ton of refined, whereas the actual conversion ratio was more like 1.07 to

one.'7 So, quotas on imports of refined sugar were imposed to satisfy domes-

tic (second—stage)     refining interests; the quota was later replaced with a
prohibition -    a   necessary condition for preserving the support of the sugar
refiners who imported the raw (cane) sugar and refined it in their plants.
    The initially recommended quotas were set with a base equal to the
preceeding three years marketings. The average marketings over that period had
been   (in millions of tons of sugar, raw value):

                      Continental beets   1,450,000
                      Continental cane (from Louisiana and Florida) 1,260,000
                      Hawaiian cane         935,000
                      Puerto Rican cane     821,000
mittee. It did come under the latter. But one of the interesting 'accidents'
with important consequences was that when the Jones-Costigan Act was first up
for renewal in 1937, the Chairman of the House Agriculture Committee re-
quested, as a favor from his colleague and friend, the Chairman of the Ways
and Means Conpnjttee, that the House Agriculture Committee handle sugar mat-
ters. The Chairman of the House Ways and Means Coimiitteeacceeded to the re-
quest, and the House Agriculture Committee has handled sugar matters ever
since.See Price for an account. Because there is a tax on sugar imports, only
the House may initiate legislation. This right of initiation, combined with
the fact that sugar is the only agricultural commodity considered by the
Senate Finance Committee has resulted in unusually great power concentrated in
the hands of the House Agriculture Committee for dealing with sugar. See the
discussion of the 1962 bill below for one instance where the Senate opposed
the House decisions but in the end was unable to prevail.
17. Johnson (P. 30) believes that American refineries had lost their compara-
tive advantage in the 1920s and used the 1.07 to one conversion ratio as an
argument for protection which they needed on other grounds. Taussig 's documen-
tation, however, suggests that the protection accorded to American sugar
refineries as early as the 1870s was more than sufficient to provide needed
protection and monopoly profit. See his interesting discussion of the "Sugar
Trust"(Taussig, 1924, Ch. VIII). Taussig cites testimony before Congress in
1888 by the head of the American    Sugar Refining Company (the Trust) to the ef-
fect that "the mother of all trusts is the customs tariff bill". Taussig 1924,
p. 104.



                                          15
                       Philippine cane     1,037,000
                       Cuban cane          1,944,000
                       Virgin Islands cane     5,000
                            Total          6,452,000 tons'8
      As   already indicated, the sugar growers opposed the introduction of these
quotas in 1934, feeling it was against their interests. When the bill cane up
for renewal in 1937, however, they had switched sides, and actively supported
the sugar program and production and import quotas. (See pp. 16-45 of the 1937
House Hearings). Interestingly, a representative of the United States Sugar
Corporation (based in Florida) opposed the 1937 bill on the grounds that
Florida could expand production and indicated a preference for unrestricted
sugar imports unless Florida's quota was increased substantially (P. 168 of
House Hearings, 1937). Louisiana growers also asked for larger quotas, while
beet   producers had not even filled their quotas under the original 1934         Act.

(P.   145 of 1937 Hearings). Representatives of both   Puerto   Rico and   Hawaii both
advocated the removal of restrictions on their exportation of refined sugar to
the mainland (P. 55, 106).
      The   sugar program was again renewed in 1940. With the advent of the Second

World      War, however, it was naturally suspended as the problem became one of
increasing output, rather than controlling supply. During the war, Cuban sugar
was exported to the United States, even when American prices were below those
that could have been realized in other markets.'9.


4. The "Support Cuba" Period: 1948 -      1960.

      After the War, the Sugar Act was reconsidered in 1948.       At that time, of

course,     the world price was high (although the U.S. price was about 10 percent
above it) and the real issue was the percentaged of sugar that should be sup-

18. Data from P. 2 of House Hearings 1934.
19. Sugar Act of 1948, House Agriculture Committee Hearings of        1947. Pp. 42-
44. See also Gerber for a discussion.




                                          16
 plied from domestic and foreign sources. A major consideration in devising the
 legislation was the moral debt owed to Cuba, because of Cuban steadfastness in
providing sugar to a wartime ally. As passed, the intent of the legislation
was to "protect foreigners' interests in the U.S. market'. This was to be ac-
complished by continuing      to restrict U. S.      production to 55 percent of      con-

sumption and allocating the remaining rights to supply the high-price                U.S.

market to foreign countries, which in practice meant primarily Cuba.2°

   By virtue of the production controls, the U.S. price would be higher              than

the foreign price by more than        the   tariff; rights   to   sell in the U. S. market

would therefore be valuable. It was clearly the intent of the administration
that these rights be directed largely toward          Cuba.    Te Cuban share was    98.64

percent of the total import rights and Cuba also received rights to unfilled
quotas of other countries. In 1949, for example, the United States imported
3.103 million tons of sugar from Cuba, 525 thousand tons from the Philippines,
and     56 thousand tons   from all other foreign countries (Senate Finance Com-
mittee Hearings,    1965, P. 19).21



20. House Agriculture Cosinittee Hearings of 1951, HR 4521, Extension              of the
Sugar Act of 1948, pp. 34—35. The 55—45 formula had been set in the 1937            Ex—
tension of the Jones Costigan Bill.
21. The Philippine sugar industry was initially bolstered by the Payne Aldrich
Tariff Act of 1909 which gave the Philippines the right to export 300,000 tons
duty-free to the limited States. The duty-free allotment had then been expanded
during the First World War. The Philippine production of sugar had expanded
greatly in the 1930s. According to the U. S. Tariff Commission, "the most
rapid expansion in both acreage and production occurred in the years 1932-34,
when the question of Philippine independence was being debated by Congress.
Inasmuch as the several independence bills then under consideration provided
for quotas on sugar to be allocated to individual mills and to planters on a
production basis, there was an incentive to increase output and hence quota
allotments. As a result, Philippine sugar production reached a peak of
1,509,000 short tons in 1934. Since that year it has declined because of the
quota provisions of the Jones-Costigan Act and the Independence act." U.S.
Tariff Commission, P. 45. After the Second World              War, the Philippines were
againto be favored with quotas; initially, however, it was recognized that
war damages would prevent their filling their quotas and the unfilled portion
was allocated to Cuba.


                                             17
   It is perhaps significant that only one sugar consumer testified in 1948:
the American Bakers Association sut4uitted a short letter indicating its sup-
port of a one-year extension of the Sugar Act, and urging a study of the ef-
fects of the sugar program (P. 54 of House Hearings).
      The sugar program was changed very little throughout the 1950s. Cuba's
share of imports fell somewhat as other countries' production increased, but
remained at 3.4 million tons in 1958, contrasted with 980 thousand tons from
the   Philippines and 291 thousand tons from all other foreign sources. The

Sugar Act was     renewed in 1951    to continue through 1956, and     it was again   ex-

tended in 1956     to last through 1960. The 1956 extension differed from the ear-

lier ones in that production quotas for U.S. producers were increased along

with foreign quotas, so that American producers would maintain           their share in
the   American   market.   Thereafter, market growth in excess of 8,350,000 tons was

to be   shared 55-45 between domestic and      foreign producers.22
   As    an indication of how complex formulae can become,       the 55 percent addi-

tional domestic production quotas were to be distributed             as follows: of the
first 165,000 tons of increased quota, 51.5 percent was to go to sugarbeet and

48.5    percent to mainland cane; the next 20,000 and        2,000   tons were to go to

Puerto Rico and      the   Virgin Islands respectively, and increases in excess of

188,000 tons were to be allocated in proportion to the initial quota allot-

ments. (Ibid., P. 37).For foreign countries' 45 percent additional alloca-

tions, 43.2 percent was to go to Cuba, and             1.8   percent to other foreign

countries in 1956, while in subsequent years Cuba was to receive 29.59 percent

and    15.41   percent was to go to other foreign countries: the Philippines,




22. Data are from     U.S. House of Representatives, Commitee on Ag, The
United States              Program, 1971, P. 37.



                                             18
however, was not to receive any change in quota. Meanwhile, if any domestic
areas failed to fill their quotas, these should be reallocated to other domes-
tic areas and Cuba only.
  During the 1950s, acreages allocated to cane and sugarbeet in the United
States remained relatively constant, but production increased somewhat due to
rising yields. In 1950, 406,000 acres of cane and 924,000 acres of sugarbeet
had been harvested with yields of 34.9 tons and 14.7 tons per acre respec-
tively. By 1960, 406,600 acres     of land   were devoted to sugarcane and 897,000
acres were devoted to sugarbeet. Yields had risen respectively to 40.0 and
18.7 tons per acre.23


5. Expanding Domestic Production and Acreage, 1962 to 1974
5.1. The Battle over the Cuban
   A major shift occurred after    1959, however, as   American relations with Cuba
soured. A first step was to amend the earlier legislation to permit the Presi-
dent of the United States to determine the Cuban quota for the period June
1960 to June 30, 1962, and to permit imports from alternative sources not to
exceed   the amount   by which the Cuban quota was reduced. Cuba's quota was
thereupon reduced to zero from July 1960.
    A political battle over the future of government policy toward sugar then
ensued. The original motives for the 1948 Act were no longer valid. (ie solu-
tion, advocated by economists in the Administration and outside the govern-
ment, would have been to abandon quotas both on domestic production and on im-
ports, and to permit a return to free markets; if not that, at least a global
quota (rather than country-specific allocations) would have made sense and
were in fact finally supported by the Kennedy Administration. The domestic


23. Data are from USDA ERS 1985.


                                        19
growers, and especially beet growers, however, seized the opportunity to urge
that their production quotas be increased to make up part of the Cuban short-
fall, and advocated a continuation of the program.24 It should be noted,
however,     that   from an economic   self—interest    standpoint,   domestic   producers
and   processors had an interest in restricting imports, but          it is   not evident

that     country-specific quotas were in any regard more favorable than a global
quota.
      However, interests of the refiners of raw (i.e. cane) sugar did diverge

from     those of growers of cane and sugarbeet,       and from those of beet and cane

millers: reducing the quantity of raw sugar imported and increasing domestic
produotion would necessarily reduce economic activity for raw sugar (cane)
refiners. For mostof the (second-stage) refinors of               cane were locatcd

primarily     in coastal areas, where imports of raw Cuban sugar (once-processed
cane) had once      been refined. Insofar as domestic beet would substitute for im-

ported cane, new sugarbeet processing capacity would be built near beet grow-
ing areas, and second—stage cane refiners would not receive raw cane sugar in
quantities    commensurate with their capacity.

   After    Cuba lost her quotas,   the Chairman   of the House Agriculture Committee

apparently     wanted to reassign a large share of the Cuban quota to the

Dominican Republic, at the sane time as the State Department was                 preparing
sanctions     against the Dominican Republic (under Trijillo). As described by

Cater,




24. It should be recalled that the early l960s were a time of "surplus produc-
tion'tof agricultural commodities under agricultural price support programs.
This enabled advocates of expanded sugar growing areas to argue that enactment
would reduce the extent of surpluses of other commodities. For an account of
the political forces that determined the           outcome in 1962, see Berman and
Heineman.



                                            20
       'Quite a   struggle ensued.   For   a period,   it   remained   doubtful   whose foreign

policy would prevail -        the    U.S. government's or the sugar          subgovernment's.
Chairman    Cooley forced a temporary         increase of the Dominican quota, but the

U.S.    Treasury slapped a special tax on it. With the change of Administrations
in 1960, Executive resources were wheeled into the battle, Attorney General
Robert Kennedy made it known that he was examining the spending habits of the
affluent Dominican lobbyists for evidence of "improper" efforts at
persuasion.. .At long last, Mr. Cooley retreated, arid soon afterward General
Trujillo fell. .. .Despite President Kennedy's desire to move toward a 'global
quota" purchased at noripremium pricess, the old arrangement.. .has been
preserved largely intact.' (Cater, P. l9_20).25
   Although opposition to the bill arose both from those opposing giving
something of value to foreigners and from those who wanted to protect domestic
growers, the Sugar Act of 1962 nonetheless passed in a form which enlarged
and/or extended quotas to other foreign producers but simultaneously allowed
for increases in domestic production.26 Thus, total acres of cane and beet
harvested rose from 1,370,000 in 1960 to 2,065,000 in 1970.27

25. The 1962 Congressional Almanac commented that "Although sugar legislation
 is not a partisan issue, it has touched off some major Congressional battles
 in recent years. In general, the Senate has supported the Administration,
while the House has followed the lead of its Agriculture Committee, where
sugar legislation originates.
       In 1962, the Administration and the House were in accord on increasing
domestic quotas, but differed sharply over the foreign quota provisions, with
te Administration resisting reassignment of a portion of the reserved Cuban
quota to other countries on a permanent basis, and the House supporting such
reassignment. . .A controversy arose over the role of lobbyists representing
foreign interests, who stood to gain large fees if their clients' countries
received quotas. . .1962 Congressional Quarterly Almanac, P. 128. I am indebted
to Rick Harper for calling this article to my attention.
26. The version passed in the Senate was considerably more liberal than that
passed in the House, but it was the House's version that survived the con-
ference committee. See Berman and Heineman for an account.
27. Almost all of this increase took place on the U. S. mainland. Acreage
planted in Hawaii rose about 200,000 acres between 1960 and 1970. However,
acreage and production in Puerto Rico declined over this period, apparently

                                               21
      The 1962 Amendments to the Sugar Act of 1948 included a provision under
which there would be acreage allotnents granted to yield 65,000 short tons,
raw value of beet sugar. Localities were to be selected without regard to

earlier producing history,     in accordance with the following criteria:
     "firmness    of capital commitment for construction of factory facilities,

need for a cash crop, distance from other producing localities, suitability

for sugarbeet production and accessibility to sugar markets.

      157,000 acres were committed to localities in which six new beet mills

would be constructed, and another 15,000 acres were allotted in areas where

existing mills were thought to have additional capacity.26 Over $20 million

was invested in additional beet refining capacity. The designated localities

were Mendota, California (1963), Herefore, Texas (1964), Drayton, North

Dakota (1965), Montezuma, New York (1965), Easton, Maine (1966) and Chandler,

Arizona (l966).29

     Cane production and milling capacity were also expanded: during the l960s,

eight mew raw sugar mills were constructed in Florida, so that there were nine

large mills in 1970 compared to three in 1960.



due to the high costs of production relative to other U. S. sources. It is
difficult to determine the reason for Puerto Rico's apparemt cost disad-
vantage. Sugar was grown on small farms in Puerto Rico, and it is probable
that scale economies, combined with rising real wages in Puerto Rico resulted
in unprofitability of the crop. There is some discussion of Puerto Rico in the
House Agriculture Hearings of 1974 on the Sugar Act Extension of 1974, p. 293.

28. U.S.H.R. "The United States Sugar Program", 1971. P. 39.

29. Thirty six Congressmen were om the House Agriculture Committee for the
87th Congress The Chairman was from North Carolina and the Vice Chairman from
Texas. There was no Congressman from Arizona om the Committee and there were
Congressmen      from states with more apparent suitability for sugarbeet produc-
tion than some of those mentioned above. (Committee membership included a rep-
resentative from Idaho, two from Kansas, two from Iowa, and two from
Oklahoma.) There were three Congressmen on the committee from cane—growing
states (Hawaii, Louisiana, and Florida) .See 1961 Congressional Quarterly Al-
manac, p. 48.



                                         22
5.2 Administration of the Program

   The Sugar Act was renewed, with amendments, until 1974. There were dif-

ficulties in both administration and enforcement during these years. For ex-

ample, sugar tended to be shipped to the United States early in the quota

period, leaving U.S. refiners with storage problems. The U.S. Department of

Agriculture   therefore began restricting the amount of sugar that could be im-
ported under quota in the first part of the year.3°
   There was   also   a problem of how to keep domestic acreage within the desired
limits. For some regions, including Hawaii for the entire post—war period and
Puerto Rico after 1956, this was not an       issue as prices were not sufficiently
high   to induce increased plantings. For other areas, however, the Secretary of
Agriculture was to determine proportionate shares to be allocated to in-
dividual farms. These shares were the fraction of a region's allotment that
could be produced by the individual farm. These proportionate shares were en-
forced by a 'conditional payment' granted to farmers staying within their al-
lotments, which constituted an important part of their income. Farmers could
feed excess cane or beet to livestock without penalty but could not sell it
to the mill; the mill, in turn, could buy it       legally   but would not have been
able to market it and therefore had no incentive to do so.
   This,   in turn, caused difficulties in     areas where it appeared there would
be excess production, because each producer wanted to sell to the mill before
the mill's allotment was exhausted. When this happened, "panic selling"
started. To stop this, the Secretary of Agriculture was entitled to impose

Marketing Allotments for individual farms, indicating the proportion of each
farmer's crop that could be sold to the mill.



30. House Agriculture Committee, The United States             Program,   op.   cit.,



                                         23
     Then, too, criteria had       to   he established for the allocation of foreign

quotas." These included:

     I. There must be friendly governments with which the United States had

diplomatic relations, which did not       discriminate against ,\merican citizens and

which indemnified for any property expropriated.
     2. "Dependability as a source of sugar supply             as reflected in the

country's    history in supplying the U.S. market, its maintenance of sugar in-
ventories and its potcntial for supplying additional sugar upon call during
critical periods of short supply.' (U.S. Sugar Program, P. 49)
     3.   The   country' s imports from the United   States,   with particular atten-
tion to   its imports of agricultural commodities.

     4.     "Need of the country for a premium priced market . . . including
(a)reference to the extent it shares im other premium priced markets,32 (b)
its relative dependence on sugar as a source of foreign exchange, and
(c)present stage of and need for economic development). (Ibid., p. 49).
     5. "Extent to which benefits of participation of this market are shared
by factories and larger land owners with farmers and workers together with
other socio-economic policies in the quota countries." (p. 49 again)
    6. Location of country, including considerations of how supplies might be
affected in case of emergencies.




31. There were also criteria for the allocation of quota deficits, but these
were even specific with respect to the country in deficit, and are not covered
here.
32. This was    primarily   a reference to sugar exports tothe United Kingdom under
the Commonwealth Sugar Agreement.


                                            24
   There were also provisions for the imposition of' quotas upon the importa-
tion of sugar-containing products in the event it was determined that these
uould   affect the U.S. sugar market and the implementation of the program.

Finally, there was even quota—exempt sugar importation, for the following

situations:

        '1. The first ten short tons, raw value, of sugar or liquid sugar im-
ported from     any foreign country, other than Cuba and the Republic of the
Philippines";
  2. The first ten short tons, raw value, of sugar or liquid sugar imported
from any foreign country, other than Cuba and the Republic of the Philippines,
for religious, sacramental, educational, or experimental purposes;
3) Liquid sugar, imported from any foreign country, other than Cuba and the
Republic of the Philippines, in individual sealed containers of such capacity
as determined not in excess of one and one-tenth gallons each; and
     4) any sugar or liquid sugar imported, brought in, or produced or manufac-
tured in the United States (a) for livestock feed or for the production of
livestock feed, or (b) for the distillation of alcohol (including all
polyhydric    alcohols), or (c) for the   production (other than by distillation)
of   alcohol, including all polyhydric    alcohols, but not including any alcohol
or resulting by-products for human food consumption or (d) for export as sugar
or in sugar-containing products." (U.S. Sugar Program., p. 64).
5.3 Interest Groups
     These administrative complications notwithstanding, the Sugar Act con-
tinued to be approved, with amendments until l974. Long before that, various
groups initeres ted in the sugar program had organized themselves. There was a

33. The Chairman of.the House Agriculture Bill introduced one set of amend-
merits to the bill to the House with the introductory statement that the bill
was so complex that no one could understand it, and it would. be necessary for
Congressmen to take his word for it!


                                          25
Sugar Users Group (consisting of bakers, soft drink bottlers, candy and con-
fectionary manufacturers, etc.) arid a Sugar Producers (the growers, millers,
and refiners) Group, growers associations in all the main regions, associa-
tions of refiners (of imported raw sugar) and of beet mill operators, and so


      Foreign lobbyists wore also important. Cater, in his Washington expose of
1964, focussed inter alia on the "sugar subgovernment". As he described it,
      "since the early l930s, this agricultural conuaodity has been subject to a
cartel arrangement sponsored by the government. By       specific   prescription, the
sugar    market is divided to the last spoonful among domestic cane and beet

growers, and foreign suppliers. Ostensibly to insure "stability" of supply,

the   U.S. price is pegged at a level considerably above the competitive price
in the world market...
      Political power within the sugar subgovernment is largely vested in the
Chairman of the House Agricultural Committee who works out the schedule of
quotas.    It is shared by a veteran civil servant.. .who provides the necessary

"expert"    advice for such a complex marketing arrangement. Further advice is
provided by Washington representatives of the domestic beet arid cane sugar
growers,   the sugar refineries, and the foreign producers." (Cater, P. 18)



6. Cessation of the pg           1974   and the Era of No Program, 1974-1981

   During 1973—74, the price of sugar skyrocketed, rising from 9.61 cents per

pound on the world market in 1973 to 44.97 cents per pound at the end of 1974,

having    reached a high of 57.17 cents in November of that year. The Sugar Act
was up for renewal arid came to a vote during the period of high prices. At
that time, the U.S. price was a little below the world price, so that the
quotas to recipient countries were valueless and there was no protection to
American producers. Indeed, there was    discussion   in the hearings as to whether


                                          26
it was reasonable to expect Hawaiians to ship raw sugar to the mainland when
they would receive a higher price in Japan. Simultaneously,consumer groups
were    protesting   high retail sugar prices, which reached a dollar a pound at
Lhe    retail level at about the time    the   hearings were held.
      The National Consumer Congress testified in         favor of failing to renew the
Sugar    Act, eliminating all quotas, and going instead to an income—support

basis   for sugar growers. The consumer group also advocated efforts to reach an
international agreement to stabilize sugar prices.3
       The Department of Agriculture supported extension of the Sugar Act, but
wanted to end domestic quotas and direct payments.              It   also requested a 3-year
extension (only) of the program, with the stated intent of considering ways of
bringing the sugar program under general agricultural legislation. The                  Sugar

Users    Group recommended a two-year extension of the program, and advocated a
wide corridor for the price targets of the Secretary of Agriculture. Simul-
taneously, it opposed bringing other sweeteners under the program or control-
ling them in any way. The National Confectioners Association also supported
extension of the bill, but advocated quotas on imports of conectionary imports
as an essential part of the legislation.
      Thus, support still appeared strong for a sugar program, but it was less
cohesive than had earlier been the case and the various producer and user

groups could not agree on what they wanted.            The House Agricultural Committee
passed a    bill, but it was defeated on the House Floor, and             the   Sugar Act was

not   renewed. As a consequence, sugar was          without   a special program. It still




34. See Council on Wage and     Price   Stability, 1975.

35.   House Hearings 1974, p. 164.



                                               27
fell under the general provisions applicable to agricultural commodities,

however arid thus remained subject to agricultural prpice supports. In addition

there   remained a duty on imported sugar.
   During the early iO7Os, a technology for producing a virtually-perfect
substitute for sugar in liquid uses from corn (high fructose corn syrup —
liftS) was developed. Until the high sugar prices of 1973—74, however, it was
uneconomic relative to sugar. With those prices, however, HFCS came to be
produced in increasing quantities and to be used instead of sugar in some com-
mercial uses.
      In 1978, a new sugar act was proposed. For the first time, the sugar

ref iners testified against it. The representatiave of the U.S. Cane Sugar

Refiners Association was    asked whether the refiners had not earlier supported
legislation.    The response was:

        "Yes and of course that was prior to the new FII?CS technology which com-

pletely changes it. It is an entirely different ballgame.. ."     (Senate Hearings,

P. 140). Simultaneously, the Sugar Users Group advocated joining the Interna-

tional    Sugar Association with deficiency payments to   growers if the price fell

out   of the International Sugar Association Range. This would have permitted
sugar   prices to industrial users and consumers to move with the international
price and have supported farmers' incomes. The Sugar Users Group further op-
posed quotas, and advocated      on imports, if necessary, rather than quotas.
                               fees

Thus, by 1978, with the increasing competition from HFCS (see Table 2), the
unanimity of interests represented by growers, processors, refiners and users
broke down completely. In these circumstances, the administration decided to
have the United States join the International Sugar Organization as             its

proposed    assistance to domestic sugar interests.36

36. The United States did join the International Sugar Organization, which set
13 to 23 cents per pound raw value as its target price range. As can be seen
from Table 1, the ISA was unable to prevent the price from exceeding this

                                         28
     Although action was proposed repeatedly in the mid-1970s as the world price
of   sugar fell, no bill passed   in those years. In 1978 and 1979, price supports
were put into effect under general agricultural legislation, but in the fol-

lowing two years, the world price of sugar (see Table 1) once again soared,

rising from 9.66 cents per pound     in 1979 to 41.09 cents per pound in Qtober
1980, and then falling almost as precipitously to 16.32 cents per pound by

July l98l.'



7. The pgp Program of the l980s.

      It was while the price of sugar was high that a mew sugar program was

passed. Unlike earlier measures, however, the sugar program was treated         as
part    of the overall Agriculture and Food Act of 1981, rather than as a

separate piece of legislation.       The new program set domestic price support

levels for the period 1982 to 1985, with an interim support level until March

1982 of 16.75 cents per pound.38 No quotas were set on imports, as it was an—


range during 1980-81 and could    not prevent its fall below the target range   in
1982.

37. Data are from Terpstra, P. 4

38. The Administration had not advocated a support price for sugar, but ap-
parently accepted it in return for support for other legislation, probably in
part because it was not anticipated that the world sugar price would fall so
drastically or so soon. The Senate had passed a support      bill, at an initial
price of
16.50 cents a pound; the House had rejected an amendment that would have made
the price 18 cents a pound for the 1982 crop, and had then voted down the
program. But sugar price supports were passed as part of the 1981 farm program
after the particulars had been worked out in conference coninittee. Loans until
the end of March 1982 were to be made at the rate of 16.75 cents per pound raw
basis and 19.70 cents per pound of refined beet sugar. The Secretary of
Agriculture was instructed to set the price for the 1982 crop at a level not
less than 17 cents a pound, for the 1983 crop at 17.5 cents a pound, at 17.75
cents for 1984 and at 18.00 cents for 1985. Growers could get a loan at these
prices from the CCC, and decide not to reclaim their produce, which in effect
meant that they would repay only if the price rose above the support level.
The CCC cannot sell ooinmodities it is holding at less than 1.05 times the pur-
chase price.




                                         29
ticipated that the support price could be maintained by altering the tariff
and fee    applicable to sugar imports (which the President was authorized to do

under existing legislation). It was anticipated that the purchase price would

not   be attractive   relative to the world price, and     that the domestic price
could be adequately supported through import duties and fees .       One   amendment

to the bill, which was adopted, prohibited the financing of the sugar program
from government revenue sources. Thus, the CCC could not buy sugar that would
not be repurchased by farmers, for it would have had to take a loss to do so.
   Once the law was passed, a number of market reactions enused. There were
unusually large imports at the end of 1981 in anticipation of the higher
tariffs that would be imposed.4° Also, by late May, the Department of Agricul-
ture had to issue regulations that a sugar processor could not sell more to
the government than the minimum he had had on hand over the preceeding six-
month interval. A Washington Post article suggested that sugar processors had
deposited more sugar with the ftC than they in fact had with the intent of
forcing the government to impose quotas •4 1
      As   the sugar price fell on world markets, it became apparent that the
Commodity Credit Corporation would end up holding some sugar that it had
received    from farmers in   return   for loans.   The tariff had already been in-

creased    to the maximum extent   permissible by law (50 percent of the world

price). As the    world   price fell, (see Table 1) it became   evident    that main-

tenance of the support prices mandated by the 1981 law would not be possible

without CCC purchases of crops that would not be repurchased by growers unless

other action was taken. Since CCC retention was inconsistent with the amend—



39. See Terpstra, 1982.

40. See Terpstra, 1932, P. 8.

41. Washington Post, June 6, 1982.



                                           30
meat requiring no budgetary cost from the program, something had to be done.
In 1ay, emergency quarterly import quotas were established on a country-by-
country basis to avoid a loss to the Treasury" 42
      At that time, it was estimated that the "cost of production' of sugar was
about 21-22 cents per pound in the United States. Production was decreasing in
Hawaii and in      sugarbeet   growing areas, and mills   were in fact closing down,

There    were no production ceilings on any U.S. source.43
      Import quotas were established un the basis of average deliveries over the

preceeding years when      entry had been   free, This was done to attempt to insure

conformity with the       nondiscriminatory clauses of GAfl pertaining to the in-
position   of quotas.44

        As can   be seen from the price disparities in Table   1, the divergence be-
tween American sugar prices and world prices were now so great that dif-

ficulties were bound to ensue. From the raw sugar (cane) refiners' viewpoint,

a major difficulty was that quarterly quotas prevented any        futures   contracts.




42.    One of the precipitating factors blamed by the administration for its
inability to maintain the domestic sugar price at the legally mandated level
without CCC purchases was the fact that some sugar was being imported under
the Generalized System of Preferences, under which some developing countries
were permitted to export to the U.S. at less than normal duty rates. Since
most sugar imports came from developing countries, the GSP legislation under-
mined the effectiveness of the tariff. The Administration also pointed to the
European Community sugar policy as a source of excess supply on the world
market, and hence of the declining world price. Later on, a similar policy
dilemma arose between the Caribbean Basin Initiative and       sugar price supports.
43.   See Terpstra, 1982, p. 10

44. Until 1974, the United States could impose quotas legally under GAfl be-
cause its agricultural legislation had been in effect from GAfl's initiation
and had therefore been subject to "grandfathering'. However, quotas had to be
nondiscriminatory to qualify when they were reimposed in 1981, as grandfather-
ing no longer applied. When American policy toward Nicaragua shifted, the Ad-
ministration eliminated the Nicaraguan sugar quota. Nicaragua sued the United
States in the International Court of Law and won its case, although the United
States failed to provide redress.


                                            31
They therefore the Government before the U.S. Court of International Trade.
The Court, however, ruled in favor of the U. S. government, so quarterly im-
port quotas persisted. .4
  At    least six Presidential proclamations had   to be issued between 1982 and
1983 to attempt to contain the side effects. Among the more interesting was
the effects on trade with Canada. Canada had no protection on sugar and im-
ported it at world prices. The Canadians at first added 6 percent corn syrup
to sugar, since anything less than 94 percent sugar was not "sugar" from the
viewpoint of the regulations. This was then shipped to northern U.S. points
and sold to U.S. producers of sugar-containing preducts. When these shipments
reached 175 thousand tons a year, they were banned. Then, Canadian firms
began producing high—sugar content cake mixes and other products, which were
exported to the United States where, once again, the sugar was extracted.
Canadians firms also shipped sugar into the U.S. as "packets of cocoa and
tins of maple syrup and in Aunt Hetty's Patent Pancake Mix" (quoted from the
Economist,   cited below). These, too, were banned. However,other countries' ex-

ports of sweet preducts to the U. S. also rose, so that    by   January 1985 emer-

gency   import quotas were placed on all imports of sweetened cocoa, cake mixes
and edible preparations. This latter category was      filled   by March 5, 1985,

meaning that no Korean noodles (.002 percent sugar), kosher pizzas, or other

preducts   with any sugar could be imported for the remainder of the year
import prohibitions were put on all sugar—containing products after these, and
other, responses to the price differential had been felt. Noteworthy were the




45. Terpstra, 1982, P. 15
46. See Ecomomist, June 1, 1985, P. 31 of American Survey.


                                        32
protests of candy producers, after imports of confectionary products rose from
39,850 tons     in   1980 to 95,553 metric tons in 1985: candy producers had been
part of the Users' Group which earlier had supported the sugar program.47
     Data in Tables 1 to 3 tell the story thereafter. Support prices were
set, and import quotas established at levels designed to achieve them.
However, the substitutability of HFCS was so great that sugar consumption
began declining 1Drecipitous1'. All American soft drink bottlers shifted to
HFOS by 1985. Sugar accounted for less than half of all aloric sweetener con-
simiption by 1985, when its price had risen to 5 times the world price.
   By 1987, U.S. imports had fallen to an estimated 1.48 million tons of raw
sugar,    down from 5 million tons   as recently as 1979 arid 1981.     Estimates of the

total cost of sugar support ranged      from    $800 million to $2.5 billion, depend-

ing   on the estimated world price in the absence of the program, with payments
per   sugar farm estimated to be l36,000. More than half of all caloric

sweetener consumption was now high fructose corn syrup, and              the proportion
continued    to increase. Moreover, in    1987, it was    announced that a technique

for mnking    crystalline dry corn sweetener     had been discovered.

 On existing trends, it is expected       that   the United States will stop import-

ing sugar in either 1988 or 1989. As earlier mentioned, import quotas for 1988

have been    set at 750,000 tons, half the 1986      level. When   there   are no longer

any   imports   the policy choices available to the politicians will change and

their    costs will rise. If sugar prices are to be maintained at their present




47. See U • S. D .A., Foreign Agricultural Circular, Sugar, Molasses and
FS 2—86, November 1986, Pp. 18—24 for a listing of the 113 significant
proclamations, Presidential signatures, notices filed, and USDA announcements
pertaining to sugar over the l982-•S period. See also Council of Economic
Añvisers,Economic Report of the President, 1987, P. 165.



                                           33
levels, either stocks will have to mount or subsidized exports will have to
start. If the political process is unwilling to accept either of these two op-
tions, price supports will have to be lowered.48


8.The   Political Economy of the Sugar Program

      No   case can ever prove a rule, and the sugar   program is no exception. Like

everythiag      else, sugar is unique,    and its uniqueness has undoubtedly in-

fluenced     the   evelutien of intervention in the sugar market ever the years.

Nonetheless,       one can ask certain questions which pertain to the various models
outlined     in Sect. 1, and venture    hypotheses as to some missing ingredients.
Questions which nay shed light on the appropriateness of the competing under-
lying models include: 1) who gained and who lost under the sugar program? 2)
did all parties act rationally in their own self—interest?; and 3). to what
extent     does the conservative social welfare function model,   the    Becker model,

the   Brock-Nagee     trade—off model between votes and lobbyists,     the Olson free—

rider      model, or the Bhagwati-Srinivasan revenue seeking approach capture the
essentials     of sugar ccntrcls? The answer to the third question really points



43,   This
         section was written in December 1987. On January 7, 1988, the New
Vbrk Times , under the headline "Buried in Spending Law" reported that Senator
Incuye (Hawaii), with the 'backing of domestic cane and beet sugar growers",
?isd succeeded in getting a little-noticed provision into the $600 billion
spending bill to permit an addition 400,000 tons of sugar —       in
                                                               addition to the
750,000 quota — imports into the United States in 1988 "to offset the impact
en foreign producers of drastic cuts in American sugar imports in recent
years." The additional 400,000 tons, allocated to the Caribbean and the
Philippines, is to be imported at American prices, refined, and may not be
sold in the United States, i.e., it must be reexported at world prices. The
1980 Qanibus spending bill allotted $100,000,000 million to cover the finan-
cial loss under this program, equal to 12 cents per pound). Obviously, this
additional sugar will increase the capacity utilization rate in domestic sugar
refineries. The New York Times was silent on the issue of how the additional
imported cane would be allocated between refineries. It would therefore appear
that the final paragraph of this section was too optimistic: a new instrument
has been created under which the United States can import raw sugar and reex-
port that, which will make it relatively straightforward to reexport domestic
surpluses when domestic production exceeds consumption.



                                            34
to some missing elements in existing models which may be important for under-
standing political controls over economic activity. These include importantly:
4)institutional bottlenecks to achieving a Pareto—superior solution; 5) the
interaction between economic markets and political markets?; and 6) the role
of knowledge, and       of   technocracy, in   influencing   controls. These issues are
considered    in turn in this section.



8.1 Who Gained and Who Lost?

     All    the available evidence suggests that most American sugar land earns
no more than it would in alternative uses. The only possible exception is

Hawaii, which will be discussed further below. Even with the relatively high

sugar prices of recent years, there has been little expansion of acreage

devoted    to cane and   actual   contraction of acreage devoted to beet.
    Moreover, this does not appear to be an entirely new situation. In 1974,
Johnson concluded that the sugar program was an evil system, costing between
$500 and    $730   million, depending on   whether   the premium per pound   was 1.5 or

2.5 cents(Johnson, p.50). This contrasted with gross farm income from sugar

at that time of about $870 million.49

     Johnson estimated that the average income per sugar farm in 1972 was

$619,856 in Florida, $312,611 in Hawaii, $75,089 in Louisiana, and above

$30,000 in all sugar-producing states except Puerto Rico, Colorado, Montana,

Nebraska, Utah, Michigan, and Ohio.       There were altogether 175    thousand produc-




49. Johnson, Pp. 54—55. Johnson's estimates excluded Puerto Rican and
Hawaiian-grown sugar. They were based on the assumption of a 2 cent a pound
quota premium      in
                  a&Iition to the tariff. Taussig believed that no mainland
acreage was profitable for sugar, given alternative uses, and attributed the
deve1opient of sugarcane acreage in Louisiana to American protection in the
nineteenth century. See Taussig,l9l5, Ch. IV.



                                               35
tion workers in 1971, but their average hourly earnings (both in growing and
processing) were significantly below the average for persons with comparable
training and     skills   in each state.
     Johnson concluded that
         the net benefits — the net increase in income going to farm—owned
resources — are only a small fraction of the gross benefits. Most of the gross
transfers are required because the U.S. is a high—cost producer of sugar.
Many resources are used in sugar production that would readily find employment
elsewhere. . .Much of the gross transfer is required to induce these resources
to        be devoted to sugar production rather than their next best
alternative.. . (Johnson, P. 58)

      Turning   to analyze beet and cane   separately,Johnson   found no evidence that
the price of sugar beet land (near mills) was significantly different than the
pricing of other land in beet growing areas. He notes that:
     "I must admit that these results surprised me. I had expected to find some
positIve effect.. .There has been considerable political pressure to establish
new sugar beet producing areas, and it seemed reasonable to assume that
faraers expected to gain from these efforts.. .(P. 61) Of the six new beet
processing      plants established after 1962, 2 (New York and Maine) were

'complete failures" (because they could not obtain enough sugar beets to

onerate).       The acreage   allotted to sugarbeets in Arizona had been only half
that      anticipated when the plant was built (P. 61). Moreover, the Secretary of

Agriculture had not, at that time or since, had to impose "proportionate al—

lothsents" on any producing area since 1966.

     As    for cane, Puerto Rican production and acreage had been declining for a
decade at the tine of Johnson's analysis. For Hawaii, most benefits went to
the large producers, as noted abeve, as 25 out of the 705 sugar farms produced
93 percent of the sugar.50 In addition, field worker wages in Hawaii were

                                            36
double tile national average and Johnson concluded that "it is quite possible
that some of the economic rent from sugar production in Hawaii has been cap-
tured by approximately 5,000 farm workers."(p. 67)51
       During the l970s, more beet and cane     processing   plants went bankrupt. USDA
data    show 58 beet processing factories operating in 1970, 56 operating in

1975, 43 operating in 1980, and 36 operating in 1986. There were 75 sugar

mills processing cane in 1970, and the number fell to 42 by 1986.52

      Certainly,   refiners of imported raw cane sugar lost    from the sugar program,

at least starting with 1970 and the increased inroads of HFCS. Some went

bankrupt, and the total demand for their product fell sharply as beet and

sugar    substitutes replaced imported   raw cane sugar.

      There is little reason to question Johnson's conclusions today. Indeed,

subsequent bankruptcies, the failure of the industry to expand despite greater

protection and higher prices relative to some other crops, all suggest that

most of the cost of the sugar program was absorbed by the excess cost of

production.        Indeed, even the argument    first put forth   in 1934 ——   that   the

United States should have some domestic production capability in the event

that foreign supplies were disrupted ---no longer seems compelling in light of

the HFCS substitution possibilities.53


50.   Johnson noted the disappearance of data on size of sugar farms           in   Hawaii
from the Census of Agriculture starting in 1969 (Johnson, P. 66).

51. Taussig, 1915, pointed to innigrant workers as the chief gainers in Hawaii
from sugar protection, asserting that native Hawaiians, like native Americans,
would not work in cane fields. Taussig, 1915, Ch. 5, P. 65.

52. See gg and Sweeteners Outlook and Situation, June 1987, Tables 19 and
20. Total sugar capacity remained approximately constant as those mills still
producing   were handling larger average volumes.
53.   And if concern had genuinely been over the adequacy of foreign supplies,
one   wonders why distant, landlocked Subsaharan African countries should have a
quota.



                                           37
   If there       were gainers,   they   would have been Hawaiian   growers (who are    low-

cost relative        to the mainland). But there, strong unions apparently ap-

propriated most of the rents from higher sugar prices for the plantation

workers, who therefore       were the chief Hawaiian gainers.       Since   most workers are
immigrants,       they should not have a significant political voice.54 It is inter-

esting to speculate on the type of political-market model that would yield an
outcome in which the chief gains from controls had no voice or vote in the

decisions to adopt those controls.


8.2   The Rationality of the Actors

       One   of   the fundamental assumptions of economists is that individuals are

rational in their own         self   interest. Even with individual rationality, of

course, a group does not necessarily maximize as models of the prisoners'

dilcimna readily demonstrate.

       There are two issues here. First, how well did the representatives of the

various interests (cane and beet growers, cane millers, beet refiners, and               raw

cane   sugar      refiners) know their own     interests?   Second, was the collective

outcome      rational, in the sense that policies could have been devised that ren-
dered all concerned better off?
       In the sane way that more alternatives are always preferable to fewer,
there must have been short—run gains to those already growing sugar, or with
the possibility of growing beet or cane, from the sugar program at most points
in time. That does not, of course, prove that the gains were maximized. For
example, had the sugar program in 1981 been established to provide deficiency
payments to farmers (compensating for the difference bewtween the price

54. Taussig noted this sane apparent anomoly, thmt immigrant workeres were the
chief beneficiaries, in his analysis of the sugar program. At that time, he
concluded that the refiners had also gained, at least temporarily, through
their formation of the trust.

                                               38
received by them and a target support price), HEtS could not have made the in-
roads it did on sweetener consumption. Although          one   can   point    to this policy
instrument as being      clearly   superior on economic grounds in the long run to
support prices in the presence of the HFCS alternative, one can                 still    claim
rationality     for the sugar interests IF it is claimed that they feared the

transparency of deficiency payments.

        If, however, there is a       need for obscurity in programs such       as American

sugar,    then the role of knowledge becomes important, since to assert a need

for obscurity is equivalent to asserting the necessity of hiding what is in

fact    happening.55.
    Moreover, even then, it seems apparent that many of the gains of the

sugar    program   prior to the 1970s did not go to American interests: many for-

eign countries were      gainers.56    Certainly there was considerable political op-

position aroused by the activities of foreign lobbyists, especially in 1962

when they were widely blamed for having achieved the 1962 reimposition of

country-specific quotas .' One might have thought the domestic sugar interests


55. See Sect. 8.6 below. There is also a question as to why attempts were not
made to prohibit HFtS. While this relates to the transparency issues as well,
other factors were also involved. See below for a discussion.

56. They did not gain by the full amount of the premium times       quota, oftheir
course and some with small quotas into the American market probably lost. For
most countries, sugar was sold both to the United States at premium prices and
on the residual world market at much lower prices. To the (considerable) ex-
tent that the world price would have been higher in the absence of American
quotas, only those sugar exporters gained whose quantity exported to the
United States times the premium exceeded the quantity they exported to the
rest of the world times the amount by which the world price was below its no-
sugar-program level. However, it was not until 1985 that any foreign represen-
tative in Washington publicly opposed the program.

57. See Berman and Heineman. Since focus here is on domestic economic-
political interactions, many of the irrationalities involved in the allocation
of foreign sugar quotas are ignored here. Suffice it to note that the
Dominican   Repulbic    under Trujillo was the big gainer from the 1962 legislation
at a time when the Administration was attempting to impose sanctions on the
regime. Berman and Heineman' s coninent was that        "It
                                                   is not easy to find ra-
tional justification for many of        the quotas that were recoemended        by   the House
Agriculture Committee and included with little change in the final


                                             39
would have disassociated themselves from the foreign interests, yet that does
not appear to have happened.
       Furthermore, there are a number of actions that were NOT taken that would
have been rational, if one accepts the viewpoint that the overall program was
beneficial to sugar interests.5a To cite just a few: If large Hawaiian growers
really profited from the program, one would have expected them to be suff i-
ciently rational to support a price ceiling in 1974, rather than to permit the
opposition that arose to the vory high (and very tenporary) price of sugar to
defeat the entire program; 2). why did the sugar interests accede to American
efforts    to support the International Sugar Organization in the late l970s

rather than push for more effective action?; 3) why in the early 1960s did the

ugar interests so adamantly support country-specific quotas, when they could

have bargained for a larger donestic fraction of the market with a global

quota?

       Then, too, there is a list of positive mistakes if one takes a narrow,
short-run,    self—interest model and accepts that the sugar program did help

American sugar over the short run. There seems little doubt that many    of   the

large   growers were among those most adamantly opposed to the program in 1934,
although they did reverse sides by l937. There is also the question of why

legislation."     (P. 425). They proceeded to cite a quota of 15,000 tons for
Panama (which had produced only 5000 tons a year) and several other countries
which could not meet their quota, as well as quotas for the Netherlands and
Ireland (although a separate provision of the bill prohibited imports from
countries that themselves imported sugar as these latter two countries do).

58. There    is abundant evidence worldwide that protection of domestic in-
dustries tends to weaken their competitive abilities and thus render them even
higher cost and more uncompetitive in the long run than they are when protec-
tion    is first introduced. It is certainly conceivable that that has happened
to American sugar. While it is unarguable that some sugar land has such good
alternatives that it is inherently uncompetitive at any plausible world price
of' sugar, it    is also possible that some lands, such as the Hawaiian, might
have been considerably lower cost producers had they been subject to foreign
competition.

59. See, for example, I{rauss and Alexander, 1965, Pp.336.




                                        40
soft drink    bottlers, cake mix   manufacturers,    bakers, and confectioners    were so

willing to support the program. Finally, the support of the sugar refiners was

clearly    essential for the continuation of the program and yet was             obviously
ruinous to them in the long      run.
       Finally,   in the large, there have clearly been a number       of   actions which

could at best have been very short-term maximization. Given that the United
States will shortly stop importing sugar altogether, and that high fructose
corn syrup and crystalline fructose corn can be expected to continue to take
an increasing share of the market (along with non—caloric or low—caloric
sweeteners    which are better able to compete at higher sugar prices) it is in-
teresting to asic whether the sugar program has even been in the long-run in-
terests of Hawaiian and other low—cost growers.
      Moreover, there seems to have been no effort to bring HFCS under regula-
tion   to prevent its emergence as      a substitute for sugar. Certainly if         it was

rational   to seek a high   domestic sugar price, the sugar producers        should have
sought a ban on high fructose corn syrup, or if not that, at least a system of
deficiency payments rather than price-raising measures.            The declining con-
sumption of sugar in the United States, and the increasingly competitive posi-
tion   of corn substitutes were clearly not consistent with the longer-tern in-

terests of sugar producers, and         even   less so of refiners. Had sugar growers

and refiners been willing to accept a deficiency payment          program in the late
l960s (so that payments to growers would compensate for any divergence between
the world price-plus-margins and the domestic support price), much of the HCFS
competition   would have been    avoided.60


60.   The representatives of the corn refiners were at pains       to   assure   Congress
that their costs were high, and that "sugar is still the standard of the
sweetener industry." (Testimony of Donald E. Nurdlund, Chairman of A. E.
Staley Manufacturing    Co.,   representing the corn producers,   at    1978 House   Hear-
ings, p. 138



                                               41
     At present, the corn producers strongly oppose any switch to deficiency
payments on the grounds that they would provide "unfair competition' to corn
in   the sweetener market. Indeed, Congressional representatives fron corn-

producing states now appear to be the strongest supporters of the sugar

program, including import quotas. Whether that support group would have

developed    had sugar   producers correctly estimated the potential competition

from  corn is an open question. Certainly, to the extent that corn producers
are the gainers from the sugar program, there is no evidence of their apparent
support for the program prior to the l970s.
     The apparent reason for the sugar growers' opposition to deficiency pay-
ments seems to have been their concern that a ceiling would be placed on the
size of the payment that might be made to any individual farm. This in itself
suggests that growers were sensitive to the degree to which benefits went to
larger    farners, but it does not indicate why refiners and processors were

willing to support import and production quotas.6'

       Even beyond that, however, there lies the question --alluded to by Johnson

     as to why in the early 1960s it was anticipated that there would be great

benefits to expanded beetsugar production. These do not seem to have been

forthcoming, and the evidence strongly suggests that such an exponsion was not

in   the interests of existing producers and did not significantly benefit those
in areas where new beetsugar mills were established.



61. For an amusing sidelight to the story, see the testimony of Helen
Rohrbaugh, Head,Quota Section, Special Operations Branch, Office of Opera-
tions, U.S. Customs Service. This branch is (or at least was in 1974) in
charge    of administering all import quotas. Ms. Rohrbach explained why her
branch could not administer import quotas (which were set in raw value terms)
as then currently laid down: Congressman Vigorito, who presided at the hear-
ings, thanked her for her testimony with the statement: "You have brought to
my attention a small group in Customs that I did not know existed       (P. 97
of 1974 hearings)



                                         42
      If one is to believe statements from representatives of the sugar inter-
ests, sugar producers have not been happy with the program. According to the
Economist after the 1985 bill was passed:
             It might be supposed that the sugar-growers at eas, would be happy
with the absurd press for regulations. They are not. They get a government
subsidy of 17 cents a pound, but say it costs them 20 cents to produce one.
Acreage under sugar cane       in   Florida, Louisiana and   Hawaii, or   under sugar beet
in the   midwest, continues to contract.... Economist, June 1, 1985, P. 31 of

American     survey.
     There is then the curious episode with the International Sugar Associa-
tion: the ISA could not contain the price of sugar even within a very wide
band. In part this was because the EC did not join. However, it is difficult
to imagine that, even with EC participation, the target range could have been
maintained without resources considerably in excess of those available to the
ISA. It is difficult to believe that the ISA was expected to be              effective in

stabilizing the sugar       price: why, then, was support for ISA membership taken
as   an acceptable substitute by the sugar producers for a sugar program?

     Next,    there    is an interesting question as to why some arguments are con-

vincing, or are thought convincing, in the           political arena.       Virtually all

witnesses to Congressional hearings on the sugar program listed as one of its

major   virtues   the fact that "it costs the taxpayer nothing".62




62. See, for example, the statement contained in the House Agriculture Com-
mittee pamphlet on the U.S. Sugar Program (1971): "The Sugar Act has given us
this security of supplies at a reasonable cost to the consumer and at no cost
to the taxpayer. . . "P.45. Note, however, that the decision to permit the import
and reexport of 400,000 tons of sugar in the omnibus spending bill passed by
Congress in December 1987 invalidates this argument, and of course sets a
precedent for subsidies to support exports in future years.



                                              43
    A second oft-repeated argument pertained to the alleged instability of the
international sugar market arid the 'need' for price stability for producers.
This argument   first appeared in Roosevelt's message to Congress in 1934, and

was    reiterated by almost all witnesses supporting the Sugar Program. Yet the
program was   neither designed for "stability" (since there was no ceiling) nor

were there efforts to set a "band" within which the price might fluctuate.

Whether   it was thought that appeals for "stability" were more convincing than
appeals for support prices is open to conjecture, but the inconsistecy of
rhetoric pertaining to stability with the appeals for higher prices strikes
one on even the most casual perusal of Congressional testimony.
   Although a large number of other apparent irrationalities could be pointed
to, it suffices to mention one more: surely in 1974 and again in 1981, it
should have been understood that the prevailing price of sugar would not con-
tinue indefinitely. Even without any degree of sophisticated understanding of
the sugar market domestically and internationally, all testinony before both
houses of Congress had     years emphasized the wide fluctuations in sugar
                            for

prices as a reason for controls. Yet the Reagan administration apparently
bci ieved that it had   a   sugar program which would not require a return to the
country-specific quotas that had      earlier   prevailed.

8.3.   Goodness of Fit of Existing Political Economy Models

       Without doubt, the saga of the American sugar oorigran over the 1934-1987

period contains elements of       a number of the models discussed   in   Sect.1.   There

is very little of the "benevolent guardian, social—welfare maximizing" govern-

ment   in the story, however, and that model fails, at least after 1934.
       Clearly lobbying was important, as the various components of the sugar
industry sought to increase the benefits they perceived as emanating from the
bill and foreign lobbyists did the same thing for their clients. Becker's

                                           44
model and the Brock-Magee approach     both have   significant elements   of truth,   at

least   in   analyzing the sugar program and its evolution. There are, however, a

number of phenomena which     are not captured in these models,   to   which attention
returns    in Sects. 8.4 to 8.6.

       An interesting point to note with respect to lobbying models, however, is

that they do not fit Olson's prediction that interest groups would form when

the group on the opposite side of the market consists of relativly small and

fragmented    entities. Sugar users were at least as large as sugar producers and
nonetheless    joined in the coalition. One would not have forecast the coalition
of interests that did emerge. There was ultimately a significant conflict be-
tween the    interests   of domestic and foreign growers, between domestic growers
and refiners, and between domestic producers and domestic          industrial users.

These  latter were large, which is not normally anticipated in discussions of
lobbying.63 The puzzle here is thrown in even sharper relief when it is asked

why sugar growers, millers, ref iners,and users were all on the same side of
the issue when there were clearly some divergent interests among them.
      Lobbying, at least by domestic growers, was NOT significant in the in-
auguration of the sugar program, however. Growers seem actively to have op-
posed it initially, and it is certain they did          not lobby for it. In that
respect, the Bhagwati—Srinivasan revenue-seeking model, in which        resources are

spent in an effort to obtain a program of value, does not seem appropriate for
the initiation of the sugar program. Once the program was         in place, however,

domestic sugar growers rallied     to its   support. In a sense, the history   of the


63.   There is no doubt that Americans owned some sources of foreign supply.
This was   especially true in the l930s. However, even then, only about a third
of Cuban sugar Ias produced under American ownership. For the Philippines, the
fraction did not reach that level until after Philippine preferences were in
place, and the mechanism seems to have worked the other way around: the
American preference induced American firms to start producing in the Philip-
pines. See U. S. Tariff Commission, 1937.


                                            45
sugar program since 1934 is that a government which regarded itself as a

platonic    guardian put the program in place with certain short-tern goals. The
program    once in place was perpetuated by the interaction of political arid

market forces that could seize upon it.           Thus, a program   which started out in-

tended to   benefit Cuba was     nonetheless   perpetuated   whon   assisting Cuba was   no

longer an object of policy. Likewise, country-specific quotas continuedafter
the American interest in Cuba subsided, in part because they were lobbied for
and    supported   by powerful   groops   in Congress which had grown up because the
sugar    program was there. Even in the l980s, when sugar interests came to

recognize their interest in deficiency payments rather than price supports,

corn   interests emerged to defend the program.
      The conservative   social welfare function argument reasonably well fits the
motive for introduction of the sugar program in 1934; it does not explain its
reintroduction in 1948, its continuation of country-specific quotas after
1960, nor the evolution of the program thereafter.
      Thus, there is no doubt that econonic interests and lobbying go part way
toward explaining the sugar program. There are missing elements, however, to
which attention turns below. First, it                is   apparent that institutional
mechanisms were necessary in order to facilitate               the continuation of the

program,    and that alternative arrangements might have reduced the economic
costs of the program, even if they would not have eliminated it. Secondly, it
is clear that markets reacted to the various shifts and turns in policy in
ways which neither politicians nor sugar interests anticipated. In this sense,
there never was "the" sugar program; rather, policies evolved over time as
politicians reacted to market responses (and exogenous events) and markets
reacted to the changes in policy. Finally, any reading of the evolution of




                                             46
 sugar policies    over time suggests that a number   of   key issues surrounding

 transparency,   knowledge, and the role of technocrats must be addressed. It is
 to these missing ingredients that attention now turns.


 8.4 Institutional Issues
   Several institutional issues are noteworthy. First, there is the anomaly
 (for the American congress) that sugar legislation was handled by the Senate
Finance Committee (because it is an import) and the House Agriculture Com-
mittee (by historical accident). Moreover, because it was an import and thus
had revenue implications, only the House had the power to initiate legisla-
tion.    This gave the House Agriculture Committee considerably more power over
sugar than it would have had had the counterpart body been the Senate Agricul-
ture Committee, and the House Agriculture Committee had considerably more
ability to focus its attention on sugar than would the House Ways and Means
omniittee 64

   Second,     the sugar program could not have persisted in anything like the
form that it did had sugar not been an import. At a minimum, there would have
been a budgetary cost to any program which raised price. As mentioned above,
the 'lack of budgetary cost" was frequently mentioned as an important point by
advocates of the program. Likewise, because sugar was an import, the program
provided instruments of foreign policy (the sugar quotas) which would other-
wise not have been present. Moreover, had sugar not been an import, it would



64. Had the House Ways and Means Committee handled the legislation,its atten-
tion would have been spread over enough other issues that it could not have
devoted as much tine to it as did the House Agriculture Committee. Moreover,
membership on the House Ways and Means Committee would have been determined
with respect to many more issues and thus could not have been as specialized
as was the House Agriculture Committee. For a discussion of these issues, see
Price.


                                       47
have been dealt with together with other agricultural commodities: it is

likely that the ability of sugar interests to influence the outcome (for bet-

ter or worse in their own     self   interest) would have been less.65

   Indeed, it is arguable that        it   was the ability of the sugar interests to

distance    themselves from other elements of a political situation that was cru-
cial to the continuation of the program: it was an import, mid therefore came
before the Sexate Finance Committee and was not dealt with as part of other
agricultural legislation. While an import, it was agricultural, and thus not
dealt   with in other trade legislation along with other importable commodities.

   Third,it took the agreement of all producing interests - beet growers,
cane growers, beet refiners, cane millers, and cane refiners - to insure the
continuation of tho program. Indeed, until the mid 1970s, what is remarkable
is that the Sugar Users Group did not oppose the program.
   Fourth, the fact that the interrelationships wero complex undoubtedly in-
creased the political influence of those who did undcrstand the economics arid
politics    of   the sugar program: in a sense, the complexity of the issues stood

as a barrier to entry of nonspocialists.66



8.5. Interaction of Economic arid Political Markets


65. The above paragraph was written prior to the passage of the 1987 omnibus
spending bill. That bill sets a precedent for expenditures on supporting sugar
prices that may ease the way for subsidy payments when sugar is no longer im-
ported. Even so, one might guess that pressures against sugar will mount when
the program must be financed from the budget.
66. In some hearings late in 1974 after the defeat of the Sugar Program, a
number of witnesses were called. The first was a Mr. Arthur Calcagnini, Direc-
tor of the Sugar Division, USDA. He was carefully examined on his move from
Amerop Corp., international sugar dealers, to USDA which had taken place ear-
her  in 1974. Other witnesses included: Mr. Thomas 0. Murphy, the USDA Sugar
Division Director from 1963 to 1972, who was in 1974 President, United States
Sugar Beet Association; and Mr. Lawrence Myers, who had been USDA Sugar
Divisioin Director from 1948 to 1963, and who was a "consultant in agricul—
tural economics and economic adviser to the Philippine Sugar Institute." (P.
81). See also Sect. 8.6 below



                                             48
   Examination of the history of the sugar program strongly suggests that,
once created, a policy instrument will: 1) be seized upon by groups who per-
ceive themselves to benefit (regardless of whether they had anything to do
with initiating the program or not); 2) induce economic market reactions which
will minimize the costs of the program; 3) lead to political responses to (2)
by the groups formed under (1) to attempt to offset these economic market
reactions, which in turn will lead to 4) increasingly complex policy instru—
merits designed both to deal with the competing interest groups that form
around the policy instrument and simultaneously to subvert the sorts of market
responses perceived     to be detrimental.

    This sequence, which      as   articulated, sounds very straightforward, is

perhaps    the   most obvious, but also the most complex, of conclusions. For it

suggests that, once an instrument is in           place,   a   variety   of political forces

will    emerge that will act upon it and try to seize it in ways that are largely
unpredictable. In the case of the U.S. Sugar Program, the instrument was ini-
tially opposed by the sugar producers, but they very quickly reversed their
position and supported       its continuation. Likewise, the sugar exporting

countries strongly supported the program until the mid-l980s, and then

reversed    their position ii response to the market forces set in motion by the
price support program.
   Ironically in 1948, it was a perceived obligation to Cuba, rather than any
motivation   of domestic producers that led to the reinstatement of the program.

During the years 1948 to 1960, Congressmen dealing with the sugar program were

regarded virtually as foreign agents -            their    interests appear    to   have been

primarily    in allocating import quotas rather than benefitting domestic inter-
ests.




                                             49
      There are two interesting mental experiments that can be performed; 1)
what would have happened had the Cuban government not changed? and 2) what
would have happened if there had been no sugar program prior to 1960 when the
Cuban government changed? In answer to the first1 the most reasonable conjec-
ture would appear to be that the U.S. sugar program would have continued, muoh
as before, and that there never would have been the expansion of beet acreage
and other high—cost (and possibly even ill—advised on the part of those who
undsrtook them) and beet refining capacity that characterized the 1960s. It is
hard to imagine the impetus that would have been necessary to substantially
increase American acreage at the expense of imports.
      With regard to the second question, had there been no sugar program in
1960, the most likely outcome probably is that the United States would have
continued buying sugar on world markets. It is difficult to imagine a sequence
of events under which a changed Cuban government could have been seized upon
as a rationale for the inauguration of a Sugar Program.
   Insofar as these conjectures are plausible, they strongly suggest that it
is much easier to adapt, or seize, an already—existing instrument, than it is
tc have a mew one created. For that reason alone, an existing instrument is
very likely to become used for objectives and by groups that may not have been
the   intended beneficiaries at all when the instrument was first formed.

     There is then the question of market reaction. Clearly, the market will

minimize the cost of any given policy-imposed distortion. In the case of

sugar, this entailed two important reactions and several minor ones. The

first important reaction was the shift in the location of preduction (with

expansion of Florida land and reduction in beet land). The second was the

development   of substitutes and with it, the   potential disappearance of sugar

as   an importable good: that will make the Sugar Program, in its present form
(with a legislated mandate to avoid any payments by the U.S. government), in-


                                        50
feasible. Absent     a legal ban      on development    of all substitutes, it   is   dif-

ficult   to see how the political process can further increase the real price of
sugar, especially as and if crystalline corn sugar becomes economic. In the
longer term, this market reaction to the sugar program may indeed threaten the
economic viability of' the entire sugar industry in the United States - thereby
doing the very thing that many supporters of the sugar program claimed they
were trying to avoid.
  The minor reactions include the importation of soft drinks, cake mixes,             and

other sugar-containing products from Canada and elsewhere, the need for
detailed regulation of imports to avoid storage costs for American refiners,
the seizure of the program by sugar refiners as a basis on which to press for

a ban on imported raw sugar or of refined beet sugar, and the diplomatic and
other complications arising out of establishing and implementing import quotas
for a large number of countries. An interesting reaction, difficult to clas-
sify, has been the increased volatility of the international sugar price in
response to the smaller and smaller vohune of transactions going            through the

"free   market" (which would more appropriately be termed the"residual" market).
    These market reactions in turn have induced political responses: bans on
imports of cake mixes, and then of processed food products containing sugar;
movement from annual       to quarterly import quotas; reactions to the high sugar
price   of the   early   1970s (which itself was arguably the outcome of the earlier

decision to increase domestic production, which depressed the world price,

leading to amplified fluctuations in plantings and in sugar price cycles)

which led   to   the (temporary) abandonment of the program, and so on.

    In   a sense, this "life of its own" hypothesis is the most disturbing for
potential econoinist—policymakers. If the hypothesis           is correct, it says that
even if a program is       designed   to   meet   socially-desirable objectives in cost-



                                              51
minimizing ways, it will likely be seized upon by groups and in circumstances
only remotely related to the initial intent of the program. Once put in place,
a policy may evolve in ways unrelated to the initial purpose.67


8.6. Role of knowledge and technocrats
    Partly because of the interaction of economic and political aarkets, any
ongoing program is likely to become very complex. While sugar may be espe-
cially so, it is at least arguable that other agricultural commodities, im-
ports subject to quota, health regulations, and most other policy instruments
inevitably become highly complex. One important consequence is that a coterie
of specialists is called for whose human capital consists of their understand-
ing of the program, arid hopefully of the economic implications of alternative
changes in policies.68
     Complexity in and of itself provides a significant barrier to participa-
tion of nonspecialist groups in the decision process. In the case of sugar
legislation,   it seems   evident that there were a number of efforts to resist
changes that might have made the program more transparent: sugar producers op-
posed deficiency   payments (until it   was too late) probably because the size of
payment per farm   would have been apparent and they feared a ceiling; import


67. One needs only to point to the complexity of American income tax laws
(even after reform) and of the Multi Fibre Arrangement to convince oneself
that the phenomenon is not limited to the sugar case.

68. One indication of the ways in which these interests grow is to exanine the
length of hearings and the number of witnesses who appeared before the House
Agriculture Committee each time the Sugar Act was under consideration. The
1934 Hearings were 251 pages long, with 33 witnesses; in 1937 Hearings were
373 pages long, with 47 witnesses. In 1940, Hearings were 302 pages with 40
witnesses; the 1948 Hearings were short with 114 pages and 10 witnesses; l95i
hearings were 323 pages with 46 witnesses and submissions; 1955 Hearings were
768 pages with 136 withesses and submissions; 1962 Hearings were 552 pages
with 81 witnesses and submissions; 1965 Hearings were 365 pages with 74 wit-
nesses and subaissions; 1971 hearings were 789 pages with 132 witnesses and
submissions. Even this understates the increase, as coalitions of supporters
(such as the Sugar Users Group and the Sugar Producers Group) formed.



                                          52
quotas were country-specific, rather than global, and there was opposition to
any change; import quotas, rather than tariffs were the chosen instrument for
protection raw sugar refiners supported the program and sought prohibition of
imports rather than seeking protection from foreign refiners; and corn
producers were adamant in wanting sugar prices supported rather than seeking
higher support prices and deficiency payments for corn growers directly.
   In addition, however, the specialists in a given policy instrument become a
vested interest in the maintenance of SCtIE policy.69 Those with understanding
of the U.S. Sugar Program could seek employment as lobbyists for foreign
governments, or as representatives of domestic groups, as Congressional staff
assistants, or with the Department of Agriculture. For any nonspecialist to
enter    the policy dialogue in a meaningful way   would require a considerable in-
vestment.
   All    of   these phenomena suggest that public discussion of policy options

might be significantly improved if means could be found to keep policies

transparent and simple. The opposition to deficiency payments and other

transparent     procedures was clearly based on the hypothesis that they would not
have withstood careful scrutiny. Whether means can be found in complex markets
of limiting the types of interventions that are permitted is a difficult sub-
ject, and one well beyond the scope of this essay. Nonetheless, it seems
highly likely that, had the Sugar Program been transparent and readily com-
prehensible to an informed citizenry, it could not have persisted in anything
like the form it did.



69. It might be argued that they would prefer some changes because that gener-
ates more work, but that issue is secondary. The hypothesis here is that the
loss of human capital that would be involved in the complete abandonment of a
program is probably so large as to induce specialists to advocate "more ra-
tional" programs, rather than program abandonment.


                                          53
9. Some Tentative Conclusions
   No case       study can provide the generalizations desirable to form a basis for

a theory of political-economic interactions. The U.S.            Sugar Program    is,    none-
theless, interesting in         that it   raises   some questions that are not readily

handled    with the use of traditional models. Its evolution demonstrates that a
static analysis of the costs and benefits of the program at a point in time
would significantly misstate the program's impact: clearly account must be
taken of the ways in which economic and political responses will alter the
program    over time. It is to be hoped that future research will enable the

transformation       of some of the questions raised here into testable hypotheses
       Several    quostions clearly call for further research.           Among them: 1) to

what extent are the economic outcomcs of policies               reasonably correctly an-

ticipated and to what extent to side effects render the outcomes unacceptable

to the policies' advocates?; 2) can one find meaningful characterizations of

the logic of interaction        between political and      economic   markets?; and     3)   can
one classify policy instruments according to criteria (such as transparency)

and them make meaningful         predictions as to, for example, the likely excess
cost   of policies pursued with each of these instruments?

    At this stage, the conclusions that emerge arise primarily with regard to

the sugar program itself. First, when it            was   originally formulated in 1934,

and then   when it     was   reinstated in 1948, the intentions of its advocates bore
little   resemblance to the purposes to which it was put some twenty or thirty

years later. Second, it seems highly unlikely that             the    electorate would sup-

port a program that provides payments of ever $136,000 per farm were that

figure   highly publicized.      Third, at least some of the supporters of the sugar

program ever the      years   — the importers and   refiners   of raw sugar and the beet

mills owners who      went   bankrupt at the very least - would net have been so en-

thusiastic   had they )mown the outcome.


                                             54
   At a more general level, two tentative lessons emerge. First, at the very
least, economists advocating government intervention in markets would be well
advised to recognize that the measures they advocate will, once enacted, have
a life -   including supporters - of its own. Second, in choosing between alter-
native policy instruments, there should be a strong presumption in favor of
simple, transparent instruments: the likelihood that those instruments can be
seized in ways unacceptable to a comprehending electorate would be reduced.




                                        55
                  Table 1. New York and World Sugar Prices, 1948-1987

                             F.O.B.      N.Y.   Ratio:
                             Caribbean duty-    N.Y. to
                                      id world
                               (1)       (2)      (3)

                     1948     4.17       5.6     1.34
                     1949     4.34       5.8     1.34
                     1950     4.98       5.9     1.18
                     1951     5.67       6.1    1.08
                     1952     4.17       6.3    1.51
                     1953     3.41       6.3    1.85
                     1954     3.26       6.1    1.87
                     1955     3.24       6.0    1.85

                     1956     3.48       6.1    1.75
                     1957     5.16       6.1    1.18
                     1958     3.50       6.3    1.80
                     1959     2.97       6.2    2.09
                     1960     3.14       6.3    2.01

                     1961     2.91       6.4    2.20
                     1962     2.98       6.3    2.11
                     1963     8.50       8.2    0.96
                     1964     5.87       6.9    1.18
                     1965     2.12       6.8    3.21
                     1966     1.86       7.0    3.76
                     1967     1.99       7.3    3.67
                     1968     1.98       7.5    3.79
                     1969     3.37       7.8    2.31
                     1970     3.75       8.1    2.16

                     1971     4.52       8.5    1.88
                     1972     7.43       9.1    1.22
                     1973     9.61      10.3    1.07
                     1974    29.99      29.5    0.98
                     1975    20.49      22.5    1.10
                     1976    11.58      13.3    1.15
                     1977     8.11      11.0    1.36
                     1978     7.82      13.9    1.78
                     1979     9.66      15.6    1.61
                     1980    29.02      30.1    1.04

                     1981    16.93  19.7        1.16
                     1982     8.42  19.9        2.36
                     1983     8.49  22.0        2.59
                     1984     5.18  21.7        4.19
                     1985     4.04  20.3        5.02
                     1986     6.05  21.0        3.47
                    1987      7.10  21.7        3.06
    column 1: Caribbean price; column 2: New    York duty-paid price; column 3:
the ratio of 1 to 2
Source: U. S.Department of Agriculture, Sugar and Sweeteners Situaion,
various issues.



                                        56
                     Table 2. SUGAR AND SWEFID''ER (X)NSUMPTION,
                                       UNITED STATES, 1970—1987


           Ref mcd IIFCS      Total            Total     Percent Sugar
             sugar            corn         Sweeteners    of Total
                     (millions of çp
1970       10.43     0.07       1.98           12.57       83.0
1971       10.60     0.09       2.16           12.91       82.1
1972       10.74     0.14       2.21           13.11       81.9
1973       10.68     0.22       2.48           13.31       80.2
1974       10.22     0.32       2.68           13.03       78.4
1975        9.63     0.54       2.97           12.75       75.5

1976       10.18     0.78       3.24           13.56       75.0
1977       10.37     1.05       3.44           13.96       74.4
1978       10.18     1.35      3.75            14.10       71.4
1979       10.05     1.67      4.09            14.30       70.2
1980        9.52     2.18      4.58            14.24       64.7

1981        9.13     2.67      5.12            14.39       63.4
1982        8.56     3.10      5.60            14.31       59.8
1983        8.33     3.60      6.12            14.61       57.0
1984        8.01     4.30      6.84            15.01       53.4
1985        7.58     5.39      7.96            15.70       48.2

1986        7.37     5.53      8.12            15.66       47.0
1987        7.44     5.65      8.29            15.89       46.8

Source:   U. S. Department of Agriculture, U.S.         and Sweeteners Situation,
 June 1987
Note: Noncaloric sweeteners consumption (in sugar equivalent weight) was .59
million tons in 1970 and rose to 2.23 million tons by 1986.




                                          57
Table 3. Sugarcane: Raw     sugar      production by area, 1950-86 crop years.

Crop   year           Mainland
              Florida       Louisiana       Texas   Total Hawaii       Puerto    Total
                                                                       Rico
                                 (1,000 short tons, raw value)
1950            108              456          ———     564      961       1,299     2,824
1951            122              297          ———     419      996       1,128     2,653
1952            154              451          ———     605    1,020       1,372     2,997
1953            151              481          ———     632    1,099       1,182     2,913
1954            132              478          ———     610    1,077       1,204     2,891
1955            119              455          ———     574    1,140       1,166     2,880
1956            129              432          ———     561    1,100       1,152     2,813
1957            136              398          ———     534    1,085         990     2,609
1958            130              443          ———     579    1,158         934     2,278
1959            175              441          ———     616        975     1,087     2,678

1960            160              470                  630      936       1,019     2,585
1961            208              650                  858    1,092       1,110     3,060
1962            380              472                  852    1,120       1,009     2,981
1963            424              759                1,183    1,101         989     3,273
1964            574              573                1,147    1,179         989     3,315
1965            554              550                1,104    1,218         897     3,219
1966            652              562                1,214    1,234         883     3,331
1967            717              740                1,457    1,191         818     3,446
1968            546              669                1,215    1,232         645     3,092
1969            535              537                1,072    1,182         483     2,737

1970            652              602          ———   1,254    1,162         460     2,876
1971            635              571          ———   1,206    1,230         324     2,760
1972            961              660          ———   1,621    1,119         298     3,038
1973            824              558           38   1,420    1,129         255     2,804
1974            803              594           74   1,471    1,041         291     2,803
1975          1,061              640          126   1,827    1,107         303     3,237
1976            930              650           94   1,674    1,050         312     3,036
1977            894              668           88   1,650    1,034         267     2,951
1978            972              550           61   1,583    1,029         204     2,816
1979          1,047              500           93   1,640    1,060         193     2,893

1980          1,121              491           93   1,705    1,023         177     2,905
1981            963              712          110   1,785    1,048         153     2,986
1982          1,307              675           98 2,080        983         113     3,176
1983          1,223              603           60 1,886      1,044         100     2,799
1984          1,412              452           81   1,945    1,062          97     3,002
1985          1,413              532           76   2,021    2,021         109     3,109
1986          1,382              650           75   2,107    1,045          95     3,426

Source: U.S.D.A.       and Sweetener Situation, ODtober 1986.
     means no production at that time.




                                               58
                                       REFERENCES

Becker,     Gary S, 1983. "A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for
Political    Influence", Quarterly Journal of Economic
August 1983.
Berman, Daniel H. and Heilieman, Robert A., 1963. 'Lobbying by Foreign Govern-
ments on the Sugar Act Amendments of 1962,", Law and Contemporary Problems,
vol. 28, No. 2, Spring. Pp. 416—27.
Bhagwati, Jagdish and Srinivasan T.N.,1980. 'Revenue Seeking: A Generalization
of the Theory of Tariffs,"Journal of Political Economy, December, Vol.      88,
No. 6 Pp. 1069-87.

Borrell, Brent, Sturgiss, Robert and Wong, Gordon, 1987, "U.S. Sugar Policy -
Its   Effects on the    World Sugar Market",     paper presented at International
Sweetener Colloquium, California, Feb. 1987.

Brock, W.A., and Magee, S. P., 1978, 'The Economics of Special Interest
Politics: The case of Tariffs" ,Amserican Economic Review, 68: 236-50.

Buchanan, James H., 1987. 'The Constitution of Economic Policy", American
Economic Review, June.

Cameron, Laurie A and Berg, Gerald C.,'The U.S. Sugar Program, An Historical
Overview", min,eo, undated.

Campos, Jose Edgardo L., 1987 A Simple Political Economy Model of Price Sup-
ports. Ph. D. Thesis , California Institute of Technology.

Cater, Douglass, 1964. Power in Washirigton,Random House, N.Y.

Congressional Quarterly Almanac,       1962. "Congress Again Revises    Sugar Quotas",
1962 CQ Almanac, Pp. 127—130.

Congressional      Research Service,     1985. "World Sugar Trade and U.S. Sugar
Policy", Report No. 85—144, ENR, July 12.

Corden, W. H., 1974. Trade Policy and Economic Welfare, Oxford University
Press,   Oxford.

Council on Wage and Price Stability, 1975, Staff      Report   on        Prices, May.

Ferguson,    Allen R., undated, "The   Sugar Price Support Program", mimeo.

General Accounting Office, 1984. "U.S. Sweetener/Sugar         Issues   and Concerns",
GAD/RCED 85—19, November 15, 1984.

Gerber, David J. 1976, "The United States Sugar Program: A Study in the Direct
Congressional Control of Imports", Journal of Law and Economics, Vol 19 (1),
Pp. 103—47.
Harris, Simon, "Protectionism in the World Sugar Economy Reed, mimeo.
Sao Paulo, 25 June 1985

Johnson, D. Gale, The          Program, American Enterprise Institute, 1974.


                                           59
Krauss, Bob    and Alexander, William P., 1965, Grove Farm Plantation:   The ftisa::
         of a Hawaiian       Plantation. Pacific Books, Palo Alto
Leu, Gwo-Jiun Mike and Knutson, Ronald D., "U.S. Sugar Policy: Costs,
Benefits,Consequences" , Paper presented at Western Economic Association,
July 1987.
Maskus, Keith E., 1987. "The International Political Economy of U.S. Sugar
Policy in the l980s", United States Department of State, Bureau of Economic
and Business Affairs, Planning and Economic Analysis Staff. WP/87/j.

Mueller, Dennis C., l983.The Political Economy of Growth,Yale University
Press, 1983.

Olson, Mancur 1965 The gjp of Collective Action, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Mass.

Olson, Mancur 1982. The Rise and Fall of Nations: Economic Growth,
tij and Social Rigiditios, Yale Universitiy Press, New Haven, Conn.

Peltzman, Sam, 1976 "Toward a More      General Theory of Regulation' ,Journai of
Isw and Economics, XIX, Pp. 211—40.

Price, David E., l97l,"The Politics of Sugar", Review of Politics.         Vol. 33,
April (pp. 212—231.

Snape, Richard H., l963,,"Some Effects of Protection in the World Sugar
Industry", Econonica, February

Stigler, George J., 1971. "The Theory of Economic Regulation", Bell Journal of
Economics, Spring, Pp. 3-21.

Tan, C Suan, 1986. Cuba—USSR          Trade, Commodity Studies and Projections
Division, World Bank, Division Working Paper No. 1986-2.,

Tarr, David 0. and Morkre, Morris E., Aggregate Costs to the United States of
Tariffs and Qyqs on Imparts, Federal Trade Commission, December 1984.

Taussig, Frank William, 1924 Some Aspects of the Tariff Question, Harvard
University Press, Cammbridge, Mass.

Taussig, Frank William, l93l.A Tariff History of the United States, 0. P.
Putnam's & Sons, New York and London.

Terpstra, A. Ellen, 1981 "U. S. Sugar Policy and Proposals Since 1974", Con-
gressional Research Service, ED 9100, July 31.

United States Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Agriculture,
Hearings on Sugar Program. Cited as House Hearings, with indicated date.

United    States Department of Agriculture, 1985. Economics Research Service.
"Background to 1985 Sugar Legislation".




                                        60
United States House of Representatives, 1974.Subconinittee on Domestic Market-
ing and Consumer Relations of the Committee on Agriculture, Examination of
      Marketing Conditions Since Defeat of         Bill, Dec. 9,    10, 11, 12, and
197, 1974. Serial 93-)OO(. Referenced as Sugar   Marketing   Hearings 1974.

United States Tariff Commission, 1937.United States—Philippine Trade,       Report
No. 118, Second Series, U.S. Government Printing Office




                                      61
Number         Author                     Title                                Date

 2444    Tadashi Yamada          Nutrition and Infant Health in Japan          11/87
         Tetsuji Yamada and
         Frank Chaloupka

 2445    Peter Schmidt and       Predicting Criminal Recidivism Using          11/87
         Ann Dryden Witte        "Split Population" Survival Time Models

 2446    Robert J. Shiller       Investor Behavior in the October 1987         11/87
                                 Stock Market Crash: Survey Evidence

 2447    Carol L. Osler          Factor Prices and Welfare Under Integrated    11/87
                                 Capital Markets

 2448    David E. Bloom and      Economic Development and the Timing and       11/87
         Richard B. Freeman      Components of Population Growth

 2449    Charles Engel and       Trade Policy Under Endogenous Credibility     11/37
         Kenneth Kletzer

 2450    Danny Quah              What Do We Learn From Unit Roots in           12/87
                                 Macroeconomic Time Series?

2451     Shlomo Yitzhaki and     Welfare Dominance: An Application to          12/87
         Joel Slemrod            Comodity Taxation

 2452    Randi Boorstein and     Quality Upgrading and its Welfare Cost        12/87
         Robert C. Feenstra      in U.S. Steel Imports, 1969-74

 2453    Robert C. Feenstra      Syninetric Pass—Through of Tariffs and        12/87
                                 Exchange Rates Under Imperfect Competition:
                                 An Empirical Test

2454     Robert J. Gordon        Wage Gaps vs. Output Gaps: Is There a         12/87
                                 Comon Story for All of Europe?

2455     Jeffrey Sachs and       U.S. Coninercial Banks and the Developing     12/87
         Harry Huizinga          Country Debt Crisis

 2456    Robert C. Harris        Means of Payment in Takeovers: Results        12/87
         Julian Franks and       for the U.K and U.S.

 2457    Manuel Trajtenberg      Patents, Citations and Innovations:           12/87
                                 Tracing the Links

 2458    Dagobert L. Brito       Information and Multi-Period Optimal          12/87
         Jonathan H. Hamilton    Income Taxation with Government Comitment
         Steven N. Slutsky and
         Joseph E. Stiglltz

2459     Paul R. Krugman         Trigger Strategies and Price Dynamics in      12/87
                                 Equity and Foreign Exchange Markets
