                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE SUBSIDY TO INFRASTRUCTURE AS AN ASSET CLASS

                                        Aleksandar Andonov
                                          Roman Kräussl
                                            Joshua Rauh

                                        Working Paper 25045
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25045


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2018




We are grateful to seminar, workshop and conference participants at the NBER Economics of Infrastructure
Meeting and at the SACRS Program for Public Investment Management for helpful comments and
suggestions.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25045.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Aleksandar Andonov, Roman Kräussl, and Joshua Rauh. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Subsidy to Infrastructure as an Asset Class
Aleksandar Andonov, Roman Kräussl, and Joshua Rauh
NBER Working Paper No. 25045
September 2018
JEL No. G11,G23,G28,H54,H75

                                          ABSTRACT

We investigate the characteristics of infrastructure as an asset class from an investment
perspective of a limited partner. While non U.S. institutional investors gain exposure to
infrastructure assets through a mix of direct investments and private fund vehicles, U.S. investors
predominantly invest in infrastructure through private funds. We find that the stream of cash
flows delivered by private infrastructure funds to institutional investors is very similar to that
delivered by other types of private equity, as reflected by the frequency and amounts of net cash
flows. U.S. public pension funds perform worse than other institutional investors in their
infrastructure fund investments, although they are exposed to underlying deals with very similar
project stage, concession terms, ownership structure, industry, and geographical location. By
selecting funds that invest in projects with poor financial performance, U.S. public pension funds
have created an implicit subsidy to infrastructure as an asset class, which we estimate within the
range of $730 million to $3.16 billion per year depending on the benchmark.

Aleksandar Andonov                               Joshua Rauh
University of Amsterdam                          Graduate School of Business
Amsterdam Business School                        Stanford University
Plantage Muidergracht 12                         Stanford, CA 94305
1018 TV Amsterdam                                and Hoover Institution
Netherlands                                      and also NBER
a.andonov@uva.nl                                 rauh@stanford.edu

Roman Kräussl
Luxembourg School of Finance
University of Luxembourg
6, rue Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi
1359 Luxembourg
Luxembourg
roman.kraussl@uni.lu
                                             I.       Introduction
         An adequate supply of infrastructure is an essential ingredient for competitiveness and long
run potential growth in any economy (Fernald, 1999; Roller and Waverman, 2001; Esfahani and
Ramı́rez, 2003; Donaldson, 2018). The public and private stock of infrastructure plays a critical
role in enhancing the productivity of people and firms by lowering the costs of combining different
productive inputs, accessing markets, and increasing mobility and competition. International
organizations such as the OECD and World Bank have called attention to an acute need for new
or modernized infrastructure and pointed to a disparity between this need and the current level of
infrastructure investment.1 This globally increasing gap between the demand for infrastructure
investment and the provision of resources has led to calls for greater recourse to private capital in
the infrastructure sector.
         Institutional investors, such as pension funds, insurance companies and sovereign wealth
funds, are becoming increasingly active alongside governments in the provision of capital to
infrastructure funds and projects. The financial industry presents infrastructure as a new alternative
asset class – in contrast to standard assets such as equities and bonds and established alternative
assets such as buyout, venture capital and real estate – which would deliver new sources of stable
return and better diversification of risk.2 In the last two decades, public and private investors have
expressed growing interest in real assets that were perceived as more transparent and stable than
complex products presented to them, with a more direct connection to underlying value. Further,
infrastructure investments may offer a wide range of social and political benefits in their respective
regions (Castells and Solé-Ollé, 2005; Cadot, Röller and Stephan, 2006).
         The stated value proposition of infrastructure as an investment is generally that it has
attractive financial attributes such as strong returns, a low sensitivity to swings in the business
cycle, little correlation with equity markets, long-term stable and predictable cash flows, inflation
hedging properties, and low default rates. Based on their economic and financial characteristics,



1
  According to estimates of the Infrastructure 2030 OECD study, the need for infrastructure investments amounts to
$60 trillion by 2030, or 3.5% annually of global GDP. The World Bank’s Global Infrastructure Outlook forecasts a
global infrastructure investment need of $94 trillion by 2040, and a $15 trillion gap between that need and projected
infrastructure investment under current trends.
2
  For example, according to Deutsche Bank Asset Management (2017), “Infrastructure offers relatively low long-term
cash flow volatility compared with other asset classes and can also provide attractive, inflation-hedged total returns.”
J.P. Morgan Asset Management (2017) bases its case for infrastructure on “benefits of diversification, inflation
protection, and yield, along with a strong focus on environmental, social, and governance (ESG) principles.”


                                                           2
infrastructure investments are supposed to offer investors long-term, low-risk, inflation-protected
and a-cyclical returns. As such, they would be a natural fit with long-lasting, often inflation-linked
pension liabilities (see Della Croce, 2012). Infrastructure has thus been marketed as a useful
alternative asset for public pension funds.3
         Public pension investors also share this view. For example, according to the California
Public Employees' Retirement System (CalPERS) website as of August 2018: “Infrastructure
targets stable, defensive investments within the water, energy, waste, transportation, technology,
and communications sectors.”4 But do the infrastructure investments that public pension funds and
other institutional investors make live up to this promise? One challenge to answering this question
has been the difficulty of assembling data series of unlisted infrastructure investments that include
data on fund cash flows and fundamental risk properties of the underlying assets in these funds.
         In this paper, we study the risk and return characteristics of infrastructure investments in a
sample covering 640 institutional investors, who each invest on average in five infrastructure funds
over the period of 1991–2016. Through these fund placements and direct investments in
infrastructure assets, each institutional investor gains exposure to an average of 65 underlying
infrastructure deals, whose properties we directly observe. The majority of investments in our
sample are made through closed private infrastructure funds that have a private equity type
structure.5
         We find that closed infrastructure funds, the primary vehicle used by U.S. institutional
investors, deliver very similar payout profiles to traditional buyout private equity funds.
Specifically, we find a similar frequency of capital calls and distributions over time, as well as
similar amounts. Infrastructure funds do not provide more stable cash flows to institutional
investors than private equity funds. As is the case with buyout and venture funds, closed
infrastructure funds also have a finite life of approximately 10–12 years and must sell assets in




3
  According to Deutsche Bank Asset Management (2017), “The cash flows of infrastructure assets with inherently
long lives and strong intrinsic value, can provide a good match for the long-term liabilities of certain investors, such
as pension funds for example.”
4
  Appendix 1 contains similar statements made by other U.S. public pension funds.
5
  U.S. investors in particular predominantly invest in infrastructure through closed infrastructure funds, while non U.S.
institutional investors gain exposure to infrastructure assets through a mix of direct investments and fund vehicles.
For example, only 3 out of 98 U.S. public pension funds in our sample make direct investments, while 33 out of 100
non U.S. public pension funds in our sample have direct investments. In total, the 3 U.S. public pension funds hold 13
direct deals, while the 33 non U.S. public pension funds hold 248 direct deals.


                                                           3
order to be fully liquidated over this horizon. Overall, we find no economic or statistical difference
between the payouts offered by infrastructure and traditional buyout funds.
       We also find substantial heterogeneity in performance by the type of institutional investor.
Specifically, U.S. public pension funds display worse performance on a number of measures. First,
the deals to which U.S. public pension funds have exposure have substantially worse exit rates,
and we show that this is correlated with worse fund performance. The underlying deal data allow
us to demonstrate that this underperformance is not due to differences in deal type, as the
differences in exit rates persists even when controlling for deal characteristics such as project stage
(greenfield, brownfield, secondary), the region, the existence of a concession agreement with a
government, and the industry of the investment (e.g., renewable energy, traditional energy, social,
ICT, transport, and utilities sectors). Second, the funds that U.S. public pension funds invest in
substantially underperform on a net internal rate of return (IRR), multiple of invested capital, and
public market equivalent (PME) basis, even when controlling for the percentage of deals in the
funds that are in each specific region and industry.
       One potential hypothesis that could explain these findings would be that U.S. public
pension fund infrastructure investments are less risky than those of other institutional investors.
However, we find no evidence of this. The ability to measure deal characteristics allows us in both
the deal-level and fund-level analysis to control for factors that capture the riskiness of the
underlying assets. Furthermore, when we examine the cash flows of closed funds, we find that the
frequency of distributions is equivalent for U.S. public pension funds and other types of
institutional investors, with the underperformance reflected in a lower public market equivalent of
public pension fund investments. U.S. public pension funds therefore either have access to worse
funds than other institutional investors but nonetheless choose to invest in the asset class, or they
select worse-performing funds.
       By selecting funds that invest in projects with poor financial performance, U.S. public
pension funds have created an implicit subsidy to infrastructure as an asset class. Specifically,
lower performance of infrastructure investments leads to a lower funding status of promised
benefits. Either taxpayers will have to remedy the underfunding through increased contributions,
or pension plan members will receive reduced pension benefits. Therefore either taxpayers or
pension plan members are subsidizing infrastructure investments through lower returns.




                                                  4
         We estimate this subsidy in three ways. First, we consider the estimated net IRR
performance of U.S. public pension funds relative to other institutional investors, and assume this
performance differential is stable over the approximately $56 billion of U.S. public pension
exposure to infrastructure assets. This first calculation requires an assumption that IRR equals the
effective rate of return.6 It implies an annual subsidy of $730 million per year. Second, we consider
the PME of infrastructure funds relative to a listed infrastructure index, treating listed
infrastructure as the alternative asset that pension funds could have invested in. Estimates here
imply a 17% underperformance over the life of the fund. Given that the annual net flows of public
pension funds into infrastructure assets amount to $5 billion, the U.S. public pension funds lose
$850 million over the lifetime of the fund relative to what they could achieve by investing in an
infrastructure index. Third, we consider how infrastructure fund investments performed relative to
the general private equity buyout and venture capital investments by the same investors. Relative
to these alternatives we observe an even more substantial underperformance and calculate an
implicit annual loss relative to buyout funds of as much as $3.16 billion per year. Given the
similarity in cash flow profiles that we document, this performance differential is unlikely to be
attributable to differential risk.
         Our paper contributes to several literatures. First, we contribute to the literature on
alternative asset classes that focuses primarily on institutional investors’ performance in private
equity and real estate assets (see Kaplan and Sensoy (2015) for a recent survey). We extend this
work by studying infrastructure, which is a fast-growing asset class, and we describe the
underlying assets as well as its performance. Prior research on infrastructure finance has focused
primarily on Australian funds and assets.7 We provide a global overview that covers a longer time
period and multiple investment approaches, and we measure differences in underlying assets,
contractual terms under which the assets are operated, and the contribution of these assets to fund
performance.




6
  IRR equals the effective rate of return if and only if dividends generated by the investment are reinvested at the IRR
rate. See Phalippou (2008) and Kaplan and Sensoy (2015) for a further discussion.
7
  Peng and Newell (2007) were the first to analyze infrastructure investments, using data on listed infrastructure
companies, listed funds and closed funds from Australia. They find that for listed infrastructure the average return was
22.4% with a volatility of 16%, which compared to a 14.1% return with a 5.8% volatility for unlisted infrastructure.
Focusing also on Australia, but analyzing a longer time period that includes the financial crisis of 2008/09, Newell,
Peng and de Francesco (2011) and Finkenzeller, Dechant and Shepherd (2010) report a lower performance.


                                                           5
        Second, our paper contributes to the literature on the performance and incentives of public
institutional investors. Previous research suggests that public pension funds (Hochberg and Rauh,
2013; Bradley, Pantzalis and Yuan 2016; Andonov, Hochberg and Rauh, 2018) and sovereign
wealth funds (Bernstein, Lerner and Schoar, 2013; Bortolotti, Fotak and Megginson, 2015) do not
always pursue pure value maximization. Infrastructure is an asset class over which government
policy has a large influence. Our finding that public pension funds achieve lower performance
suggests that they are susceptible to pressure to subsidize the public sector. That is, at least in asset
classes closely linked to government policies, it seems that public pension funds are not pursuing
strategies whose goals are pure value maximization.
        Third, we add to the literature on the drivers of differences in performance across types of
institutional investors. Lerner, Schoar and Wongsunwai (2007) find that endowments invest in
private equity funds that deliver greater performance, but Sensoy, Wang and Weisbach (2014)
show that the outperformance of endowments disappears over time as the private equity industry
matured and the persistence in performance declined. Our result that endowments and foundations
select infrastructure funds that deliver higher returns, while public pension funds underperform,
shows that university endowments still are better equipped to identify, access, and invest in the
relatively stronger opportunities in young, growing asset classes.
        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the data and our
sample. Section III compares the cash flows delivered by infrastructure funds with the cash flows
delivered by private equity buyout and venture capital funds. Section IV provides results on
institutional investors’ performance in infrastructure. Section V examines exit patterns within
infrastructure deal types. Section VI measures the implicit subsidy to infrastructure as an asset
class. Section VII concludes.


                                             II.       Data
        There are numerous reasons why data in the field of infrastructure investing poses
challenges for researchers. First and foremost, it is the lack of transparency that is typical of
unlisted investments due to their proprietary nature. The practical result of this is that the
characteristics and performance of such assets are often not publicly disclosed. Second, owing to
both the usual annual reporting of unlisted investment vehicles plus the overall, still relatively




                                                   6
short, history of infrastructure investments, only recently has the asset class generated a body of
data that is large enough to conduct substantive multivariate analysis.
           In this paper, we focus on equity positions of institutional investors in infrastructure assets.8
We obtain data on infrastructure investments from Preqin. Figure 1 depicts the investment
approaches through which investors can gain equity exposure to infrastructure projects. Investors
can invest in infrastructure assets directly or through different types of funds run by professional
managers, referred to as general partners (GPs). Few investors decide to invest directly in assets
as it requires a greater financial commitment to a single asset, as well as specialized human capital
to select, manage, and monitor these assets. Our sample covers 38,676 investor-deal observations
and only 1,096 observations are direct investments.
           When investing through infrastructure funds, institutional investors can select between
three fund types: closed, listed, and open-ended funds. The vast majority of institutional investors
gain exposure to infrastructure assets through closed funds. Closed funds are organized in a similar
way as buyout and venture capital. These funds are raised for a specified period (typically 10 to
12 years, with possible short extensions) and are governed by partnership agreements between the
investors and the fund’s principals. Investments are made by the limited partners (LPs) at the start
of the fund’s life, often referred to as the vintage year. Closed funds account for 29,068 investor-
deal observations.
           The remaining observations are split between listed and open-ended funds. Listed
infrastructure funds have publicly traded shares. Institutional investors can gain exposure to their
underlying assets by buying shares of listed funds instead of signing a separate partnership
agreement. Open-ended (evergreen) funds are not publicly traded, but they also offer more
liquidity to the investors through periodic subscriptions and redemptions. Importantly, unlike
closed funds, both listed and open-ended funds do not have a clear termination date and may be
better designed to provide long-term exposure to infrastructure assets. Closed funds are expected
to focus more on exiting positions in assets as they need to distribute cash back to the LPs.
           Investors can also access infrastructure projects through funds-of-funds. In Preqin, we do
not observe the portfolio of funds selected by funds-of-funds and we cannot link the investor to
the underlying infrastructure assets. Therefore, we exclude pure funds-of-funds from the analysis



8
    We do not analyze institutional investors acting as debt providers in infrastructure projects.


                                                             7
but we keep in the sample a small number of funds-of-funds that have some direct exposure to
infrastructure assets in addition to the portfolio of fund investments.
       Infrastructure has emerged as an asset class in the last decade and it has experienced a
steady increase in the flow of funds. To show this increasing trend, we rely on the reported
unrealized value of assets when estimating the value of assets under management by closed
infrastructure funds. Specifically, we download the time-series of annual performance snapshots
for the time period 2008–2017 from Preqin and use the ratio of residual value to paid-in capital to
estimate the time-series of assets under management. We transform the ratio of residual value to
paid-in capital to dollar amounts using the percentage of capital called and fund size.
       Figure 2 shows the unrealized value of assets managed by closed infrastructure funds over
time. We estimate that over the past ten years, the amount of assets under management by
infrastructure funds with performance reported in Preqin increased from $23 to $222 billion. On
the one hand, this estimate could overstate the asset under management if infrastructure funds
overestimate the value of their unrealized assets (Phalippou and Gottschalg, 2009). On the other
hand, this estimate significantly understates the assets under management because it considers only
the assets managed by infrastructure funds that report performance in the Preqin database. For
example, in 2017, we have performance statistics of 270 closed funds, while in the period 2006–
2017 there are 870 closed (but not yet liquidated) funds in the Preqin database.
       We attempt to remedy this by making additional imputations in the upper bars of Figure 2.
Specifically, we assume that every fund that does not report performance holds 25% of the average
assets of reporting funds from the same vintage, yielding $145 billion in unrealized value in non-
reporting funds and a total of $367 billion in total unrealized value across all funds. Note that this
total does not include the assets held by listed and open-ended funds, nor does it include the
infrastructure assets held directly by institutional investors.
       The increasing trend in infrastructure assets under management presented in Figure 2 is
likely to continue in the coming years as many investors are targeting higher allocation weights to
infrastructure than their current actual asset allocation. For example, in 2017, the Employees
Retirement System of Texas (2017) reported in their annual report a target allocation of 4%,
compared to an actual allocation of 1.7%, while the Maine Public Employees Retirement System
(2017) reported in the annual report a target allocation of 10%, compared to an actual allocation
of 7.2%.



                                                   8
       We collect the investments made by six types of institutional investors. Three types of
investors belong to the public sector: public pension funds, government agencies, and sovereign
wealth funds.9 The other three types of investors come from the private sector: private pension
funds, insurance firms and banks, and university endowments and foundations. Table 1 presents
summary statistics by institutional investor. Our sample contains 640 institutional investors from
38 countries, plus several international financial institutions which are classified as international
instead of being assigned to one country. In Panel A we present summary statistics for all
institutional investors, while in Panel B we limit attention to U.S. institutional investors only,
which account for 40% of our sample. These investors make commitments to 425 unique funds
(368 closed, 27 listed, and 30 open-ended funds) managed by 206 unique GPs. Directly and
through funds, they gain exposure to 3,687 unique infrastructure assets. There can be multiple
deals (transactions) in one asset during the sample period. We observe 3,081 investor-fund
observations and 1,096 direct investments in infrastructure assets. Since an infrastructure fund
invests in multiple assets, our sample contains 38,676 investor-deal observations.
       The largest groups of institutional investors are public and private pension funds, with a
share of 33.94% and 29.87% of the investor-deal observations respectively. Government agencies
and sovereign wealth funds account for 4.00% and 1.91% of our sample. Insurance firms and banks
represent 24.52% of the sample, and endowments and foundations represent the remaining 5.77%.
Panel A shows that the institutional investors in our sample have an average of $61.55 billion in
assets under management (AUM), and invest on average in 4.69 funds and 1.71 direct deals.
Through the funds and direct investments, institutional investors gain exposure to an average of
60.43 deals. We observe substantial cross-sectional variation in investor size. Sovereign wealth
funds are the largest institutional investors, while endowments and foundations are the smallest.
Figure 3 presents the investment approach by investor type. All institutions invest primarily
through closed infrastructure funds. Sovereign wealth funds and government agencies are more
likely to invest directly in infrastructure assets. There is no large cross-sectional dispersion in the
investment approach choices of the other types of institutional investors. Public pension funds gain




9
  We classify also development banks as government agencies. Our sample of government agencies includes
investments made by the International Finance Corporation (IFC), European Investment Bank (EIB), African
Development Bank, U.S. Overseas Private Investment Corporation, and U.K. CDC Group, among others.


                                                   9
exposure to assets in a similar way as private pension funds, insurance firms, banks, endowments
and foundations.
            Infrastructure deals can be classified into three categories based on the project stage:
greenfield, brownfield, and secondary stage. The greenfield stage designation refers to physical
assets that do not exist and need to be constructed. Investors finance the building of the asset as
well as the maintenance after it is designed, built, and became operational. The brownfield stage
designation provides exposure to assets that require improvements, repairs or expansion. These
assets are usually partially operational and may already be generating income. Secondary stage
assets provide exposure to fully operational assets that require no further investment for
development. The key difference lies in the maturity of the asset and the available asset-specific
experience, which is substantially less in the case of greenfield and brownfield investments. This
difference might lead to a significantly higher degree of uncertainty and risk in greenfield and
brownfield compared to secondary stage projects. Indeed, compared to investments in secondary
projects, investments in greenfield and brownfield projects do not generally distribute profit in the
first years but instead require capital commitments, which results in a so-called J-curve effect. In
our sample, around 63.8% of the investor-deal observations provide exposure to secondary deals.
Greenfield projects account for 22.5% of the deals and brownfield projects account for 13.8% of
the deals. The exposure to different projects does not differ across the larger types of institutional
investors. The only exception is government agencies which are more likely to invest in greenfield
and brownfield projects.
            We next present summary statistics on the contractual agreements of the deal. The
concession variable is an indicator for whether a deal involves either a concession or a privatization
agreement with the government or other public entity. In the case of a concession, an investor
enters into an agreement with the government to have the exclusive right to operate, maintain and
invest in an infrastructure asset for a given number of years. We classify as a concession only a
transaction in which the government is involved as a counterparty. We do not consider resale
transactions when one investor exits and sells a position in a concession deal to another investor
to be a concession deal, as the government is not directly involved in the transaction.10 We find
that on average 9.1% of the deals in an investor portfolio are backed by a concession agreement.



10
     Our results are robust to alternative concession definitions.


                                                             10
       Table 1 also presents summary statistics on the ownership structure in deals. #Investors
counts the average number of investors in the same deal. When constructing this variable, we count
multiple LPs investing through the same infrastructure fund only once. Many infrastructure deals
are relatively large transactions and, on average, 1.68 investors jointly execute a deal. Investment
Stake measures the average investment stake of the infrastructure fund through which the LPs
accessed the deal. Total Stake is the average stake of all investors in the deal. Investors on average
obtain 57.8% ownership in the underlying asset and all investors jointly have 73.9% ownership in
the underlying asset.
       Figure 4 presents the distribution of deals by industry for each investor type. We classify
the deals into seven industries. The largest industry is traditional energy and it includes investments
in coal and nuclear power plants, natural resources pipelines, refineries, and natural resource
storage facilities. Renewable energy captures investments in wind, solar, hydro, biomass, and
geothermal power facilities. The transportation industry includes investments in toll roads, parking
lots and service stations, tunnels, bridges, railroads and rolling stocks, airports and aircraft, sea
ports, cargo shipping vessels, and logistics. Social infrastructure combines investments in
hospitals, medical facilities, senior homes, student accommodation, education facilities, public
buildings, prisons, defense accommodation, and police stations. The utilities industry includes
investments in water treatment plants, water distribution, power distribution, sewage treatment
plants, sewage networks, and waste management. The telecom industry covers investments in
mobile phone, landline phone, wireless, internet, cable television, and satellite networks. The final
category covers diversified infrastructure projects. Overall, the infrastructure asset class
encompasses projects from different industries, highlighting the importance of controlling for
industry type in our analysis.
       Our sample includes infrastructure assets located in 124 countries. In our analysis, we
account for differences in geographical location by classifying the assets into seven regions:
Northern America (USA and Canada), Latin America and Caribbean, Western Europe, Eastern
Europe, Asia, Africa, and Oceania. Panel A of Figure 5 shows the distribution of deals by region
for each investor type. Around 88% of the exposure of public pension funds, private pension funds,
insurance firms, banks, endowments and foundations is to deals in developed markets and 12% is
to deals in emerging markets. Government agencies and sovereign wealth funds invest relatively
more in infrastructure projects located in emerging markets. Panel B focuses on the subsample of



                                                  11
U.S. investors only. U.S. institutions allocate a similar proportion of their capital to assets in
emerging markets, but within developed markets they invest relatively more in their home country.
For instance, U.S. public pension funds invest 65.35% of their capital in assets located in Northern
America, while for endowments and foundations this percentage increases to 83.29% of their
investments.
        We generate a %Home deals variable based on the location of the deal relative to the
location of the institutional investor. Since the U.S. is a very large country in our sample with a
geographically disperse network of institutional investors, we define the %Home deals variable
for U.S. investors as deals located in the same state (not country) as the institutional investor. Panel
B of Table 1 shows that institutional investors allocate around 25% of their capital to projects
located in their home state or country under this definition.


     III.     Comparison of Infrastructure Funds with Buyout and VC Funds
        Institutional investors often incorporate infrastructure as an alternative asset class in their
portfolio, under the expectation that it will deliver steady cash flows in the long run and
diversification benefits due to low correlation with other asset classes. Indeed, investors often
describe infrastructure assets as a match for their long-term inflation-linked liabilities.11 The asset
management industry promotes infrastructure as a new asset class that will deliver stable cash
flows with a low correlation with the business cycle (Deutsche Bank Asset Management, 2017;
J.P. Morgan Asset Management, 2017). Furthermore, recent literature has recognized the
importance of cash flow data for achieving a complete picture of the performance of vehicles with
a private equity structure (Ang et al, 2018).
        In Table 2 and Figure 6, we compare the cash flows delivered by closed infrastructure
funds with the cash flows delivered by buyout and venture capital (VC) funds. We use cash flow
data from Preqin for funds with a 2002 vintage or later and focus on the annual frequency of capital
calls and distributions as well as on the annual amounts of these capital calls and distributions. If
closed infrastructure funds deliver more stable cash flows, as argued by the finance industry and
expected by investors, their payouts would be expected to have more stable frequency and amounts
over the entire life of a fund. We standardize the cash flows over the life of a fund, so that time


 In Appendix 1, we quote several statements made by U.S. public pension funds that explain their expectations and
11

motives for investing in infrastructure.


                                                       12
period t=1 corresponds to the vintage year of the fund. We present the timeline of cash flows for
the first 12 years of the fund life, as most closed funds are designed to exist for approximately 12
years and are fully divested by that time.
       Table 2 and Figure 6 show that the payout profile provided by infrastructure funds does
not differ from the payout profile provided by buyout funds. The only significant difference is in
the frequency of capital calls as buyout funds draw on capital commitments more frequently.
However, the amount of capital calls and the dollar amount of distributions over time provided by
infrastructure funds is statistically and economically indistinguishable from the dollar amount of
capital calls and the amount of distributions over time delivered by buyout funds. As compared to
VC funds, infrastructure funds have a similar timeline of capital calls but more frequent and larger
annual distributions.
       Table 2 shows that the number of buyout and VC funds raised since 2002 is significantly
greater than the number of infrastructure funds raised in the same time period. One potential worry
is that infrastructure funds differ in their focus and size from the average buyout and VC funds. In
Appendix Figure IA.1, we replicate the analysis from Figure 6, but instead of using the cash flows
of the entire sample of buyout and VC funds with available cash flow data, we use only the cash
flows of a matched subsample. We create this subsample by matching infrastructure funds with
buyout and VC funds based on three criteria: vintage year, geographical focus (U.S., Europe and
Rest-of-World), and fund size (closest match). The results with the matched subsample confirm
that infrastructure and buyout funds have a similar profile of capital distributions over time.
Moreover, in the matched subsample, we also observe that infrastructure and VC funds have a
similar (statistically and economically) profile of capital calls and distributions.
       In Table 2, we also present the public market equivalent (PME) performance measure. We
use the returns on the S&P 500 stock market index to calculate the PMEs and find that
infrastructure funds have performed similarly to the public market with an average PME of 0.987.
The PMEs delivered by buyout and VC funds in the same time period are 1.048 and 0.974,
respectively.
       Overall, the typical structure of cash flows over time provided by infrastructure funds does
not differ from the payout policy offered by more established alternative assets, like buyout and
VC funds. Based on the payout profiles, we conclude that it will be difficult for closed




                                                  13
infrastructure funds to meet investor expectations for stable cash flows with diversification
benefits.


            IV.    Performance Differences across Institutional Investors
       In this section, we move the analysis from an asset class level to an investor level and study
the investor experience in infrastructure, specifically the probability of exiting an infrastructure
investment while controlling for the characteristics of the infrastructure asset. The fraction of
exited investments has been used a proxy for performance in the private equity literature when
analyzing the performance of buyout and venture capital funds (Hochberg, Ljungqvist and Lu,
2007; Sorensen, 2007; Phalippou and Gottschalg, 2009). Exiting a deal is an informative indicator
of performance in our setting because the majority of infrastructure deals are made by closed funds
organized in the same way as private equity funds. We also verify the positive link between deal
exits and performance later in this section.
       To examine performance differences across types of institutional investors, we estimate
Cox proportional hazard models. The hazard event of interest is defined as a sale transaction that
results in a full (not partial) exit of an equity position in an infrastructure asset during a year. We
estimate the hazard rate of exiting an asset, defined as the probability that an exit will come to
fruition in year t conditional on it not becoming complete prior to year t. In this setting, t refers to
the number of years after the purchase transaction and it measures event time rather than calendar
time. Estimation of the model delivers coefficients that can be interpreted as hazard ratios. A
hazard ratio lower than one indicates that as the value of the covariate increases, the hazard rate of
exiting a deal decreases.
       In Table 3, observations are at the investor-deal level. As explanatory variables, we use
indicators for institutional investors from the public sector: U.S. public pension funds, non U.S.
public pension funds, government agencies, and sovereign wealth funds. The omitted category is
investors from the private sector. We control for the natural logarithm of the LP’s AUM and for
the year of their first infrastructure investment. These two variables could capture negotiating
power, experience, or ability to access higher-performing GPs for reasons unrelated to investor
type. #Funds measures the total number of investments in infrastructure funds by investor. Direct
deal is an indicator variable for direct investments in infrastructure deals. In each model we include
LP country, deal industry, and deal region fixed effects. We cluster standard errors by investor


                                                  14
(Columns (1) to (6)), fund (Column (7)), or asset (Column (8)). In the Cox proportional hazard
model the coefficient estimates are robust to any baseline hazard function, which implies that the
specification is robust to any time-specific common factors, equivalent to controlling for year fixed
effects (Dinc and Gupta, 2011).
        Our results show that U.S. public pension funds have a lower probability (based on the
hazard ratio) of exiting an infrastructure deal. As shown in Column (3) – which includes fixed
effects at the level of the deal region as well as deal industry and LP country – U.S. public pension
funds have a 20.8% lower probability of exiting an infrastructure deal as compared to institutional
investors from the private sector. Non U.S. public pension funds also seem to have lower exit rates
compared to private sector institutional investors, although the effect is not consistently
statistically significant. Government agencies and sovereign wealth funds do not exhibit different
exit rates.
        We analyze exit rates as a proxy for performance, but the infrastructure asset class includes
heterogeneous projects. Recognizing that the differences in exit rates could potentially be due to
differences in the selection of projects, we take several approaches. First, we control for project
industry and geographical location through the inclusion of fixed effects. Second, we include an
indicator control variable for direct deals, which offer more flexibility in the exit decisions. When
investing through funds, institutional investors generally do not have the power to influence the
timing of exit decisions, whereas when they invest directly they can make such decisions. We
observe that direct deals in infrastructure have economically significantly longer holding periods
and around 30% lower exit rates, as institutional investors who devote substantial financial and
human capital to direct investing are willing to make long-term commitments.
        Third, in Column (4), we add controls for concession agreement, project stage, and location
of the deal in the same country (state) as the LP. As expected, the coefficients on the greenfield
and brownfield variables are below one, indicating that these (riskier) projects require a longer
time for development before they can be sold to other parties. Secondary deals that are fully
operational are more liquid and transact faster. Deals backed by a concession agreement exhibit a
higher probability of exit. This implies that a concession agreement has the potential to reduce risk
and increases the liquidity of a deal. Institutional investors also see lower exit rates for deals
located in their country.




                                                 15
       Fourth, in Columns (5) and (6), we add controls for the total number of investors in the
same deal and the ownership position. The investment stake and total stake differ if there are
multiple investors in the same transaction. We observe a lower probability of exiting a deal when
multiple investors are involved and when the investor obtains a higher ownership stake.
       In Columns (7) and (8), we show that our results are robust to clustering standard errors in
two alternative ways. First, we cluster the standard errors by infrastructure fund. This estimation
automatically excludes direct deals as there is no fund involved as an intermediary. Second, we
cluster the standard errors by infrastructure asset. These robustness tests account for the fact that
multiple institutional investors can invest in the same fund or in the same asset.
       In the Internet Appendix, we estimate two robustness tests of our results. First, in Internet
Appendix Table IA.1, we include an indicator variable for all other institutional investors except
public pension funds. We find that all other institutional investors have hazard ratios above one,
but particularly private sector pension funds, endowments and foundations display a higher
probability of exiting deals. Based on Column (6), endowments and foundations have around a
60.2% higher probability of exiting an infrastructure deal in year t if it has not exited previously
than public pension funds. Second, in Internet Appendix Table IA.2, we focus on the subsample
of investor-deal observations accessed through closed funds, because closed funds have an ending
term and stronger incentive to exit a deal faster. We exclude deals accessed directly or through
listed and open-ended funds as these investment approaches do not have a clear ending term and
have more flexibility in the exit decisions. The results in Internet Appendix Table IA.2 are similar
to the results in Table 3: U.S. public pension funds (and to some extent non U.S. public pension
funds) have a significantly lower probability of exiting deals.
       Overall, we document that public pension funds display lower exit rates relative to other
institutional investors even after controlling for deal characteristics. While differences in allocation
to specific deal types could be driven by variation in objectives, beliefs or preferences about the
properties of different deals, the fact that the coefficients on U.S. and non U.S. public pension
funds remain unchanged after controlling for deal type (industry, location, stage, concession, and
ownership stake) suggests that the differences in exit rates between institutional investors do in
fact proxy for differences in performance.
       In Table 4 we test directly whether exit rates are indeed related to performance, as they
could in theory also capture differences in investment horizon or other preferences. We analyze



                                                  16
three performance measures: (i) the probability of reporting any performance statistics in Preqin;
(ii) the net IRR; and (iii) the net multiple of invested capital. The analysis is on a fund level. We
limit attention to closed funds, as Preqin collects performance data only for these funds and they
have clear objectives to exit deals faster. The other investment approaches (listed funds, open-
ended funds, and direct deals) do not have a predefined ending term and thus do not face an
incentive to exit deals quickly.
       Columns (1) and (2) present the results of logit regressions and the dependent variable
equals one if a closed infrastructure fund reports either the net IRR or multiple of invested capital
in the Preqin database. Infrastructure is a relatively new asset class and many funds still do not
report any return measures. However, this argument is reasonable for funds started in recent years,
but not for funds that have existed for a longer time period. Therefore, in Table 4, we control for
vintage year of the fund as well as the percentage allocated to projects in difference industries and
geographical regions. The vintage year indicators are designed to control for a truncated
distribution of deal exits. In Column (1), we find that a 10 percentage point increase in the
percentage of exited deals is associated with a 2.79 percentage point higher probability of reporting
performance. We also observe that larger funds are more likely to report performance.
       In Columns (3) and (5), we find more direct evidence that exiting a deal proxies for better
performance. Based on Column (3), a 10 percentage point increase in the percentage of exited
deals is associated with a 1.82 percentage point higher net IRR. Based on Column (5), a 10
percentage point increase in the percentage of exited deals is associated with an increase in the
multiple of invested capital by around 0.06.
       Within infrastructure, the percentage of exited deals proxies well for performance because
many funds were raised recently and are still not fully liquidated. If there are many liquidated
funds, the percentage of exited deals will be a weaker proxy of performance because liquidated
funds by definition have already exited all their investments. Therefore, in Columns (4) and (6),
we split the percentage of exited deals based on the holding period. We examine separately the
relation between performance and the percentage of exited deals in the first five years after the
transaction date, in five to ten years after the transaction, and in more than ten years after the
transaction date. We find that the positive relation between performance and exit rates is driven by
relatively quick exits within the first five years after the investment date. Investments held for a
period of longer than 10 years seem to be negatively related to performance, even after controlling



                                                 17
for the share of fund investments in different deal regions and deal industries. This result further
confirms that for closed infrastructure funds, a quick exit might well be the objective when making
investment decisions and that exit rates are a valid proxy for analyzing the performance of different
institutional investors in this asset class.
        In Table 5, we extend the analysis by examining the performance on an investor-fund level.
The advantage compared to Table 3 is that we can directly include return measures, like net IRR
and multiple of invested capital, as dependent variables. The disadvantage compared to Table 3 is
that we can analyze only the performance of investments through closed funds, but not to listed
funds, open-ended funds, and direct deals. We include two additional control variables for fund
type. FOF is an indicator variable equal to one for infrastructure funds labeled primarily as funds-
of-funds but still holding few deals directly. The negative coefficient is consistent with prior
literature on funds-of-funds.12 Debt fund is an indicator variable that captures infrastructure funds
investing in both debt and equity securities related to infrastructure. The negative performance
coefficient could be explained if such funds previously held an underperforming loan and were
forced to restructure it in an equity stake. The best-performing debt funds will likely not have any
direct equity stakes and will not be in our sample.
        The results in Table 5 confirm that public pension funds exhibit lower performance. U.S.
public pension funds invest in infrastructure funds that have 7.10 percentage points lower exit
rates, 1.32 percentage points lower net IRR, and 0.058 lower multiple of invested capital. Non
U.S. public funds also seem to underperform compared to other institutional investors, although
the coefficients are significant only when using the multiple of invested capital as a performance
measure. That said, the coefficients in Columns (4) to (9) could underestimate the
underperformance of U.S. public pension funds if there is selection bias in the availability of
performance data. In particular, U.S. public pension funds hold more infrastructure funds with
lower exit rates and these funds deliver on average lower returns and are less likely to report




12
  In private equity, Andonov, Hochberg and Rauh (2018) and Harris, Jenkinson, Kaplan and Stucke (2018) document
that fund-of-funds deliver lower returns than other fund types. In hedge funds, Brown, Goetzmann and Liang (2004)
and Ang, Rhodes-Kropf and Zhao (2008) find that funds-of-funds underperform individual hedge funds. The
underperformance by funds-of-funds primarily arises from the extra layer of fees (French, 2008). However, the
performance of funds-of-funds from an investor perspective needs to be compared to individual funds that the
investors would have been able to select and access if not investing through fund-of-funds (Ang, Rhodes-Kropf and
Zhao, 2008; Harris, Jenkinson, Kaplan and Stucke, 2018).


                                                       18
performance in Preqin. Table 4 shows that the performance measures are more likely to be missing
for funds with lower exit rates.
       Overall, our results indicate that U.S. public pension funds hold infrastructure deals longer,
and that their lower exit rates proxy for lower performance. There are four potential explanations
for the underperformance of U.S. public pension funds.
       First, the differences in exit rates and performance could be due to differences in
preferences for gaining long-term exposure to infrastructure assets. However, as shown in Figure
3, U.S. public pension funds are equally likely to invest through closed funds, i.e., the investment
approach with the strongest incentive to exit deals faster, and are no more likely to invest directly
or through listed and open-ended funds, which offer more flexibility to hold deals longer. The
underperformance of public pension funds also does not seem to be due to preferences for different
projects, as controlling for detailed deal characteristics does not attenuate the coefficient of their
underperformance. Thus, we observe limited support for the explanation based on different
preferences.
       Second, U.S. public pension funds could gain exposure to less risky infrastructure
investments than other institutional investors and these safer assets will deliver lower returns. We
test for this hypothesis in two ways. First, we use deal characteristics, like project stage, location,
and concession agreement, as proxies for factors that capture the riskiness of the underlying assets.
Second, in Table 6, we examine the cash flows delivered by closed funds to their investors. If
public pension funds are exposed to less risky assets, then they should receive steadier cash flows
over time from these assets. We find that the frequency of distributions is equivalent for public
pension funds and other types of institutional investors. However, U.S. public pension funds
receive more frequent capital calls. In line with the previous performance results, U.S. public
pension funds earn a lower PME of around 3.8% from their infrastructure funds. The lower PME
shows that the similar frequency of distributions over time is not compensated by higher
distribution amounts. Therefore, we do not find support for the lower-risk hypothesis.
       Third, U.S. public pension funds frequently state that they expect stable long-term cash
flows, while our results suggest that their infrastructure fund managers look for capital
appreciation and sales during the limited life of the fund. However, this misalignment of objectives
is unlikely to explain lower performance, as U.S. public pension funds are making the decision to




                                                  19
invest in closed infrastructure funds with limited life even though they are familiar with this
business model based on extensive prior experience with buyout and VC funds.
          Finally, the underperformance of U.S. public pension funds could be due to lower skill in
the selection of infrastructure funds, or continued investment in infrastructure despite perhaps only
having access to worse-performing funds. U.S. public pension funds may also have different
objectives, such as finding back-door ways to increase allocation to alternative assets in order to
maintain high expected returns on their plan assets. If some pension funds have a higher target
allocation to infrastructure, and if the universe of good investments available to them is limited,
those with higher target allocations may take on more marginal investments in order to meet the
target.
          Our results seem to be in line with the last of these interpretations – that public pension
funds either have lower skill in manager selection or worse access to funds, but continue to invest
in the asset class in order to justify increased exposure to private markets more generally. The
performance differences in infrastructure across types of institutional investors are similar to the
literature on performance of institutional investors in private equity. The evidence that endowment
funds perform better in infrastructure at present, when this asset class is still in a growth stage, is
in line with the evidence that endowments performed better than other investors in private equity
investments in the 1990s, before the private equity industry matured (Lerner, Schoar and
Wongsunwai, 2007; Sensoy, Wang and Weisbach, 2014). Our results suggest that university
endowments still possess an information advantage and are able to identify and access well-
performing managers in young asset classes.


                         V.      Exit Rates and Deal Characteristics
          In this section, we extend the performance analysis by examining deal exit patterns within
deal types. We limit our attention to the subsample of U.S. institutional investors as they represent
the largest group in our sample and most of the variation in performance comes from U.S. public
pension funds. Table 7 presents results of a survival analysis using Cox proportional hazard model.
The event of interest is again the decision to exit a deal in year t conditional on not exiting the deal
prior to year t. We start with the entire sample of all deals to which U.S. investors are exposed,
and afterwards we focus on smaller subsamples based on industry, location, project stage, and
concession. Public pension funds are the dominant group of investors from the U.S. public sector.


                                                  20
There are three U.S. state investment funds (sovereign wealth funds) investing in infrastructure:
Alaska Permanent Fund Corporation, New Mexico State Investment Council, and North Dakota
Legacy Fund. We include an indicator for these state investment funds, but we are cautious in our
interpretation as the sample is small.13
         The results in Column (1) confirm that U.S. public pension funds have a 32.4% lower
probability of exiting an infrastructure deal as compared to U.S. institutional investors from the
private sector. The three U.S. sovereign wealth funds also display significantly lower exit rates.
         In Columns (2) to (4), we analyze the exit rates within the three largest industries based on
the number of deals: traditional energy, renewable energy, and transportation.14 The other
industrial categories are too small for a separate analysis. We find that U.S. public pension funds
have lower exit rates within all three industries. However, the magnitude of the coefficients is
relatively larger when U.S. investors are exposed to renewable energy and transportation deals.
U.S. public pension funds have around a 44.8% lower probability of exiting a renewable energy
deal, and a 40.5% lower probability to exit a transportation deal.
         In Columns (5) and (6), we split the deals based on location into home (U.S.) deals and
international deals. U.S. public pension funds have lower exit rates on their portfolio of both
domestic and international deals. The economic magnitude seems to be larger for domestic deals.
         In Columns (7) and (8), we split the sample based on project stage. We combine greenfield
and brownfield deals as both of them provide exposure to assets that are not fully operational and
require significant investments. We observe that U.S. public pension funds have lower exit rates
for both greenfield/brownfield and secondary deals. Therefore, their underperformance does not
arise from exposure to deals associated with differential risk. In Columns (9) and (10), we split the
sample based on whether the deal is backed by a concession agreement as additional measure of
the riskiness of the project. The sample of concession deals in the portfolio of U.S. investors is
small and covers only 488 investor-deal observations. We find that U.S. public pension funds have
lower exit rates for both deals with and without a concession agreement.




13
   There is also one U.S. government agency, Overseas Private Investment Corporation, acting as an infrastructure
investor but we do not include a separate indicator for this single investor.
14
   When examining deals within traditional and renewable energy, we cannot control for a concession indicator
because there are almost no concessions in these industries. The vast majority of the concessions is offered for deals
in the transportation, social, and utilities industries.


                                                         21
         Overall, we find that the lower exit rates and underperformance of U.S. public pension
funds are not driven by a specific subsample of infrastructure deals. They display lower rates in
all major industries, locations, and project types. The lower exit rates and underperformance seem
to be relatively larger within domestic renewable energy and transportation projects, but they are
not entirely driven by these deals.


                                       VI.      The Implicit Subsidy
         By selecting funds that invest in projects with poor financial performance, U.S. public
pension funds have created an implicit subsidy to infrastructure as an asset class, as the
underperformance will negatively affect their funding status. Depending on whether unfunded
pension liabilities will ultimately be remediated through contribution increases from taxpayers or
benefit cuts, this subsidy is provided by either taxpayers or pension plan members, or a mix of
both. We measure the value of this subsidy in three ways.
         First, relative to other global infrastructure investors, we estimate an underperformance in
terms of net IRR of 1.3% of the value of the investment each year (see Table 5). If the share of
U.S. public pension funds in the total value of infrastructure fund assets under management is
given by their share in investor counts (98 out of a total of 640, i.e., 15.3%), then U.S. public
pension funds have a total $56.2 billion under management in infrastructure funds.15 If held stable,
and if IRR can be taken as a proxy for effective rate of return experienced by investors, then the
1.3% lower net IRR would imply an annual subsidy of $730 million. With U.S. public pension
fund assets under management rising at a rate of 28% per year, this subsidy would be expected to
double every three years.16
         This first calculation has several drawbacks. The net IRR equals the rate of return
experienced by investors if and only if dividends generated by the investment are reinvested and
earn that same rate of return. Furthermore, a calculation of the subsidy based on the estimated
performance differential between US public pension fund investments and the fund investments
of other institutional investors implicitly assumes that global infrastructure fund investments made

15
   $56.2 billion is 15.3% of the $367 billion in assets under management in Figure 2.
16
   Several large public pension fund investors foresee substantial increases in their allocations to infrastructure. For
example, Pennsylvania Public School Employees' Retirement System (2014; 2017) increased its infrastructure
allocation target from 3% in 2014 to 8% in 2017. In 2017, Employees Retirement System of Texas (2017) has a target
allocation of 4%, compared to actual allocation of 1.7%, and Maine Public Employees Retirement System (2017)
targets 10%, compared to actual allocation of 7.2%.


                                                          22
by these other institutional investors are on the efficient frontier and therefore are an appropriate
benchmark.
         To address the possibility that there are other comparable-risk opportunities in the
investible universe that might have similar expected returns, we develop a second measure of the
underperformance of U.S. public pension funds in the infrastructure asset class, based on the Public
Market Equivalent (PME) approach of Kaplan and Schoar (2005). Panel A of Table 8 shows that
relative to the S&P 500, U.S. public pension funds infrastructure investments have a PME of 0.93,
implying a 7% underperformance over the life of the fund. Relative to a value-weighted index of
listed infrastructure funds, however, the PME of U.S. public pension funds’ infrastructure
investments is only 0.83, implying a 17% underperformance over the life of the fund.17 Thus, for
each new (annual) $5 billion committed, public pension funds lose $850 million over the lifetime
of the fund relative to what they could have achieved if investing in this listed infrastructure index.
This estimate is around 13% larger than the one based on the net IRR regression, and has the
benefit of not relying on an assumption about the validity of IRR as a performance measure.18
         Our final measure of the underperformance of U.S. public pension funds considers how
their infrastructure fund investments performed relative to their own private equity investments.
Given our findings that the shape of the cash flow profiles of infrastructure fund investments are
similar to the profiles of general private equity buyout fund investments, we argue that this is an
appropriate comparison. In Panels B and C of Table 8 we compare the performance of investments
in infrastructure funds with the investments in buyout and VC funds made by the same investor
and in the same vintage year. We present the average net IRR and multiple of invested capital
delivered by infrastructure, buyout, or VC funds. We find that U.S. public pension funds invested
in buyout funds that deliver a 5.62% (14.400 – 8.778) higher net IRR and a 20% (1.436 – 1.238)



17
   We calculate the value-weighted return index of listed infrastructure funds using an international sample of 52 listed
funds. We download the return series from Datastream. The weights assigned to the returns of each fund are based on
the market capitalization of the fund. We update the weights monthly. The number of listed funds in the value-
weighted index increases over time from 2 funds in 1994 to 10 funds in 2002 and further to 46 funds in 2016. This
increase matches well the number of closed funds reporting cash flow data: 1 fund in 1994, 4 funds in 2002, and 89
funds during the entire sample period. We estimate two robustness tests of the PME results. First, our results are robust
to comparing the performance of listed and closed funds only in the later subperiod 2004-2016 when the number of
both listed and closed funds is higher. Second, our results are robust to annual instead of monthly adjustment of the
weights in the value-weighted return index.
18
   Unlike the net IRR measure, the PME approach adjusts for market movements and is robust to variations in the
timing and systematic risks of the underlying cash flows as well as potential GP manipulations (Kaplan and Schoar,
2005; Kaplan and Seonsoy, 2015; Sorensen and Jagannathan, 2015).


                                                          23
higher multiple of invested capital than their infrastructure funds. They also invested in VC funds
that deliver a 4.24% (12.887 – 8.650) higher net IRR and a 28% (1.509 – 1.228) higher multiple
of invested capital than their infrastructure funds. Based on our estimation, U.S. public pension
funds have around $56.2 billion invested in infrastructure assets and the difference in net IRR
relative to buyout funds would imply an annual loss of $3.158 billion. The difference in net IRR
relative to VC funds would imply an annual loss of $2.382 billion relative to what U.S. public
pension funds could have achieved if they could have committed more capital to their existing VC
funds instead of investing in infrastructure funds.


                                       VII. Conclusion
       In this paper, we analyze infrastructure as an asset class available to institutional investors.
We find that closed infrastructure funds have payout profiles similar to traditional buyout private
equity funds. When analyzing the frequency and amounts of capital calls and distributions, we find
no evidence of differences between the cash flows provided by closed infrastructure and the cash
flows offered by buyout funds. We conclude that closed infrastructure funds, typically structured
with a finite life of around 10-12 years, generate most of their returns through capital gains and
relatively quick exits. Infrastructure funds do not provide more stable cash flows to institutional
investors than private equity funds, even though many institutional investors justify the inclusion
of the infrastructure asset class in their portfolio on the grounds that they expect infrastructure
investments to deliver stable cash flows over a long horizon.
       We examine also the experience of various types of institutional investors within the
infrastructure asset class. We find that public pension funds hold infrastructure deals longer.
However, their lower exit rates proxy for lower performance and do not capture differences in
preferences for gaining long-term exposure to infrastructure assets. First, public pension funds
prefer investing through closed funds and their investment approaches choices are similar to
private sector pension funds, insurance firms, banks, endowments and foundations. Second, the
underperformance of public pension funds also is not due to preferences for different projects as
controlling for deal characteristics does not attenuate the coefficient of their underperformance.
We control for project stage and the inclusion of concession agreements as proxies for riskiness of
the deal, as well as industry and location as proxies for different preferences. While our evidence
on performance comes from investments through a closed fund structure, we note that there would


                                                 24
be no a priori reason to expect that agency problems or governance issues that contribute to the
underperformance of U.S. public pension funds would disappear in a direct investment context.
       The underperformance of U.S. public pension funds is economically and statistically
significant. We find that U.S. public pension funds obtain around 1.32 percentage points lower net
IRR and a multiple of invested capital that is lower by 0.058. The underperformance of U.S. public
pension funds is stronger in renewable energy and transportation assets located in U.S., but it also
persists across the other industry types as well as internationally. The finding that U.S. public
pension funds’ infrastructure investments are not on the efficient frontier of infrastructure
investments has important implications if U.S. public pension funds are planning to scale up the
extent of their infrastructure investing. Either taxpayers are providing a subsidy – if they will make
up for unfunded liabilities that emerge as a result of the underperformance – or beneficiaries
provide the subsidy, if they will take pension cuts as a result of the underperformance.




                                                 25
References
Andonov, A., Y. Hochberg, and J. Rauh, 2018. Political representation and governance: Evidence
from the investment decisions of public pension funds. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Ang, A., B. Chen, W. Goetzmann, and L. Phalippou, 2018. Estimating private equity returns from
limited partner cash flows, Journal of Finance 73(4), 1751-1783.

Ang, A., M. Rhodes-Kropf, and R. Zhao, 2008. Do funds-of-funds deserve their fees-on-fees?
Journal of Investment Management 6, 1–25.

Bernstein, S., J. Lerner, and A. Schoar, 2013. The investment strategies of sovereign wealth funds.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 27(2), 219-238.

Bortolotti, B., V. Fotak, and W. Megginson, 2015. The sovereign wealth fund discount: Evidence
from public equity investments. Review of Financial Studies 28(11), 2993-3035.

Bradley, D., C. Pantzalis, and X. Yuan, 2016. The influence of political bias in state pension funds.
Journal of Financial Economics 119(1), 69-91.

Brown, S., W. Goetzmann, and B. Liang, 2004. Fees-on-fees in funds-of-funds, Journal of
Investment Management 2, 39–56.

Cadot, O., L. Röller, and A. Stephan, 2006. Contribution to productivity or pork barrel? The two
faces of infrastructure investment. Journal of Public Economics, 90(6-7), 1133-1153.

Castells, A., and A. Solé-Ollé, 2005. The regional allocation of infrastructure investment: The role
of equity, efficiency and political factors. European Economic Review 49(5), 1165-1205.

Della Croce, R., 2012. Trends in large pension fund investment in infrastructure. OECD Working
Paper.

Deutsche Bank Asset Management, 2017. Why Invest in Infrastructure?

Dinc, I., and N. Gupta, 2011. The decision to privatize: Finance and politics. Journal of Finance
66(1), 241-269.

Donaldson, D., 2018. Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the impact of transportation infrastructure.
American Economic Review 108(4-5), 899-934.

Employees Retirement System of Texas, 2017. Comprehensive Annual Financial Report.

Esfahani, H., and M. Ramı́rez, 2003. Institutions, infrastructure, and economic growth. Journal of
Development Economics 70(2), 443-477.




                                                 26
Fernald, J., 1999. Roads to prosperity? Assessing the link between public capital and productivity.
American Economic Review 89(3), 619-638.

Finkenzeller, K., T. Dechant, and W. Shepherd, 2010. Infrastructure: A new dimension pf real
estate? An asset allocation analysis. Journal of Property Investment & Finance 28(4), 263-274.

French, K., 2008. Presidential address: The cost of active investing. Journal of Finance, 63(4),
1537-1573.

Harris, R., T. Jenkinson, S. Kaplan, and R. Stucke, 2018. Financial intermediation in private
equity: How well do funds of funds perform? Journal of Financial Economics 129(2), 287-305.

Hochberg, Y., A. Ljungqvist, and Y. Lu, 2007. Whom you know matters: Venture capital networks
and investment performance. Journal of Finance 62(1), 251-301.

Hochberg, Y., and J. Rauh, 2013. Local overweighting and underperformance: Evidence from
limited partner private equity investments. Review of Financial Studies 26 (2), 403-451.

J.P. Morgan Asset Management, 2017. The infrastructure moment.

Kaplan, S., and A. Schoar, 2005. Private equity performance: Returns, persistence, and capital
flows. Journal of Finance, 60(4), 1791-1823.

Kaplan, S., and B. Sensoy, 2015. Private equity performance: A survey. Annual Review of
Financial Economics 7, 597-614.

Lerner, J., A. Schoar, and W. Wongsunwai, 2007. Smart institutions, foolish choices: The limited
partner performance puzzle. Journal of Finance 62(2), 731-764.

Maine Public Employees Retirement System, 2017. Comprehensive Annual Financial Report.

Newell, G., and H. Peng, 2008. The role of US infrastructure in investment portfolios. Journal of
Real Estate Portfolio Management 14(1), 21-33.

Newell, G., H. Peng, and A. de Francesco, 2011. The performance of unlisted infrastructure
investment portfolios. Journal of Property Research 28(1), 59-74.

Peng, H., and G. Newell, 2007. The significance of infrastructure in investment portfolios.
Working Paper, University of Western Sydney, Australia.

Phalippou, K., 2008. The Hazards of Using IRR to Measure Performance: The Case of Private
Equity. University of Oxford, Said Business School Working Paper.

Phalippou, L., and O. Gottschalg, 2009. The performance of private equity funds. Review of
Financial Studies 22(4), 1747-1776.




                                                27
Pennsylvania Public School Employees' Retirement System, 2014. Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report.

Pennsylvania Public School Employees' Retirement System, 2017. Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report.

Roller, L., and L. Waverman, 2001. Telecommunications infrastructure and economic
development: A simultaneous approach. American Economic Review 91(4), 909-923.

Sensoy, B., Y. Wang, and M. Weisbach, 2014. Limited partner performance and the maturing of
the private equity industry. Journal of Financial Economics 112(3), 320-343.

Sorensen, M., 2007. How smart is smart money? A two-sided matching model of venture capital.
Journal of Finance 62(6), 2725-2762.

Sorensen, M., and R. Jagannathan, 2015. The public market equivalent and private equity
performance. Financial Analysts Journal, 71(4), 43-50.




                                            28
                                         Table 1: Summary Statistics
We collect data for 640 institutional investors in infrastructure. In Panel A we report summary statistics for all
institutional investors in our sample, whereas in Panel B we limit attention to the subsample of U.S. institutional
investors. Investor size presents the average assets under management ($ bil.) and Year first infra is the year of
the LP’s first investment in infrastructure. #Funds and #Direct deals measure the average number of investments
in infrastructure funds and direct deals by investor. #Deals reports the the average number of deals to which an
investors gains exposure (investing through funds exposes an investor to multiple deals). %Greenfield, %Brownfield,
and %Secondary capture the project stage and report the percentage of greenfield, brownfield, and secondary deals,
respectively. %Concession is the percentage of deals that are a concession or privatization agrements with the
government or other public institution. %Home deals measures the percentage of deals located in the same country as
the institutional investor. For U.S. investors, we define this variable as located in the same state as the institutional
investor. #Investors counts the average number of investors in the same deal (multiple LPs investing through the
same infrastructure fund are not counted multiple times). Investment stake measures the average investment stake
of the infrastructure fund through which the LPs accessed the deal. Total Stake is the average stake of all investors
in the deal.

                           All         Public     Government      Sovereign    Private     Insurance    Endowments
                      Institutional    Pension     Agencies        Wealth      Pension     Firms and       and
                        Investors       Funds                      Funds        Funds        Banks      Foundations
                            Panel A: Institutional Investors from All Countries
 #Investors                640          198            33             15          186          156            52
 Investor Size           61.552        33.283        94.837        247.826      15.861       146.203         3.813
 Year First Invest      2004.748      2006.086      2005.303      2006.357     2003.323     2004.288       2005.365
 #Funds                  4.687         5.556         4.467          4.167       4.637         4.207         3.288
 #Direct Deals            1.712        1.318          4.939         9.333        0.785        2.474         0.000
 #Deals                  60.431        64.742        35.697         49.200      62.102       65.109         42.942
 %Greenfield             0.225         0.192         0.409           0.217       0.192       0.280          0.184
 %Brownfield             0.138         0.126         0.185           0.122       0.140       0.132          0.165
 %Secondary              0.638         0.682         0.406           0.661       0.668       0.588          0.651
 %Concessions            0.091         0.075         0.115           0.145       0.095       0.117          0.031
 %Home Deals             0.250         0.213         0.247           0.166       0.291       0.312          0.092
 #Investors              1.686         1.646         1.912          2.074       1.702        1.735          1.381
 Investment Stake         0.578         0.604        0.499           0.506       0.571       0.551          0.645
 Total Stake             0.739         0.748         0.720          0.686       0.739        0.724          0.768
                                      Panel B: U.S. Institutional Investors
 #Investors                271           98             1            3            78            47            44
 Investor Size           39.122        31.343        8.184         27.895       20.749       120.149         3.937
 Year First Invest      2004.897      2007.041      2005.000      2008.667     2002.731     2003.383       2005.318
 #Funds                  5.135         5.316         6.000         7.500        5.671         5.512         3.341
 #Direct Deals            0.269        0.133          0.000        0.333         0.141        1.021         0.000
 #Deals                  57.753        48.143        24.000         74.000      69.000       73.021         42.568
 %Greenfield             0.180         0.179         0.435           0.157       0.181       0.178          0.182
 %Brownfield             0.155         0.155         0.348           0.105       0.154       0.136          0.176
 %Secondary              0.664         0.666         0.217           0.738       0.665       0.686          0.643
 %Concessions            0.033         0.034         0.043           0.039       0.034       0.045          0.016
 %Home Deals             0.035         0.044         0.000           0.000       0.031       0.029          0.029
 #Investors              1.495         1.549         1.261          1.944       1.514        1.511          1.297
 Investment Stake         0.654         0.647        0.623           0.557       0.645       0.665          0.681
 Total Stake             0.780         0.781         0.696          0.734       0.769        0.796          0.787




                                                           29
                         Table 2: Comparison of the Cash Flows of Infrastructure Funds with Buyout and VC Funds
     We compare the cash flows of closed infrastructure funds with buyout and venture capital (VC) funds. The sample includes funds raised in the period
     2002–2016. Row Funds presents the number of funds that provide cash flow data in Preqin during this period. We standardize the cash flows over time. Year
     1 captures the first year when a GP calls capital from LPs. We follow Kaplan and Schoar (2005) and calculate PME as the ratio of the sum of discounted
     distributions to the sum of discounted capital calls. The discount rate is the total return on S&P 500 index to the date of the capital call or distribution. We
     present the number of capital calls and distribution per year as well as the amounts of capital calls and distributions per year in $ mil. The t-tests measure
     whether the timeline of cash flows delivered by infrastructure funds differs from the timeline of cash flows delivered by buyout and VC funds.

          Year                     Infrastructure                                      Buyout                                             VC
                     Number      Number     Amount      Amount        Number     Number     Amount     Amount        Number      Number     Amount     Amount
                      Calls       Distri.    Calls       Distri.       Calls      Distri.    Calls      Distri.       Calls       Distri.    Calls      Distri.
          Funds         78                                               764                                            572
          PME         0.987                                             1.048                                          0.974
          1           1.938        0.630      1.839      0.065          1.910      0.403      1.488      0.048         1.980      0.146        1.506    0.014
          2           2.466        1.521      1.595      0.254          2.725      1.133      1.822      0.233         2.658      0.440        1.752    0.096
          3           2.705        1.623      1.909      0.446          2.805      1.388      1.830      0.415         2.866      0.661        1.790    0.219
          4           2.560        2.160      1.660      0.994          2.823      1.755      1.608      0.832         2.828      0.912        1.540    0.456
          5           2.500        2.167      1.237      1.223          2.650      2.042      1.311      1.202         2.569      1.177        1.181    0.678
          6           2.263        1.921      0.955      1.701          2.442      2.337      0.880      1.550         2.178      1.278        0.785    1.016
30




          7           1.484        2.194      0.386      1.571          2.093      2.451      0.534      1.804         1.768      1.279        0.518    1.054
          8           1.333        1.792      0.161      1.420          1.751      2.438      0.299      1.773         1.457      1.364        0.331    1.192
          9           1.176        1.941      0.211      1.306          1.572      2.280      0.187      1.798         1.051      1.278        0.184    1.302
          10          1.000        2.167      0.133      1.203          1.256      2.085      0.120      1.472         0.640      1.034        0.087    0.987
          11          0.000        0.444      0.000      1.423          0.996      1.848      0.128      1.367         0.466      0.883        0.065    0.949
          12          0.400        1.400      0.816      0.927          0.706      1.258      0.068      0.705         0.291      0.690        0.026    0.580
          T-tests
          Buyout    -4.231***     -0.805      0.685      -0.832
          VC          -1.220     5.625***     1.241     5.363***
                               Table 3: Exiting a Deal and Investor Type
This table presents results of a survival analysis using Cox proportional hazard model. The event of interest is a sale
transaction that results in a full (not partial) exit of an equity position in an infrastructure asset. We present the
hazard ratios. U.S. Public PF and Non U.S. Public PF are indicator variables for U.S. and non U.S. public pension
funds. Government agency and Sovereign wealth funds are indicators for these two types of public institutional
investors. We control for the natural logarithm of LP AUM and year of first infrastructure investment. #Funds
measures the number of investments in infrastructure funds by investor. Direct deal is an indicator variable for direct
investments in infrastructure deals. Concession is an indicator variable equal to one if an investor enters a concession
deal with the government. Greenfield and Brownfield are indicators for project stage (the omitted category is
secondary stage). Home deal is an indicator for deals located in the same country (state) as the investor. #Investors
counts the total number of investors in the same deal (multiple LPs investing through the same infrastructure fund
are not counted multiple times). Investment stake measures the investment stake of the infrastructure fund through
which the LPs accessed the deal. Total Stake is the total stake of all investors in the deal. We control for LP
country, deal industry, and deal region fixed effects. We cluster standard errors by investor, fund, or asset. We
report standard errors in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 level, respectively.

                               (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)
  U.S. Public PF            0.820***    0.826***   0.792***      0.777***   0.779***   0.803***    0.797**    0.803***
                             [0.059]     [0.058]    [0.054]       [0.053]    [0.051]    [0.052]    [0.082]     [0.055]
  Non U.S. Public PF          0.893      0.873*      0.926         0.940      0.929      0.921      0.924      0.921**
                             [0.071]     [0.072]    [0.073]       [0.070]    [0.072]    [0.071]    [0.092]     [0.038]
  Government agencies         1.094       0.882      1.060         1.106      1.238      1.275      1.029       1.275*
                             [0.365]     [0.263]    [0.350]       [0.359]    [0.374]    [0.404]    [0.310]     [0.162]
  Sovereign wealth funds      1.231       1.038      1.194         1.147      1.010      1.134      0.987       1.134
                             [0.217]     [0.178]    [0.212]       [0.208]    [0.224]    [0.226]    [0.255]     [0.145]
  Log Investor Size           1.029      1.032*     1.033*        1.030*     1.030*     1.029*      1.029     1.029***
                             [0.019]     [0.019]    [0.019]       [0.017]    [0.018]    [0.018]    [0.020]     [0.010]
  Year first infra           0.988*       0.994      0.995         0.993      0.998      0.995      0.997        0.995
                             [0.007]     [0.006]    [0.007]       [0.007]    [0.007]    [0.007]    [0.015]     [0.007]
  #Funds                      1.001       1.002      1.001         1.000      0.998      0.998      0.998       0.998
                             [0.006]     [0.006]    [0.006]       [0.005]    [0.006]    [0.005]    [0.006]     [0.003]
  Direct deal                0.710*     0.665**     0.723*        0.733*      0.899      0.751                 0.751**
                             [0.136]     [0.128]    [0.142]       [0.136]    [0.257]    [0.142]                [0.099]
  Concession                                                     2.074***   2.910***   2.424***   2.474***    2.424***
                                                                  [0.145]    [0.222]    [0.172]    [0.569]     [0.429]
  Greenfield                                                     0.746***   0.681***   0.666***   0.667**     0.666***
                                                                  [0.037]    [0.037]    [0.035]    [0.125]     [0.087]
  Brownfield                                                     0.620***   0.536***   0.552***   0.548***    0.552***
                                                                  [0.028]    [0.028]    [0.027]    [0.104]     [0.084]
  Home Deal                                                      0.729***   0.718***   0.752***    0.753*     0.752***
                                                                  [0.065]    [0.066]    [0.067]    [0.110]     [0.064]
  #Investors                                                                0.922***   0.941***     0.946       0.941
                                                                             [0.014]    [0.012]    [0.048]     [0.053]
  Investment Stake                                                          0.822***
                                                                             [0.049]
  Total Stake                                                                            0.989      0.978       0.989
                                                                                        [0.062]    [0.238]     [0.190]
  LP country FE               Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
  Deal region FE              Yes          No         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
  Deal industry FE             No         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
  Cluster                   Investor    Investor    Investor     Investor   Investor   Investor     Fund        Asset
  Observations               38,671      38,671      38,671       38,407     30,942     33,608     32,637      33,608




                                                            31
                          Table 4: Percentage Exited Deals and Performance
In this table we analyze the subsample of closed infrastructure funds, and exclude listed and open-ended funds
as well as direct investments in infrastructure assets, because Preqin provides performance data only for closed
funds. Observations are at the infrastructure fund level. Columns (1) and (2) presents results of logit regressions in
which the dependent variable equals one if a closed infrastructure fund reports either the net IRR or multiple of
invested capital in the Preqin database. We present the marginal effects (elasticities) at the means of the independent
variables. In the other columns, we limit attention to infrastructure funds reporting performance. In columns (3) and
(4) performance is measured using the net internal rate of return (IRR), whereas in columns (5) and (6) performance
is measured using net multiple of invested capital. %Exited deals measures the percentage of exited deals from the
total deals made by the fund. %Exited deals in years 0-5, 5-10, and >10 capture the percentage of exited deals in
the first five years after the transaction date, in five to ten years after the transaction, and in more than ten years
after the transaction date. Fund size is the natural logarithm of the assets managed by the infrastructure fund. We
include vintage year fixed effects and control for the percentage allocated to different infrastructure industries and
geographical regions. We report standard errors in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 0.10, 0.05,
and 0.01 level, respectively.

                                           Reporting                 Net IRR                  Multiple
                                          (1)      (2)            (3)       (4)             (5)      (6)
        %Exited deals                   0.279*                 18.222***                 0.637***
                                        [0.167]                 [4.638]                   [0.171]
        %Exited deals in years 0-5                   0.251                  18.741***               0.690***
                                                    [0.201]                   [5.006]                [0.189]
        %Exited deals in years 5-10                  0.303                    17.229                  0.564
                                                    [0.269]                  [11.656]                [0.385]
        %Exited deals in years >10                   0.609                   -16.071                 -0.214
                                                    [0.542]                  [41.974]                [0.655]
        Fund Size                      0.168***    0.165***     -0.673        -0.390      -0.038     -0.030
                                        [0.036]     [0.036]     [1.043]       [1.101]     [0.034]    [0.035]
        Vintage FE                        Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes
        %Deal region                      Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes
        %Deal industry                    Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes
        Observations                      323         323         121           121         187        187
        R2                                                       0.412         0.417       0.487      0.493




                                                          32
                                  Table 5: Investor Type and Performance
This table presents results of regressions in which the dependent variable is the performance in closed infrastructure
funds. Observations are at the investor-fund level. In columns (1) to (3) performance is measured using the
percentage exited deals. In columns (4) to (6) performance is measured using the net internal rate of return (IRR),
whereas in columns (7) to (9) performance is measured using net multiple of invested capital. U.S. Public PF and
Non U.S. Public PF are indicator variables for U.S. and non U.S. public pension funds. We control for the natural
logarithm of LP AUM and year of first infrastructure investment. #Funds measures the number of investments
in infrastructure funds by investor. FOF and Debt Fund are indicator variables for infrastructure funds that do
not take only equity positions in infrastructure deals, but that also act as fund-of-funds or debt fund. We include
investor (LP) country fixed effects and control for the percentage of deals in the portfolio of each infrastructure
fund in different industries and geographical regions. We cluster standard errors by institutional investor and report
standard errors in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 level, respectively.

                         Percentage exited deals                     Net IRR                 Multiple of invested capital
                         (1)       (2)       (3)            (4)       (5)          (6)        (7)         (8)       (9)
 U.S. Public PF       -0.066***   -0.072***   -0.071***    -1.219*   -1.502**    -1.323**    -0.070***   -0.064***   -0.058***
                        [0.017]     [0.017]     [0.017]    [0.664]    [0.645]     [0.651]      [0.020]     [0.021]     [0.021]
 Non U.S. Public PF     -0.012      -0.003       0.001      0.167     -0.530       -0.403     -0.048**    -0.052**    -0.048*
                        [0.016]     [0.015]     [0.015]    [0.961]    [0.928]     [0.916]      [0.023]     [0.024]     [0.025]
 Log Investor Size      0.008*       0.005       0.005    -0.388**   -0.335**    -0.305**      -0.010*     -0.011*    -0.011*
                        [0.004]     [0.004]     [0.004]    [0.158]    [0.154]     [0.154]      [0.006]     [0.006]     [0.006]
 Year first infra     -0.012***   -0.012***   -0.012***     0.026     -0.001       0.014     -0.008***   -0.009***   -0.008***
                        [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.066]    [0.064]     [0.065]      [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.002]
 #Funds               -0.003***   -0.003***   -0.004***     0.045      0.039       0.033        -0.002     -0.002*    -0.003*
                        [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.047]    [0.047]     [0.047]      [0.001]     [0.001]     [0.001]
 FOF                                          -0.184***                           -5.043*                             -0.128*
                                                [0.023]                           [3.016]                              [0.075]
 Debt Fund                                     -0.113*                          -20.766***                           -0.429***
                                                [0.069]                           [0.836]                              [0.045]
 LP country FE           Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 %Deal region            Yes         No           Yes       Yes        No           Yes         Yes         No           Yes
 %Deal industry          No          Yes          Yes       No         Yes          Yes         No          Yes          Yes
 Observations           2,958       2,958        2,958     1,393      1,393        1,393       1,910       1,910        1,910
 R-squared              0.107       0.128        0.131     0.039      0.057        0.081       0.058       0.063        0.069




                                                            33
                         Table 6: Frequency of Cash Flows and Performance
This table presents results of regressions in which the dependent variables measure different aspects of the cash flows
experienced by institutional investors holding closed infrastructure funds. Observations are at the investor-fund
level. In columns (1) and (2), #Calls measures the number of capital calls (transfers from LP to GP) per year. In
columns (3) and (4), #Distributions is the number of capital distributions from GP to LP per year. In columns (5)
and (6), the dependent variable is the public market equivalent (PME) performance measure. U.S. Public PF is
an indicator variable for U.S. public pension funds. We control for the natural logarithm of LP AUM and year of
first infrastructure investment. #Funds measures the number of investments in infrastructure funds by investor.
Fund Age measures the age of teh infrastructure fund. We include investor (LP) country fixed effects and control for
the percentage of deals in the portfolio of each infrastructure fund in different industries and geographical regions.
We cluster standard errors by institutional investor and report standard errors in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 level, respectively.

                                           #Calls          #Distributions                  PME
                                     (1)            (2)     (3)      (4)             (5)         (6)
             U.S. Public PF       0.222***     0.210***    -0.068      -0.059     -0.039**     -0.038**
                                   [0.063]      [0.061]    [0.076]    [0.077]      [0.017]      [0.018]
             Log Investor Size     -0.017       -0.008     -0.013      -0.006      -0.000        0.001
                                   [0.017]      [0.017]    [0.017]    [0.017]      [0.005]      [0.005]
             Year First Invest     0.014*       0.013*     -0.011     -0.014*      -0.002       -0.003
                                   [0.007]      [0.007]    [0.008]    [0.008]      [0.002]      [0.002]
             #Funds               0.009**       0.008*      0.003      0.001       -0.000       -0.000
                                   [0.004]      [0.004]    [0.004]    [0.004]      [0.001]      [0.001]
             Fund Age               0.001        0.005    0.100***   0.099***    -0.033***    -0.032***
                                   [0.016]      [0.016]    [0.017]    [0.017]      [0.005]      [0.005]
             LP country FE           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
             %Deal industry          Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
             %Deal region            No           Yes        No         Yes          No           Yes
             Observations            980          980        980        980          980          980
             R-squared              0.146        0.160      0.147      0.159        0.124        0.132




                                                          34
           Table 7: U.S. investors: Exiting a deal by industry, location and project type
This table presents results of a survival analysis using Cox proportional hazard model. The event of interest is a
sale transaction that results in a full (not partial) exit of an equity position in an infrastructure asset. We present
the hazard ratios. We limit attention to the subsample of U.S. institutional investors. In column (1) we analyze
all infrastructure deals made by U.S. investors. In Columns (2), (3),a nd (4) we analyze separately deals in the
three main industries - traditional energy, renewable energy, and transportation. In Columns (5 and (6) we split the
sample based on geographical location into domestic U.S. deals and outside non U.S. deals. In Columns (7) and
(8) we split the sample based on project stage into deals in greenfield and brownfield stage, and deals in secondary
stage. In columns (9) and (10) we split the sample into deals with and without concession agreement. Public
PF is an indicator variable for U.S. public pension funds. State Investment Funds is an indicator for three U.S.
sovereign wealth funds (state funds). We control for the natural logarithm of LP AUM and year of first infrastructure
investment. #Funds measures the number of investments in infrastructure funds by investor. Concession is an
indicator variable equal to one if an investor enters a concession deal with the government. Greenfield and Brownfield
are indicators for project stage (the omitted category is secondary stage). Home deal is an indicator for deals located
in the same state as the investor. #Investors counts the total number of investors in the same deal (multiple LPs
investing through the same infrastructure fund are not counted multiple times). We control for deal industry and
deal region fixed effects. We cluster standard errors by institutional investor. We report standard errors in brackets.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 level, respectively.

                            All      Traditional   Renewable   Transport     U.S. deals   non U.S.   Greenfield   Secondary    Without       With
                           deals       energy       energy                                  deals    brownfield               concession   concession
                            (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)        (7)          (8)         (9)          (10)
 Public PF                0.676***    0.721***     0.552***    0.595***      0.662***      0.827*    0.712***     0.669***    0.685***     0.516**
                           [0.049]     [0.054]      [0.079]     [0.112]       [0.046]      [0.094]    [0.073]      [0.054]     [0.049]      [0.168]
 State Investment Funds   0.437***    0.519***     0.138***     1.719*       0.293***       0.809     0.687**     0.410***    0.430***       0.766
                           [0.084]     [0.061]      [0.104]     [0.527]       [0.047]      [0.208]    [0.119]      [0.113]     [0.080]      [0.154]
 Log Investor Size          1.024       1.029        0.979       0.979         1.016        1.023      1.025        1.024       1.021        1.076
                           [0.018]     [0.021]      [0.027]     [0.034]       [0.018]      [0.047]    [0.021]      [0.022]     [0.018]      [0.068]
 Year first infra          1.015**     1.020**      1.031*       0.995        1.016**       0.991      1.016*      1.018**     1.018**     0.941***
                           [0.008]     [0.009]      [0.017]     [0.013]       [0.008]      [0.011]    [0.009]      [0.009]     [0.008]      [0.016]
 #Funds                    1.009*       1.009      1.020**       0.998         1.007        1.011    1.015**        1.006     1.010**        0.993
                           [0.005]     [0.006]      [0.010]     [0.009]       [0.005]      [0.012]    [0.006]      [0.006]     [0.005]      [0.018]
 Concession               1.925***                              1.349*         1.196      1.657***     1.095      2.488***
                           [0.246]                              [0.225]       [0.210]      [0.299]    [0.271]      [0.307]
 Greenfield               0.631***    0.596***     0.478***    0.407***      0.562***       1.133                             0.640***     0.569***
                           [0.037]     [0.036]      [0.066]     [0.088]       [0.036]      [0.134]                             [0.039]      [0.124]
 Brownfield               0.501***    0.585***     0.205***    0.522***      0.419***     1.408***                            0.504***      0.507**
                           [0.027]     [0.030]      [0.027]     [0.128]       [0.022]      [0.180]                             [0.026]      [0.164]
 Home Deal                  1.025     1.173**      0.687**       1.116                                  0.869       1.098       1.011        3.346*
                           [0.073]     [0.092]      [0.119]     [0.283]                                [0.114]     [0.090]     [0.073]      [2.326]
 #Investors               0.910***     1.052**     0.615***      0.992       0.850***       0.994       1.027     0.898***    0.896***        0.975
                           [0.016]     [0.027]      [0.044]     [0.063]       [0.020]      [0.023]     [0.030]     [0.021]     [0.018]      [0.044]
 Deal region FE              Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes           No           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
 Deal industry FE            Yes         No           No          No            Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           No
 Cluster                  Investor    Investor     Investor    Investor      Investor     Investor    Investor    Investor    Investor     Investor
 Observations               15,443      8,271        2,747       2,195        10,411        5,032       4,943      10,500      14,955          488




                                                                        35
                       Table 8: Analyzing the Performance of U.S. Investors
This table summarizes the performance of the main types of U.S. investors. Panel A presents the average public
market equivalent (PME) by investor type. We estimate the PME relative to the S&P 500 stock market index and a
value-weighted index of listed infrastructure funds. In Panels B and C, we compare the performance of investments
in infrastructure funds with the investments in buyout and VC funds made by the same investor. We match the
investments infrastructure investments with buyout and VC investments made by the same investor and in the same
vintage year. We present the average net IRR and multiple of invested capital delivered by infrastructure, buyout, or
VC funds. The number of observations changes because it depends on making investments in infrastructure, buyout
or VC in the same vintage year and on the availability of performance data for these investments.

                           Panel A: Average Public Market Equivalent (PME)
           Investor type                    Obs.    S&P500     VW Listed
                                                     PME       Infra PME
           Public pension funds             272      0.933        0.829
           Private pension funds            206      0.973        0.839
           Insurance firms and banks        140      0.968        0.836
           Endowments and foundations        97      1.001        0.857
                   Panel B: Comparison of Infrastructure Funds with Buyout Funds
           Investor type                    Obs.    Infra       Buyout       Obs.    Infra      Buyout
                                                   Net IRR      Net IRR             Multiple    Multiple
           Public pension funds             270      8.778       14.400      346      1.238      1.436
           Private pension funds            195     11.223       14.548      237      1.372      1.588
           Insurance firms and banks        139     9.315        14.414      159      1.336      1.558
           Endowments and foundations        65     11.142       10.872       75      1.388      1.494
                      Panel C: Comparison of Infrastructure Funds with VC Funds
           Investor type                    Obs.    Infra         VC         Obs.    Infra       VC
                                                   Net IRR      Net IRR             Multiple    Multiple
           Public pension funds             200      8.650       12.887      257      1.228      1.509
           Private pension funds            128     10.398        8.636      161      1.345      1.431
           Insurance firms and banks        70      9.363        11.948      87       1.332      1.568
           Endowments and foundations        50     12.868       16.347       62      1.452      2.072




                                                         36
Figure 1: Investing in Infrastructure




                 37
Figure 2: Closed Infrastructure Funds: Unrealized Value as a Proxy of AUM ($ bil)




                                       38
Figure 3: Institutional Investors and Investment Approach




                           39
Figure 4: Institutional Investors and Industry of the Deal




                            40
Figure 5: Institutional Investors and Regional Location of the Deal
                  Panel A: All Institutional Investors




                 Panel B: U.S. Institutional Investors




                                  41
     Figure 6: Comparison of the Cashflows of Infrastructure Funds with Buyout and VC Funds
42
                   Online Appendix:


The Taxpayer Subsidy to Infrastructure as an Asset Class


                     September 2018
         Appendix 1: Statements of U.S. Public Pension Funds about Infrastructure

California State Teachers’ Retirement System 2017 CAFR: “Short-term results for the Infrastructure
Portfolio are not particularly significant, as performance expectations will be better measured over the
long term as investments mature and achieve their full cash flow potential. The Infrastructure Portfolio
has begun to enter a more mature phase and is beginning to achieve greater cash flow potential.”

Iowa Public Employees’ Retirement System 2017 CAFR: “Private real assets investments include direct
equity investments in commercial real estate properties, or investment in partnerships or funds that invest
in real estate and other real assets including, but not limited to, farmland, timberland, or infrastruc-
ture. The purpose of investing in private real assets is to provide income, diversification, and inflation
protection.” Iowa PERS 2017 Private Markets Investment Policy: “Given their stable cash flow and
low variability of revenue, infrastructure assets can support more debt. For this reason, infrastructure
investments may utilize up to 65 percent debt at the fund level and will be expected to use no more
than 70 percent on any given asset. These limits will be reviewed on a case by case basis and determi-
nation of the debt level will be dependent on the investment type and risk characteristics of the investment.”

New York State Common Retirement Fund 2017 CAFR: “Currently, most of our activity [in real assets]
is focused on infrastructure transactions, given the size and risk profile of the opportunity set. Real
asset investments offer exposure to varied return sources, including capital appreciation and cash flow
from income. The diversified approach reduces realized volatility and allows the portfolio to benefit from
long-term growth investment themes. These themes, such as the global growth in protein-based diets, will
play out over multiple economic cycles. These investments will have a longer duration and an implicit
focus on sustainable practices.”

Oregon Public Employees Retirement System 2017 CAFR: “Alternative Equity investments seek to provide
diversification and inflation hedging characteristics to the Fund and include investments with a focus on
infrastructure and natural resources.”

Pennsylvania State Employees’ Retirement System 2017 CAFR: “Natural Resources/Infrastructure differ
from real estate in that they focus on other real assets other than real estate, but maintain the characteris-
tics of collateralization by hard assets and income-producing potential.”

Employees’ Retirement System of the State of Rhode Island 2017 CAFR: “Infrastructure – These four
funds provide inflation-protection and current income to the portfolio through investments in facilities and
services required for an economy to function including electricity production and distribution, pipelines,
sewers and waste management, airports, roads, bridges, ports, railroads, telephone and cable networks,
and hospitals.”

Employees Retirement System of Texas 2017 CAFR: “The Systems private infrastructure investments
are in large-scale public systems, services and facilities that are necessary for economic activity. These
types of relatively illiquid investments are often made in essential services with high barriers to entry and
predictable cash flows and have expected life from ten to twelve years, with the option of one to three-year
extension.”

Washington State Department of Retirement Systems 2017 CAFR: “Tangible Assets [includes Infrastruc-
ture]: This includes 40 limited liability structures and funds. The primary goals of the tangible asset
portfolio are to generate a long-term sustainable and stable income stream as well as generate appreciation
at least commensurate with inflation.”



                                                     44
                       Table IA.1: Robustness: Exiting a Deal and Investor Type
Robustness check of Table 2: We control for other investor types instead of public pension funds.

This table presents results of a survival analysis using Cox proportional hazard model. The event of interest is a
sale transaction that results in a full (not partial) exit of an equity position in an infrastructure asset. We present
the hazard ratios. Private PF is an indicator variable for private pension funds. Insurance firms and banks and
Endowments and foundations are indicators for these institutional investors. Government agency and Sovereign
wealth funds are indicators for these two types of public institutional investors. We control for the natural logarithm
of LP AUM and year of first infrastructure investment. #Funds measures the number of investments in infrastructure
funds by investor. Direct deal is an indicator variable for direct investments in infrastructure deals. Concession
is an indicator variable equal to one if an investor enters a concession deal with the government. Greenfield and
Brownfield are indicators for project stage (the omitted category is secondary stage). Home deal is an indicator for
deals located in the same country (state) as the investor. #Investors counts the total number of investors in the
same deal (multiple LPs investing through the same infrastructure fund are not counted multiple times). Investment
stake measures the investment stake of the infrastructure fund through which the LPs accessed the deal. Total Stake
is the total stake of all investors in the deal. We control for LP country, deal industry, and deal region fixed effects.
We cluster standard errors by investor, fund, or asset. We report standard errors in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 level, respectively.

                                     (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
   Private PF                     1.174**    1.192**    1.179**     1.170**    1.149**    1.139*      1.139    1.139***
                                   [0.085]    [0.085]    [0.081]    [0.079]    [0.079]    [0.079]    [0.090]    [0.041]
   Insurance firms and banks        1.050      1.057      1.062      1.074      1.080      1.069      1.075      1.069
                                   [0.092]    [0.089]    [0.087]    [0.083]    [0.087]    [0.084]    [0.125]    [0.057]
   Endowments and foundations     1.594***   1.563***   1.464***   1.465***   1.592***   1.602***   1.588***   1.602***
                                   [0.159]    [0.155]    [0.143]    [0.143]    [0.156]    [0.151]    [0.206]    [0.140]
   Government agencies              1.234      1.020      1.196      1.250      1.429      1.458      1.178    1.458***
                                   [0.445]    [0.329]    [0.422]    [0.434]    [0.454]    [0.486]    [0.368]    [0.194]
   Sovereign wealth funds          1.369*      1.162     1.349*      1.313      1.163      1.283      1.125     1.283**
                                   [0.236]    [0.200]    [0.238]    [0.237]    [0.253]    [0.249]    [0.270]    [0.158]
   Log Investor Size              1.054**    1.057**    1.051**     1.046**    1.046**    1.047**   1.046**    1.047***
                                   [0.023]    [0.023]    [0.023]    [0.021]    [0.022]    [0.022]    [0.023]    [0.010]
   Year first infra               0.987**      0.993      0.993      0.991      0.995      0.992      0.994      0.992
                                   [0.007]    [0.006]    [0.006]    [0.006]    [0.007]    [0.007]    [0.014]    [0.007]
   #Funds                           1.001      1.002      1.001      1.001      1.000      0.999      0.999      0.999
                                   [0.006]    [0.006]    [0.006]    [0.005]    [0.006]    [0.006]    [0.006]    [0.003]
   Direct deal                     0.718*    0.675**      0.734      0.745      0.923      0.762                0.762**
                                   [0.136]    [0.128]    [0.142]    [0.137]    [0.258]    [0.141]               [0.100]
   Concession                                                      2.085***   2.921***   2.436***   2.487***   2.436***
                                                                    [0.145]    [0.222]    [0.172]    [0.569]    [0.429]
   Greenfield                                                      0.742***   0.677***   0.662***   0.663**    0.662***
                                                                    [0.036]    [0.036]    [0.035]    [0.124]    [0.087]
   Brownfield                                                      0.618***   0.535***   0.550***   0.545***   0.550***
                                                                    [0.028]    [0.028]    [0.027]    [0.103]    [0.084]
   Home Deal                                                       0.749***   0.736***   0.770***    0.771*    0.770***
                                                                    [0.066]    [0.067]    [0.068]    [0.113]    [0.066]
   #Investors                                                                 0.922***   0.942***     0.947      0.942
                                                                               [0.014]    [0.012]    [0.048]    [0.053]
   Investment Stake                                                           0.822***
                                                                               [0.050]
   Total Stake                                                                             0.986     0.975      0.986
                                                                                          [0.061]   [0.237]    [0.189]
   LP country FE                    Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
   Deal region FE                   Yes         No        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
   Deal industry FE                  No        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
   Cluster                        Investor   Investor   Investor   Investor   Investor   Investor    Fund       Asset
   Observations                    38,671     38,671     38,671     38,407     30,942     33,608    32,637     33,608




                                                           45
       Table IA.2: Robustness: Exiting a Deal and Investor Type (Only Closed Funds)
Robustness check of Table 2: We analyze only the subsample of deals accessed through closed funds.

This table presents results of a survival analysis using Cox proportional hazard model. The event of interest is a sale
transaction that results in a full (not partial) exit of an equity position in an infrastructure asset. We present the
hazard ratios. U.S. Public PF and Non U.S. Public PF are indicator variables for U.S. and non U.S. public pension
funds. Government agency and Sovereign wealth funds are indicators for these two types of public institutional
investors. We control for the natural logarithm of LP AUM and year of first infrastructure investment. #Funds
measures the number of investments in infrastructure funds by investor. Direct deal is an indicator variable for direct
investments in infrastructure deals. Concession is an indicator variable equal to one if an investor enters a concession
deal with the government. Greenfield and Brownfield are indicators for project stage (the omitted category is
secondary stage). Home deal is an indicator for deals located in the same country (state) as the investor. #Investors
counts the total number of investors in the same deal (multiple LPs investing through the same infrastructure fund
are not counted multiple times). Investment stake measures the investment stake of the infrastructure fund through
which the LPs accessed the deal. Total Stake is the total stake of all investors in the deal. We control for LP
country, deal industry, and deal region fixed effects. We cluster standard errors by investor, fund, or asset. We
report standard errors in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 level, respectively.

                               (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)
  U.S. Public PF            0.816***    0.866**    0.812***      0.814***    0.857**    0.870**     0.870      0.870**
                             [0.055]     [0.058]    [0.054]       [0.054]    [0.053]    [0.055]    [0.099]     [0.061]
  Non U.S. Public PF          0.894     0.819**      0.895         0.897      0.877*     0.872*     0.872     0.872***
                             [0.067]     [0.064]    [0.069]       [0.069]    [0.063]    [0.064]    [0.097]     [0.040]
  Government agencies         1.026       0.726      1.014         1.069       1.268      1.241     1.241       1.241*
                             [0.262]     [0.154]    [0.259]       [0.275]    [0.319]    [0.305]    [0.308]     [0.140]
  Sovereign wealth funds      1.023      0.753*      1.011         0.995       0.967      0.952     0.952       0.952
                             [0.133]     [0.114]    [0.144]       [0.151]    [0.159]    [0.176]    [0.209]     [0.125]
  Log Investor Size           1.008       1.004      1.007         1.004       0.994      0.996     0.996       0.996
                             [0.017]     [0.017]    [0.017]       [0.016]    [0.015]    [0.015]    [0.016]     [0.008]
  Year first infra          0.977***    0.985***   0.981***      0.979***   0.975***   0.973***   0.973***    0.973***
                             [0.006]     [0.006]    [0.006]       [0.006]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.007]     [0.005]
  #Funds                      0.995       0.998      0.995         0.995     0.991*      0.991*    0.991*     0.991***
                             [0.005]     [0.005]    [0.005]       [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]     [0.002]
  Concession                                                     2.082***   2.842***   2.278***   2.278***    2.278***
                                                                  [0.141]    [0.222]    [0.163]    [0.516]     [0.487]
  Greenfield                                                     0.656***   0.539***   0.548***   0.548***    0.548***
                                                                  [0.033]    [0.027]    [0.028]    [0.102]     [0.077]
  Brownfield                                                     0.576***   0.485***   0.505***   0.505***    0.505***
                                                                  [0.027]    [0.026]    [0.026]    [0.101]     [0.084]
  Home Deal                                                       0.848*     0.813**     0.863*     0.863      0.863*
                                                                  [0.076]    [0.075]    [0.076]    [0.108]     [0.066]
  #Investors                                                                  0.976     0.973**     0.973       0.973
                                                                             [0.017]    [0.014]    [0.057]     [0.062]
  Investment Stake                                                          0.845***
                                                                             [0.053]
  Total Stake                                                                            0.983      0.983       0.983
                                                                                        [0.069]    [0.262]     [0.199]
  LP country FE               Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
  Deal region FE              Yes          No         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
  Deal industry FE             No         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
  Cluster                   Investor    Investor    Investor     Investor   Investor   Investor     Fund        Asset
  Observations               29,068      29,068      29,068       28,807     22,541     24,458     24,458      24,458




                                                            46
     Figure IA.1: Comparison of the Cashflows of Infrastructure Funds with Buyout and VC Funds (Matched Subsamples)
47
