NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LONG-TERM CONSEQUENCES OF HAVING FEWER CHILDREN IN OLD AGE:
EVIDENCE FROM CHINA’S “LATER, LONGER, FEWER” CAMPAIGN
Yi Chen
Hanming Fang
Working Paper 25041
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25041

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

This paper has been presented at the Third Annual Workshop on Population Ageing and the
Chinese Economy, and International Conference on “Addressing Population Aging: Institutional
and Public Policy Innovations.” Comments from all seminar participants are highly appreciated.
We thank Yujian Chen for his excellent work in assisting this project. All remaining errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Yi Chen and Hanming Fang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Long-Term Consequences of Having Fewer Children in Old Age: Evidence from China’s
“Later, Longer, Fewer” Campaign
Yi Chen and Hanming Fang
NBER Working Paper No. 25041
September 2018
JEL No. H31,I15,I18,J13
ABSTRACT
Family planning plays a central role in contemporary population policies. However, little is
known about its long-term consequences in old age because of the identification challenge. In this
study, we examine how family planning affects the quality of life of the Chinese elderly. The
direction of the effect is theoretically unclear. On the one hand, having fewer children allows
parents to reallocate more resources to themselves, improving their well-being. On the other
hand, having fewer children also leads to less care and companionship from children in old age.
To empirically probe the effect of family planning, we identify the causal impact by exploiting
the provincial heterogeneity in implementing the “Later, Longer, Fewer” policies in the early
1970s. We find that the policies greatly reduced the number of children born to each couple by
0.85. Parents also receive less support from children in terms of living arrangements, inter vivos
transfers, and emotional support. Finally, we find that family planning has drastically different
effects on elderly parent's physical and mental well-being. Whereas parents who are more
exposed to the family planning policies consume more and enjoy slightly better physical health
status, they report more severe depression symptoms. Our study calls for greater attention to the
mental health status of the Chinese elderly.

Yi Chen
Institute for Economic and Social Research
Jinan University
601 W.Huangpu Ave.
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510632
CHINA
chenyiecon@163.com
Hanming Fang
Department of Economics
Ronald O. Perelman Center
for Political Science and Economics
133 South 36th Street
Suite 150
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

Family planning policies play a central role in contemporary population policies. According to the World
Population Policies Datasets published by the United Nations, Population Division, the number of countries
with direct government support for family planning reached 166 in 2015.1 Some also claim that family
planning played a fundamental role in the global fertility decline in recent decades (de Silva and Tenreyro
2017). Plenty of studies have been devoted to the immediate or short-term effects of family planning
policies; however, there are surprisingly few studies on the long-term consequences of declining fertility
as a result of family planning policies (Schultz 2008).2 The dearth of such studies probably originates
from the identification challenge. Decades after the enforcement of the family planning policies, there
were numerous simultaneous changes in other factors that reshaped people’s fertility behavior, such as
socioeconomic factors (Poston and Gu 1987; Zhang 1990; Schultz and Zeng 1995; Cai 2010), birth-control
technology (Goldin and Katz 2002; Bailey 2006; Bailey 2010), abortion policies (Pop-Eleches 2006; Myers
2017), and women’s empowerment (Upadhyay et al. 2014).
China provides an excellent opportunity to study the long-term consequences of family planning. They
are among the earliest countries to implement family planning, and their policies have been recognized
as the most stringent in the world (Cleland et al. 2006).3 Note that China initiated its stringent family
planning policies in the early 1970s, which was ahead of the well-known one-child policy (OCP henceforth)
that came into effect in 1979. The total fertility rate (TFR) declined drastically from 5.7 in 1969 to 2.7
in 1978 (Figure 1).4 Chen and Huang (2018) show that the decline is closely related to the establishment
of the Family Planning Leading Group who was in charge of a raft of intensified family-planning policies,
including the famous “Later, Longer, Fewer ” campaign. For ease of interpretation, we use the term “Later,
Long, Fewer” (or LLF) to represent the whole raft of policies. Forty years later, the first group of the
affected cohorts is moving into their sixties. Different from their predecessors, they will have fewer offspring
who can take care of them; therefore, unveiling the long-term effects of family planning helps to understand
the quality of life of this growing population.
1

https://esa.un.org/poppolicy/wpp datasets.aspx
See Schultz (2008) for a comprehensive review of the effects of family planning (mostly short-term effects). He categorizes
the effects into five categories: human capital formation (both mothers and children); family labor supply or time allocation;
saving rate of parents; transfers of cash, goods, and time to and from household members; household living arrangements.
3
Ross and Stover (2001) published the Family Planning Program Effort Index to measure program intensity, and China is
the only country with a score higher than 80. The index measures 30 features of program efforts that can be further organized
into four groups: policy and stage-setting activities; service and service-related activities; evaluation and recordkeeping; and
availability of fertility control methods.
4
Total fertility rate aggregates the fertility behavior of a group of people at a given time. Women of child-bearing age
(15–49 years) are divided into several five-year age groups. Dividing the number of children born to women of a specific age
group by the number of women in that group generates the age-specific fertility rate. Summing up the age-specific fertility
rates and multiplying them by five gives us the total fertility rate. The total fertility rates represent the number of children a
hypothetical woman would give birth to if she immediately went through her entire fertile history given the fertility pattern
of the current population.
2

2

It is theoretically unclear how family planning affects the quality of life in old age. There is no doubt
that children play critical roles in providing old-age support, especially in developing countries (including
China). However, the reduction in the number of children does not necessarily lead to a worsening of
the quality of life for seniors for three reasons. First, having fewer children spares resources that can be
redirected to the parents. The reallocation of resources leads to an improved nutritional intake (Wu and
Li 2012) and higher body mass index (Canning and Schultz 2012). Moreover, child-raising can be stressful
for parents. Having fewer children also reduces parents’ burden of childbearing, which may benefit their
physical and mental health (Gove and Geerken 1977; Umberson and Gove 1989; Cáceres-Delpiano and
Simonsen 2012). Secondly, parents can potentially turn to other measures of old-age support to substitute
for having fewer children. For example, it has been well documented that Chinese households increased
their savings in response to the family planning policies (Banerjee, Meng, and Qian 2010; Curtis, Lugauer,
and Mark 2015; Choukhmane, Coeurdacier, and Jin 2016; Ge, Yang, and Zhang 2018). Finally, we should
not simply interpret the effect of China’s family planning policies as mechanically reducing households’
welfare by imposing fertility restrictions. It also provides new technologies that allow households to manage
better their childbirth. Access to birth-control technologies in countries without any restriction on fertility
(e.g., the United States) also results in a reduced number of children (Goldin and Katz 2002; Bailey
2006; Bailey 2010). Interestingly, those studies claim the effect of contraceptive measures to be mostly
positive. This indicates that people tend to have too many children if they have no access to birth-control
technologies.
[Figure 1 About Here]
In this study, we examine the long-term consequences of China’s family planning policy on the wellbeing of the elderly who are aged 60 and above. We examine a set of outcomes, including their living
arrangements, received support from children, consumption, and physical and mental health. Our identification relies on the provincial variation in the establishment year of the Family Planning Leading Group
in the early 1970s. Previous studies largely refer to the 1979 one-child policy as an exogenous shock to
the fertility rate.5 However, recent studies point out that the one-child policy has a fairly limited impact
on lifetime fertility (McElroy and Yang 2000; Whyte, Wang, and Cai 2015; Wang 2016; Chen and Huang
2018; Garcı́a 2018). Instead, a majority of the fertility decline in China actually took place during the
1970s prior to the enforcement of the one-child policy. Figure 1 plots the time series of China’s total
5
There are several ways to exploit the one-child policy as an exogenous shock. Some examples include comparing fertility
behavior before and after 1979 (Ahn 1994; Ding and Hesketh 2006; Whyte, Wang, and Cai 2015), using the year 1979 as the
cut-off for a regression discontinuity design (Qin, Zhuang, and Yang 2017), analyzing fines imposed on above-quota births
(McElroy and Yang 2000; Ebenstein 2010; Wei and Zhang 2011; Liu 2014; Huang, Lei, and Zhao 2016), examining the ex-post
violations of the policy (Li and Zhang 2017; Zhang 2017), treating the minority as a control group (Li, Zhang, and Zhu 2005;
Li, Yi, and Zhang 2011), and exploiting the rollout of family planning stations (Edlund et al. 2013; Jia and Persson 2017).

3

fertility rate and sex ratio at birth (the number of male children per 100 female children). The fertility
rate declined by three children from 5.7 in 1969 to 2.7 in 1978. During the succeeding decade, however,
the rate dropped only marginally to 2.5 children in 1988. Additionally, the one-child policy resulted in
a biased sex ratio (Hull 1990; Ding and Hesketh 2006; Ebenstein 2010; Bulte, Heerink, and Zhang 2011;
Li, Yi, and Zhang 2011; Loh and Remick 2015). Figure 1 suggests that after 1979, the sex ratio at birth
deteriorated rapidly and steadily exceeded 115 after 1990. The biased sex ratio can directly affect parents’
well-being through their children’s marriage (Rose 2000; Wei and Zhang 2011). Chen and Huang (2018)
show that China’s “Later, Longer, Fewer” campaign during the 1970s can explain about half of the decline
in fertility rate; yet, during that period there was not a simultaneous increase in the sex ratio. Another
advantage of utilizing earlier policy shocks is that it allows us to study the elderly that are “old enough.”
People aged 20 in 1979 would be only 52 in 2011. In contrast, people aged 20 in 1970 would be 61 in
2011—the age at which people are much more likely to be the care-receivers rather than the caregivers (to
their grandchildren).
Using three waves (2011, 2013, 2015) of the panel data from the China Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study (CHARLS), our empirical analysis suggests that China’s family planning policies have
very different effects on parents’ physical and mental well-being. Regarding physical well-being, we find
that parents with greater exposure to the family planning policies maintain a higher level of consumption.
Their physical health is slightly better, and they spend less on medical services. We further investigate
the source of such positive effects. First, their children become better educated and earn more as a result
of the quantity-quality tradeoff. Children transfer more to parents even conditional on their “quality.”
Another source of financing is parents’ accumulated wealth before they get old. Briefly speaking, there is
no evidence suggesting that family planning makes the elderly’s physical well-being worse off.
In contrast, the prospect of the elderly parents’ mental well-being is not so optimistic. We find that
parents more exposed to the family planning policies are more likely to be depressed. The effect is even
larger for women and rural parents. Why is the effects of family planning different on physical and mental
well-being? One explanation is that the two above-mentioned channels that may offset the negative effect
of having fewer children on the parents’ physical well-being do not necessarily apply for mental well-being.
First, the elderly who are more affected by the family planning not only have fewer children to accompany
them but also receive fewer contacts and visits per child. What makes things worse is that children with
better education and higher income are even less attached to their parents. That is to say, the quantityquality tradeoff is pushing children further away from parents in terms of geographic proximity. Second,
whereas parents can save their earned income when they are young to prepare for old-age, they can never
“save up” children’s company. Because of this, our study calls for greater attention to the elderly’s mental
health. We would like to emphasize that the mental health status of the elderly is of first-order policy
4

importance. China’s national elderly suicide rates are four to five times higher than the general Chinese
population and more than twice the global average (Li, Xiao, and Xiao 2009). The share of suicides
committed by the elderly aged 65 or above monotonically increases from 16.9% in 1987 to 41.2% in 2014
(Zhong, Chiu, and Conwell 2016).
This study contributes to the existing literature in two ways. First, it contributes to understanding the
causal effect of the number of children on parents’ well-being in the old age. Whereas there is a large body
of literature investigating the correlation between children and old-age well-being, few of them address the
endogeneity of the fertility choice.6 Other studies use arguably exogenous shocks to fertility, including
family planning (Schultz 2008; Miller 2010; Canning and Schultz 2012; Joshi and Schultz 2013; Miller and
Babiarz 2016), access to oral contraceptives (Goldin and Katz 2002; Bailey 2006; Bailey 2010; Ananat
and Hungerman 2012; Bailey, Hershbein, and Miller 2012; Steingrimsdottir 2016), and abortion policies
(Pop-Eleches 2006; Myers 2017). Those studies focus either on women’s short-term performance or on
the outcome of the second generation. Studies on how having fewer children reshape parents’ old-age life
are sparse. Second, this paper contributes to understanding the consequences of China’s “Later, Longer,
Fewer” campaign. There is a huge literature estimating the effect of China’s family planning policies on
various outcomes, including: savings rate (Banerjee, Meng, and Qian 2010; Wei and Zhang 2011; Curtis,
Lugauer, and Mark 2015; Choukhmane, Coeurdacier, and Jin 2016; Ge, Yang, and Zhang 2018), marriage
(Huang and Zhou 2015), labor supply (Huang 2016; Zhang 2017), children’s outcomes (Li, Zhang, and Zhu
2008; Qian 2009; Liu 2014; Li and Zhang 2017; Qin, Zhuang, and Yang 2017), parental health (Chen and
Lei 2009; Wu and Li 2012; Islam and Smyth 2015), rural-urban migration (Wang, Zhao, and Zhao 2017;
Zhang 2017), and female empowerment (Huang 2016). However, the term “family planning policies” in
those studies is almost identical to the “one-child policy.” The effect of “Later, Longer Fewer” policies in the
early 1970s, which played a more important role in China’s demographic transition than did the one-child
policy (Whyte, Wang, and Cai 2015; Wang 2016; Chen and Huang 2018), remains mostly unexplored.7
To the best of our knowledge, there are three studies closest to ours that estimate the causal effect of
the number of children on parents’ physical and mental health in old age using an instrumental variable
approach. Chen and Lei (2009) instrument the number of living children and the number of children ever
born with exposure to the Great Famine and gender composition of children. Kruk and Reinhold (2014)
use multiple births and the sex composition of the first two children as a natural experiment. Islam and
6
See Hurt, Ronsmans, and Thomas (2006) for a review of the literature. More recent studies in this strand of literature
include Buber and Engelhardt (2008); Spence (2008); Chen and Lei (2009); Hank (2010); Read, Grundy, and Wolf (2011);
Kruk and Reinhold (2014); Islam and Smyth (2015).
7
Banerjee, Meng, and Qian (2010) is a notable exception who also explore the changes in the population policies in the
early 1970s. They treat the year 1972 as the turning point at which “family planning policies shifted from a pro-fertility
agenda to one that focused on curbing fertility” and define the treatment and control groups by whether the first child is born
after 1972.

5

Smyth (2015) explore the exemption rule under China’s one-child policy.8 Our study complements theirs
in two ways. First, we propose an arguably better exogenous shock to the number of children to study
the long-term consequences of family planning. As previously mentioned, the one-child policy does not
yield a significant decline in fertility and simultaneously bias the sex ratio at birth. Multiple births and sex
composition of children are also problematic in the context of developing countries (Schultz 2008).9 Second,
we extend their research agenda by going beyond health outcomes and further exploring the underlying
mechanisms. For example, we not only separately estimate family planning’s effect on physical and mental
health but also try to understand the origins of the differential effects.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide background information
on China’s family planning policies and old-age support system. In Section 3, we build a simple theoretical
framework that will guide our empirical analysis. Section 4 introduces the datasets used in this study and
discusses the empirical strategy. In Section 5, we present our main results, that is, the effect of the family
planning policies on the quality of life in old age. Finally, Section 6 concludes.

2

Institutional Background

2.1

China’s Family Planning Policies during the 1970s

In this subsection, we briefly describe China’s family planning policies during the 1970s, prior to the
enforcement of the well-known one-child policy (see Zhang (2017) for a recent review of the one-child
policy). China’s family planning has a much longer history than that of the one-child policy, dating back
to December 1962 with the release of the No. [62]698 document “Instructions on Seriously Advocating
Family Planning” (guanyu renzhen tichang jihua shengyu de zhishi ). In 1964, the State Family Planning
Commission was established after which commissions at the province, city, and county levels were gradually
set up. However, the outbreak of the Cultural Revolution in 1966 severely interrupted the government’s
functioning including the family planning institutions, most of which ceased to work in 1966.
In early 1970, Premier Enlai Zhou emphasized that the implementation of family planning policies
should not stop. In 1971, the State Council released document [71]51, “Report on Better Implementing
Family Planning Policy” (guanyu zuohao jihua shengyu gongzuo de baogao), signaling the recovery of family
planning from the Cultural Revolution. The document required provinces to set up a Family Planning
8

In rural China, depending on the local policy, a second child may be permitted only if the first-born child is female.
Schultz (2008) pointed out that twin births impose two additional burdens—no spacing between two births and lower
birth weight. Sex composition of births can directly affect family lifetime wealth because dowries are generally involved
when children get married. Those two instruments can be even more worrisome in the context of China. There is abundant
evidence that the strict birth-quota imposed by the one-child policy distorted children’s gender composition (Hull 1990; Ding
and Hesketh 2006; Ebenstein 2010; Bulte, Heerink, and Zhang 2011; Li, Yi, and Zhang 2011; Loh and Remick 2015). More
interestingly, recent evidence suggests that even the birth of “twins” can be endogenous to the one-child policy (Huang, Lei,
and Zhao 2016).
9

6

Leading Group to organize and lead the implementation of family planning policies. A pilot run was
initiated in 1970, and by 1975, all provinces had set up a leading group, an important and high-level
provincial institution. In most cases, its leader is also the main leader of the provincial party committee.
One central responsibility of the leading group is to enforce the “Later, Longer, Fewer” (wan, xi, shao)
policies. “Later” means marriage at a later age—23 years for women and 25 years for men. “Longer”
means a birth planning rule of waiting for more than three years between births. “Fewer” means that one
couple could have at most two children. China’s family planning campaign in the 1970s was technically
voluntary, although there is anecdotal evidence suggesting that the campaign had several coercive elements
(Whyte, Wang, and Cai 2015). Overall, the policy enforcement was much more lenient during this period
compared to that of the one-child policy period (Zhang 2017), when an above-quota birth could result in
huge fines and even the loss of one’s job.10
The leading groups could not curb the fertility rate by simply “asking” people to have fewer children.
They had to complement the LLF policies with concrete measures of birth control. Therefore, another
responsibility of the leading groups was to provide technical support for birth control. This support included training technical staff to conduct research on contraception and sterilization measures, introducing
technology and equipment for sterilization, and making contraceptive methods more widely available (e.g.,
distributing contraception pills) (Peng 1997).
[Figures 2 and 3 About Here]
Figure 2 plots the geographic variation in the establishment years of the provincial Family Planning
Leading Group. The data comes from the population chronicles in various provinces. The groups were first
established in 1970 in Shandong and Guangdong and were last set up in Guizhou and Xinjiang in 1975.
Figure 3 sketches the effect of the provincial Family Planning Leading Group on the fertility decline. We
take provincial total fertility rates from Coale and Li (1987) and separate provinces into different groups
according to the establishment years of the leading groups. Figure 3 compares the total fertility rate of the
provinces in which the leading groups were established between 1970 and 1971 (nine provinces) to those
that established the leading group between 1973 and 1975 (also nine provinces). Before 1970, when no
provinces established leading groups or after 1975 when all provinces had established the leading groups,
the difference in the total fertility rate between the two sets of provinces remained almost constant. Only
during 1971–1974, when the family planning leading groups were established in the first set of provinces
but not in the second, did the fertility rates drop more rapidly in the first set. Readers can refer to Chen
10
The stringent one-child policy was officially announced in 1979. In 1991, the central government listed family planning
among three basic state policies, and local officials became personally responsible for implementing family planning rules.
The fine rate for out-of-quota births (also known as the “social child-raising fee”) increased substantially from 1989 to 1992
(Scharping 2003).

7

and Huang (2018) for a more comprehensive analysis of the causal effect of the Family Planning Leading
Group on curbing China’s total fertility rate.

2.2

Old-Age Support in China

China is well known for its Confucian model and filial piety family system (Li and Tracy 1999; Whyte 2005).
The Classic of Filial Piety (xiaojing) is listed among the Thirteen Classics of the Confucian tradition, giving
people advice on filial piety since the 4th century BC. One famous quotation from the Classic of Filial
Piety is “there is no greater actions than the filial piety” (renzhixing, mo dayu xiao). Such value persisted
into modern China, and filial piety is even written into the constitution and the marriage law.11 Traditions
presume that children should respect and care for their elderly parents. Compared to western countries,
where the social security system is more developed, China relies more heavily on families as the main
providers of old-age support (Zimmer and Kwong 2003). In China, children’s support for their parents
mainly takes the form of co-residence (Logan and Bian 1999; Zhang 2004; Zimmer and Korinek 2010;
Oliveira 2016), financial or in-kind support (Lee and Xiao 1998; Sun 2002; Cai, Giles, and Meng 2006; Lei
et al. 2012; Oliveira 2016), and time transfer (or informal care) (Lee and Xiao 1998; Lu, Liu, and Piggott
2015).
It is true that filial piety may erode over time with economic development, and China is developing
its public system of old-age support. The two most important systems of social support are the Urban
Employees Basic Pension Insurance and the Basic Pension Insurance for Urban and Rural Residents.12 In
2015, the former covered a population of 353.6 million and the latter covered a population of 504.7 million
(Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security 2016). Despite the wide coverage, the monthly pension
per capita was as low as 119 RMB (19.1 USD) in 2015. Moreover, there are increasing concerns over the
financial sustainability of the system as China is aging rapidly (Cai, Giles, and Meng 2006).13 At this
stage, the basic pension system is more supplementary than a substitute of family support for the elderly.
Nursing homes also fail to accommodate an important share of the elderly. Chu and Chi (2008) estimate
that only 1.49% of the Chinese older population lived in nursing homes in 2006. The share is less than
one-fifth of that in the United States.14 The dearth of nursing homes in China can originate both from
the supply side and demand side. On the supply side, administrative approval procedures are complicated
11

Both Article 49 of the Constitution and Article 21 of the marriage law state: “Parents have the duty of raising and
educating their minor children. Adult children have the duty of supporting and caring for their parents.”
12
The Basic Pension Insurance for Urban and Rural Residents combined the New Rural Pension Scheme (since 2009) and
the Urban Residents Pension Scheme (since 2011) in 2014.
13
The revenue of the Basic Pension Insurance for Urban and Rural Residents failed to cover the expenses on pensions in
23 out of 31 mainland provinces in 2015 (Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security 2016). The gap is expected to
become even larger in the future along with China’s aging process.
14
Using various sources of data (Census, American Community Survey, Health and Retirement Survey), Mommaerts (2018)
find that about 8% of the U.S. elderly live in nursing homes. She also provides evidence that nursing homes are important
substitutes for co-residence by exploiting arguable exogenous changes in Medicaid eligibility for long-term care benefits.

8

and lengthy, and the threshold for private elderly care agencies remains high.15 On the demand side, there
is still a social stigma for parents living in a nursing home because of filial piety.16
CHARLS asks the question: “If you were too old to work in the future, who do you think you can
rely on financially for old-age support?” Figure 4 presents the answers in different years for people aged
60 or above. In urban areas, where the pension programs are more generous, the elderly report to rely
financially more on a pension (69.9% in 2015). In contrast, children remain the dominant forces for old-age
support in rural China (72.6%), despite an increasing share of reporting to rely on pensions because of
the expansion of China’s public pension system (from 8.3% to 21.5%). It is important to note that the
question only asks about “financial” old-age support. We believe children are playing even more important
roles in non-financial old-age support, such as caring and company. To conclude, neither the government
nor the market can fully replace children’s role for the provision of elderly care in China in the foreseeable
future.
[Figures 4 About Here]

3

Theoretical Framework

In this section, we first build a simple three-period life-cycle model to guide our empirical analysis, but our
later empirical analysis only focuses on the long-term consequences in old age. Therefore, to complement
our model, in the second part of this section, we briefly review evidence from the existing literature on the
short-term effects of family planning.

3.1

A Simple Model

Forward-looking households experience three periods: having children, young, and old. In the first period,
a couple plans how many children they “want” to have. The final number can be affected by the availability
of birth-control technologies and fertility restrictions. People do not derive direct utility in this period. In
the second period (young), they earn labor income, raise children, and build up savings. In the third period
(old), they retire from the labor market and receive financial transfers and care from their children. We do
not model children’s decisions for simplicity. In the latter two periods, the household derives utility from
three sources: consumption, physical health, and mental health. Without loss of generality, we assume
away discounting.
In the first period, a household plans to have an optimal number of N ∗ children based on their expectation about the future. We assume that people cannot fully control their fertility behavior and will have
15
16

http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2017-03/29/content 28716504.htm
http://www.china.org.cn/english/2002/Mar/29603.htm

9

η (η > 0) more children in the end—the final number of children would be N = N ∗ + η. This assumption
is justified by the effectiveness of contraceptive measures and human behavior. The introduction of family
planning brings two effects. First, it helps households to better control their fertility (η = 0), and second,
it imposes a fertility restriction (N ≤ N ). Both effects reduce the number of children N , but the welfare
implications of these effects are vastly different. The reduction in η makes the actual number closer to the
optimal number, while the restriction of N may force households to have too few children.17
Given the number of children N , a representative household solves the following problem in the second
period:
max Uy (Cy |N ) = u (Cy ) + δ1 h1,y + δ2 h2,y + Uo
Cy

s.t. h1,y = H1 (Cy ) , h2,y = H2 (Cy ) ,
Ay = I − Cy − τ (N ) .
Cy is consumption when young. The function u(.) is concave and strictly increasing with u0 > 0 and
u00 < 0. h1,y represents physical health and h2,y represents mental health when young with relative utility
weights δ1 > 0 and δ2 > 0. Both types of health can be improved by more consumption. Hj , j = 1, 2,
is the health production function with Hj0 > 0 and Hj00 < 0. τ (N ) represents the total resources devoted
to raising children. For simplicity, we embed the quantity-quality tradeoff inside the function τ (.), and
we assume τ 0 > 0. This implies that when N becomes smaller, we expect total expenses on children to
decrease despite the fact that per-child expenses might increase as a result of the quantity-quality tradeoff.
Finally, I is the labor income, and Ay is the wealth that will be transferred to the next period.
In the third period, the household solves the following problem
max Uo (Co |N, h1,y , h2,y ) = u (Co ) + δ1 h1,o + δ2 h2,o
Co

s.t. h1,o = λh1,y + (1 − λ) H1 (Co ) + F1 (S (N )) ,
h2,o = λh2,y + (1 − λ) H2 (Co ) + F2 (S (N )) ,
0 = Ay + T (N ) − C0 .
There are two notable differences from the second period. First, the health of the elderly is not only affected
by current consumption. Health status when young partially persists into old age, with a persistence rate
0 < λ < 1, and health in old age is further shaped by the care received from the elderly’s children, denoted
17

In our model, we assume away the uncertainties in childbirth for simplicity, but the welfare implications naturally apply
to the case with childbirth uncertainties in which η becomes a random number. Family planning reduces the randomness in
η, which is welfare-improving if households are risk-averse.

10

as S (N ). We assume Fj0 > 0. Second, the elderly do not earn income from the labor market. Instead, they
rely on their accumulated wealth (Ay ) and the financial transfer from their children (T (N )). We assume
T 0 > 0.
If the utility in the latter two periods is weighted equally, the first-order condition would be:


u0 (Cy ) + (1 + λ) δ1 H10 (Cy ) + δ2 H20 (Cy ) = u0 (Co ) + (1 − λ) δ1 H10 (Co ) + δ2 H20 (Co ) .
To let the model have a closed-form solution, we further assume functions u (.), H1 (.), and H2 (.) to follow
a quadratic form. More specifically,
u (C) = C −
H1 (C) = C −

ac 2
C ,
2

ah1 2
ah
C , and H2 (C) = C − 2 C 2 .
2
2

With the above assumptions, we can solve for optimal consumption,
I − (τ (N ) − T (N ))
,
1+K
I − (τ (N ) − T (N ))
,
= K
1+K
K
=
(I − τ (N )) − T (N ) ,
1+K

Cy∗ =
Co∗
Ay
where
K=

ac + (1 + λ) (δ1 ah1 + δ2 ah2 )
> 0.
ac + (1 − λ) (δ1 ah1 + δ2 ah2 )

With the above simple model, we can describe how consumption, savings, and physical and mental
health respond to an exogenous decrease in N as a result of family planning policies.
Proposition 1 If we assume

∂(τ (N )−T (N ))
∂N

> 0, that implies fewer children free up a household’s lifetime

budget, savings (Ay ) and consumption in both period (Cy and Co ) increases as N decreases.
Proof.
∂Ay
∂N
∂Cy∗
∂N
∂Co∗
∂N

K τ (N ) T (N )
−
< 0,
1 + K ∂N
∂N
1 ∂ (τ (N ) − T (N ))
= −
< 0,
1+K
∂N
K ∂ (τ (N ) − T (N ))
= −
< 0.
1+K
∂N
= −

Therefore, all three variables will increase when N decreases.
11

The intuition behind this proposition is clear. If lower N increases a household’s lifetime resources,
households would increase their consumption in both periods because they wish to smooth their consumption. Moreover, a reduction in N effectively reallocates the household’s disposable income from the third
period to the second.18 Households need to increase savings at the end of the second period to achieve the
goal of consumption smoothing.
Proposition 2 Whereas the health status when young (hj,y ) would be unambiguously improved with a
reduction in N , the effect is less clear on the health status of the elderly (hj,o ).
Proof. For j = 1, 2,
∂hj,y
∂N
∂hj,o
∂N
The first two terms of

∂hj,o
∂N

∂Hj ∂Cy
< 0,
∂Cy ∂N
∂Hj ∂Cy
∂Hj ∂Co ∂Fj (S) ∂S
= λ
+ (1 − λ)
+
.
∂Cy ∂N
∂Co ∂N
∂S ∂N
=

are negative while the third term is positive; therefore, the sign of the aggregate

effect remains ambiguous.
∂hj,y
∂N

< 0 captures the quantity-quality tradeoff between children and parents. The extra resources

spared from having fewer children can be used not only to increase the quality of the remaining children
but also to increase parent’s consumption, further improving their health status. We call it the “nutrition
effect.” The third term in the expression (

∂Fj (S) ∂S
∂S ∂N )

represents the negative consequences of a smaller N

that there are fewer children to take care of the elderly, which we call the “caring effect.” If children’s care
positively affects their elderly parents, the relationship between hj,o and N is less clear.
Proposition 3 If we assume that mental health is less sensitive to consumption compared with physical
health, i.e.

∂H1 (C)
∂C

>

∂H2 (C)
∂C

, but more sensitive to children’s company, i.e.

∂F1 (S)
∂S

<

∂F2 (S)
∂S

, a lower

N has a more negative effect on the elderly’s mental health.
Proof. Given the expression of

∂hj,o
∂N ,

we can see that for mental health, the first two terms are less

negative while the third term is more positive:
∂h1,o
∂H1 ∂Cy
∂H1 ∂Co ∂F1 (S) ∂S
=λ
+ (1 − λ)
+
∂N
∂Cy ∂N
∂Co ∂N
∂S ∂N
∂h2,o
∂H2 ∂Cy
∂H2 ∂Co ∂F2 (S) ∂S
+ (1 − λ)
+
=
.
<λ
∂Cy ∂N
∂Co ∂N
∂S ∂N
∂N

18

In the second period,

∂(I−τ (N ))
∂N

< 0. In the third period,

∂T (N )
∂N

12

>0

Lower fertility affects the elderly’s health status through a nutrition effect and a caring effect. If we
believe physical health is more affected by consumption and mental health is more affected by children’s
care and company, family planning policies are expected to exert a more negative effect on mental health
than on physical health. Table 1 summarizes the predictions of our theoretical framework.
[Table 1 About Here]

3.2

Supporting Evidence from the Existing Literature

Our theoretical framework involves both the young and the old. Although our empirical analysis will focus
on the effect of family planning in old age, there are abundant existing studies that support our framework
when households are young. This subsection briefly reviews this strand of literature.
Health When Young
Medical literature has long been interested in the biological influence of childbearing on maternal health.
Because giving birth to a child is a risky event in developing countries, having fewer children mechanically
lowers mothers’ mortality rate (Chen et al. 1974; Boerma 1987; Menken, Duffy, and Kuhn 2003). Other
biological consequences include: breast cancer (Kelsey, Gammon, and John 1993), heart disease (Ness
et al. 1994), obesity (Weng et al. 2004), and stroke (Zhang et al. 2009). Economic literature puts a
greater emphasis on the channel of the budget constraint, which we also highlight in our theoretical
framework. Canning and Schultz (2012) find an anthropometric gain of 1 kg/m2 in the body-mass index
for reproductive-age women in treatment areas in the Matlab experiment.19 Wu and Li (2012) further
discuss the source of the BMI gain, finding that it originates from more nutrition intake and that the
father’s health is also improved as a consequence of the one-child policy.
Savings When Young
With fewer children to rear, households would realize that they can spare more resources when young
but will receive fewer inter vivos transfers when old. In response to such expectation, households should
increase their savings according to a standard life-cycle model. In the context of China, it has been
argued that family planning is an important candidate explanation for China’s high household savings rate.
Curtis, Lugauer, and Mark (2015) propose two channels through which having fewer children increases the
savings rate: a “dependent children effect” and an “intergenerational family transfer effect.” The dependent
children effect means that “a household with relatively few children devotes a smaller share of household
19

The Matlab experiment was a randomized experiment designed to document the efficiency of family planning. It was
initiated in 149 villages in a relatively remote rural district of Matlab, Bangladesh. 70 villages became the treatment village,
with government community clinics offering a range of methods and instructions on fertility control.

13

income to support dependents and, therefore, has more to save.” The intergenerational family transfer
effect states that “the current working-age population should save more aggressively because they will be
supported in retirement by relatively few working people.” Those two effects are similar in spirit to our
theoretical framework. Exploiting the plausibly exogenous decline in fertility in China caused by family
planning programs that began in the early 1970s, Banerjee, Meng, and Qian (2010) find that having one
less child increases the savings by over 14,000 RMB (or 2258 USD). Choukhmane, Coeurdacier, and Jin
(2016) also argue that the one-child policy contributes to the rise in China’s household savings rate because
the lower expected support from children induces parents to increase saving.

4

Data and Empirical Strategy

4.1

Data and Variables

The main data used in this study is the China Health and Retirement Study (CHARLS), which is a
nationally representative sample of Chinese residents aged 45 and older and is the sister study of the U.S.
Health and Retirement Study (HRS) (Zhao et al. 2013). The survey covers 150 counties/districts in 28
provinces in mainland China. Each wave includes about 10,000 households and 17,500 individuals. The
individuals are followed up every two years. We use three waves of the panel data from CHARLS: 2011,
2013, and 2015.
Because we wish to understand the effect of China’s family planning policies on a wide range of outcomes, we construct three levels of data accordingly: individual, household, and child. Some variables are
naturally defined at the individual level such as health status, but others are more suitable to be defined
at the household level such as consumption. We exclude samples from Inner Mongolia because we fail
to find information about its family planning leading group. We also drop households with either spouse
being an ethnic minority, as ethnic minority households are subject to less stringent policies compared
with their Han counterparts (Peng 1997; Li, Zhang, and Zhu 2005; Li, Yi, and Zhang 2011). We further
restrict our analysis to those who were ever married and aged 60 and above in the year 2011. The age
restriction serves two purposes. First, we wish to alleviate the concern that elderly parents remain the
caregivers instead of care-receivers. There is increasing evidence suggesting elderly parents in China are
still helping their adult children through providing residence and taking care of the grandchildren (Chen,
Liu, and Mair 2011; Lee and Bauer 2013; Zeng and Xie 2014; Lumsdaine and Vermeer 2015; Ma and Wen
2016). Second, we wish to exclude the effect of family planning on parents’ human capital accumulation
and focus on the consequences of having fewer children. Those who were aged 60 in 2011 would be at age
20 in 1971, by which time most of them had already completed their education.20 Readers can refer to
20

According to a 1 percent sample of China’s 1990 population census, only 2.2% of cohorts born between 1941 and 1950

14

Huang (2016) and Huang, Lei, and Sun (2016) for a discussion on how the expectation of having fewer
children influences young women’s educational outcomes.
Individual-level data covers demographics (e.g., age, gender), socioeconomic status (e.g., Hukou status,
education), and health status, both physical and mental health. More specifically, we include the following
nine measures to proxy the elderly parents’ physical and mental well-being:
1. Self-rated life satisfaction: CHARLS asks the interviewee how satisfied they are with their life as a
whole. The variable ranges from 1 (completely satisfied) to 5 (not at all satisfied).
2. Self-rated health: Ranges from 1 (Excellent) to 5 (Poor).
3. Self-perceived probabilities of living for another 11–15 years: CHARLS interviews the elderly at age a
about their self-perceived chances of reaching age a + x, where x ranges between 11 and 15.21 There
are five options: 1 (almost impossible); 2 (not very likely); 3 (maybe); 4 (very likely); 5 (almost
certain). For ease of interpretation, we convert those values to probabilities 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, and
0.9, respectively.
4. Body mass index (BMI): One important feature of CHARLS is that it provides a physical examination
of the interviewees. We, therefore, have access to measured numbers instead of self-reported numbers
on anthropometric data (height and weight) and blood pressure. Body mass index is calculated by
dividing one’s weight in kilograms by the square of one’s height in meters.
5. Underweight: This is a dummy variable indicating that a person’s BMI is lower than 18.5.
6. Limitations in Activities of Daily Living (ADL): Our definition of ADL measures people’s difficulty
in doing the following daily activities: dressing, bathing and showing, self-feeding, getting into or out
of bed, toilet hygiene, controlling urination and defecation. The original questions have four choices:
no difficulty, have difficulty but can still do it, have difficulty and need help, cannot do it. We define
the latter two choices as having ADL limitations.
7. Limitations in Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL): These include doing household chores,
preparing meals, shopping for groceries, making phone calls, and taking medications. The definition
of IADL limitation is the same as that of ADL limitation.
received some post-secondary education. If an individual receives at most senior high education, he should have left school by
the age of 19.
21
More specifically, CHARLS asks people aged 65–69 about their perceived probabilities of reaching age 80 and asks people
aged 70–74 about their perceived probabilities of reaching age 85, etc.

15

8. Hypertension: Defined by either systolic pressure exceeding 140 mmHg or diastolic pressure exceeding
90 mmHg.22
9. Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D scale): CES-D is a brief self-report questionnaire to measure the severity of depressive symptoms. CHARLS asks ten questions related to
depression with eight being negative behaviors and two being positive behaviors.23 For the eight
negative behaviors, we assign 0 points to “rarely or none of the time”; 1 point to “some or a little of
the time (1–2 days a week)”; 2 points to “occasionally or a moderate amount of the time (3–4 days a
week)”; 3 points to “most or all of the time (5–7 days a week).” Points are assigned in the opposite
order (from 3 to 0 points) for the two positive behaviors. Summing up the points from ten questions
gives us the CES-D scale.
The left panel of Table 2 reports the summary statistics at the individual level.
[Table 2 About Here]
The household level data covers age structure, net transfers (including in-kind transfers) from children,
living arrangements, and household expenditures. Whereas the definition of age is straightforward at the
individual level, defining the age at the household level is more complicated. Both the husband’s and
wife’s age are important in household decision making. Moreover, we also need to take into account the
possibility that one part of the couple is deceased. We, therefore, use three variables to control for the
age structure of the couple: widow or not, age of the oldest, and the age gap between the individuals
in the couple.24 Living arrangement is defined as whether there is at least one child living within a
locality (household, village/community, district/county). CHARLS also contains detailed information on
household expenditures, the categories of which are generally consistent with the definition used by the
National Bureau of Statistics in China.25 We highlight three categories that may be especially important
for the elderly: food expenditures, living expenditures (e.g., communication, transportation, utilities,
household items), and health expenditures. The three categories together account for about 70.0% of the
total household expenditures. The right panel of Table 2 reports the summary statistics at the household
level.
22

CHALRS conduct the blood pressure measurements three times for each individual. Following the standard practice in
the literature, we drop the first measurement in case people are not ready and take the means of the latter two measurements.
23
The eight negative behaviors include: was bothered by things that don’t usually bother me; had trouble keeping my mind
on what I was doing; felt depressed; felt everything I did was an effort; felt fearful; sleep was restless; felt lonely; could not
get “going.” The two positive behaviors include felt hopeful about the future; was happy.
24
Because CHARLS surveys information regarding the deceased spouse, this variable can be constructed for all those who
ever get married.
25
CHARLS asks some categories of expenditures on a weekly basis (e.g., food), some on a monthly basis (e.g., utilities), and
others on a yearly basis (e.g., health). We transform all expenditures to annual expenditures.

16

CHARLS uses a loop structure to ask information about each child, allowing us to construct childlevel data regardless of whether he/she co-reside with the parents. Our child level data covers children’s
demographics (e.g., age, gender), socioeconomic status (e.g., education and income), net transfer to parents,
and monthly frequency of contacting and visiting parents.26 Table 3 reports the summary statistics at the
child level.
[Table 3 About Here]

4.2

Empirical Strategy

To evaluate the effects of “Later, Longer, Fewer” policies, we first need to develop a measure of policy
exposure. We define the exposure according to the province and mothers’ birth cohort, regardless of
whether mothers are currently alive or not. Such approach alleviates the concern of endogenous timing of
childbirth that would arise if we defined the exposure according to children’s year of birth. More specifically,
we define the exposure to the “Later, Longer, Fewer” policies as follows:

FPPp,c =

49
X

AFRp (a) I [c + a ≥ Tp ] .

(1)

a=15

FPPp,c defines the exposure to the family planning policies for cohorts born in year c in province p. In
equation (1), I [·] is an indicator function that takes a value of 1 if the argument is true and 0 otherwise; a is
age; AFRp (a) is the age-specific fertility rate of province p in 1969, prior to the enforcement of any effective
family planning policy in any province; Tp is the year of the enforcement, which can vary by province. For
the “Later, Longer, Fewer” policies in the early 1970s, Tp is defined by the establishment year of the
provincial Family Planning Leading Group. The provincial variation within each cohort then comes from
(1) different years of establishment of the Family Planning Leading Group (Tp ) and (2) different initial
fertility profiles (AFRp ). Figure 5 illustrates how exposure to the policy is computed, using the examples of
Shandong and Beijing. Women born in 1945 are more exposed to the policies in Shandong than in Beijing
because Shandong (1) formed the Family Planning Leading Group in 1970, three years earlier than Beijing
and (2) has a higher initial fertility rate. Note that such a definition naturally applies to the one-child
policy by defining Tp as 1979 for all provinces.
[Figure 5 About Here]
The mean exposure to the LLF policies in our household level data is 3.47 with a standard deviation
of 1.88. The policy exposure ranges from 0 to 6.73. A household would remain unaffected if the wife were
26

Because it is difficult for parents to know children’s income precisely, CHARLS asks the parents whether their children’s
annual income falls into one of the following ranges: under 2,000 RMB, 2,000–20,000 RMB, 20,000–50,000 RMB, above 50,000
RMB. We are aware that this measurement is quite coarse, but there are no better alternatives.

17

passed the age of 49 prior to the enforcement of the family planning policies. On the contrary, a household
would be fully exposed if the wife was younger than age 15 at the time of enforcement. The exposure
equals the provincial total fertility rate in 1969 in this scenario. Guizhou had the highest TFR (6.73) at
that time.
After defining the exposure to family planning policies, we run the following regressions:



yi,p,c,t = F β0 + β1 FPPp,c + β 2 Xi,p,c,t + f Agei,c,t + Provp + Yeart + εi,p,c,t .

(2)


Note that the age effects, f Agei,c,t , and the year fixed effects, Yeart , effectively capture the cohort effects.
Xi,p,c,t represent a list of control variables. To avoid bad-control issues (Angrist and Pischke 2008), we
carefully choose our control variables to only include those that are pre-determined before households make
their fertility decision. F [.] is a functional form that varies according to the dependent variable of interest,
yi,p,c,t . If the dependent variable is continuous, we use a linear regression model. If the dependent variable
is binary, a Probit model will be used. We cluster the standard errors at the province-by-cohort level
because this is the unit at which exposure to policies is defined. Sample weight is applied in all regressions.
Parameter β1 is of primary interest in equation (2). With cohort effects and province fixed effects both
controlled for, the identification of β1 relies on the remaining variations in FPPp,c , which originates from
the interaction between differential timing in the establishment of the Family Planning Groups and the
initial fertility profiles prior to the groups’ establishment.
Following Miller (2010), we rely exclusively on a reduced-form approach because family planning may
affect socioeconomic outcomes through pathways other than completed lifetime fertility, despite our best
effort to rule out other channels. For example, we arguably rule out the channel of parental human capital
accumulation through (1) controlling for parents’ completed education and (2) restricting to cohorts who
were most likely to have completed their education prior to the enforcement of the “Later, Longer, Fewer”
policies.

5

Empirical Results

We present our main results in four steps. In the first step, we provide evidence that the “Later, Longer,
Fewer” campaign had powerful effects in curbing fertility. In the second step, we investigate the policy
effect on parents’ aggregate support from children as well as the per-child support. We are also interested in
whether the quantity-quality tradeoffs of children alleviate or exaggerate the effect of having fewer children.
Thirdly, we look into a set of outcomes that can proxy parents’ well-being in old age, including consumption,
subjective well-being, physical health, and mental health. Finally, we present the heterogeneity in the effect

18

of family planning policies—households with higher initial fertility prior to policy enforcement are more
affected.

5.1

Effect on Completed Fertility
[Table 4 About Here]

Table 4 presents how households’ exposure to family planning affects their number of children. Panel
A reports the effect on the number of currently living children. The first column suggests that a one unit
exposure to the “Later, Longer, Fewer” policies reduce the number of currently living children by 0.245.
Because the national average exposure to the policies is 3.47 in our sample, the LLF policies reduce the
number of living children by 0.85. Columns (2) and (3) estimate the additional effect of the one-child
policy.27 If we only include the exposure to the one-child policy (OCP) in the regression, its coefficient
would be strongly negative, which seemingly suggests the one-child policy also has a strong effect in reducing
fertility. However, once exposure to LLF policies is also controlled for (column (3)), the additional effect
of OCP becomes small and insignificant. This is not a surprising finding if we look back to Figure 1, which
reveals that the majority of China’s historical fertility decline took place prior to the enforcement of the
one-child policy. In Appendix A, we present the robustness of our results against other contemporaneous
events that took place around the period of the “Later, Longer, Fewer” campaign, such as the Cultural
Revolution and the Sent-Down Movement.
Columns (4) and (5) lend support to the accuracy of our measurement of policy exposure. A couple’s
ability to have children is more affected by the mother than by the father. In column (4), we define a
household’s exposure according to the father’s birth cohort instead of the mother’s. The coefficient remains
statistically significant but smaller than that in column (1). This is not surprising because the couple’s
ages are generally close to each other. However, once the mother’s exposure is controlled for, the father’s
exposure no longer shows any sign of significance.
Columns (6) and (7) look into the policy’s heterogeneous effects. LLF affects rural residents more than
urban residents. Different from the one-child policy that imposes different rules upon urban and rural
residents,28 the implementation of the “Later, Longer, Fewer” policies is uniform across the country to
the best of our knowledge. Because rural households had a much higher fertility rate before 1970 (6.2
in rural China versus 3.3 in urban China), they needed to reduce child births more after the government
recommended a maximum quota of two children.
27

The coefficient in front of the exposure to the one-child policy should be interpreted as the additional effect conditional
on pre-existing “Later, Longer, Fewer” policies.
28
More specifically, the policy permits only one child per couple in urban China, whereas in rural China, depending on the
local policy, a second child may be permitted. Some counties allow for a universal second birth and others permit a second
birth only if the first-born child is female.

19

Panel B of Table 4 uses the number of children ever born as the dependent variable. The general
implications derived from panel B are consistent with those from panel A, but the coefficients in panel B
are larger, suggesting the policy effect is larger on the number of births. This is because the family planning
policies directly target child births. The number of living children is further influenced by adoption and
children’s premature death. In principle, the number of birth children and that of living children should
affect parents’ well-being differently. While the former affects the resources that can be allocated to parents
when they are young more, the latter is a more important determinant for the amount of care that parents
can receive in old age (Chen and Lei 2009). However, separately identifying the effects of the two numbers
is a demanding task. The challenge not only comes from the high correlation between the two numbers
(0.92 in our sample) but also from the fact that the gap between the two numbers generates a third effect—
the early death of a child is undoubtedly a catastrophic shock to parents and therefore has a huge impact
on them, both physically and emotionally. In the remainder of this paper, we will loosely use the term
“number of children” without distinguishing the number of living children from that of birth children. We
leave the identification of the two separate effects for future research.

5.2

Effect on Support from Children

Living Arrangements
Co-residence is an important form of old-age support (Logan and Bian 1999; Zhang 2004; Zimmer and
Korinek 2010; Oliveira 2016)—it enables children to provide care for elderly parents if necessary; however,
only looking at co-residence (or living in the same dwelling) is not enough. Zimmer and Korinek (2008)
show that a large fraction of Chinese elderly who do not live with their adult children have children living
within the same neighborhood. Lei et al. (2015) show that the recent decline in the co-residence rate is
China is fully compensated by the increasing share of adult children living nearby. Such living arrangement
serves both the needs of privacy and that of family support; therefore, we explore three outcomes: whether
parents have at least one child living in the same dwelling, have at least one child living in the same
village/community, have at least one child living in the same county/district.
[Table 5 About Here]
Table 5 estimates the effect of LLF policies on the elderly parents’ living arrangements. Panel A
shows that there is no evidence that family planning affects households’ decision of co-residency; however,
panels B and C suggest family planning reduced the probabilities of having at least one child living nearby.
LLF policies reduce the probabilities of having children in the same village/community by 8.8 percentage
points (0.0254×3.47) and those of having children in the same county/district by 7.6 percentage points

20

(0.0220×3.47). Our findings are consistent with those of Holmlund, Rainer, and Siedler (2013), who use
multiple births as the instruments for family sizes and also find having fewer children reduces the likelihood
of having at least one child close-by in old age. Similar to the effect on fertility, the LLF’s effect on living
arrangements is also more salient for the rural elderly.
Intergenerational Transfers
Whereas some recent studies question the importance of children’s financial support as a form of old-age
support for the current generation of urban families in China (Rosenzweig and Zhang 2014) in which the
pension payments are more generous, other studies claim that children’s financial support still plays an
important role, especially in rural China (Lee and Xiao 1998; Sun 2002; Cai, Giles, and Meng 2006; Lei
et al. 2012; Oliveira 2016). For example, Cai, Giles, and Meng (2006) find evidence that the transfers help
to insure against parents’ risk of falling below the poverty line. The studies of Lee and Xiao (1998) and
Sun (2002) suggest that parents’ need is the most important reason driving intergenerational transfers.
[Table 6 About Here]
Table 6 estimates the effect of LLF policies on inter vivos transfers. Panel A presents the parents’
perspective and explores aggregate net transfers from children. Column (1) of panel A suggests that the
magnitude of the effect is sizable despite its statistical insignificance. Such discrepancy might originate
from the large volatility of inter vivos transfers. The LLF policies reduce elderly parents’ net annual
transfers from children by 395.9 RMB, about 18.6% of the sample average.
Elderly parents’ aggregate transfers received can be decomposed into the number of children and net
transfers per child. Panel B of Table 6 looks into how children’s transfers to parents change in response to
the policies from the children’s perspective. The results suggest that per child transfers slightly increase
and therefore partially offset the effect of a smaller number of children. Two reasons can potentially explain
the increase in per-child transfers. The first is children’s quantity-quality tradeoffs.29 Family planning can
improve the quality of children by reducing the family size. Children of higher quality can earn more and
therefore can better support their parents. The second possibility is children’s behavioral adjustments.
For example, children born under the LLF policies realize they have fewer siblings, and they need to take
greater responsibilities in taking care of their parents. Panel C probes the two possibilities by additionally
controlling for children’s characteristics, including education and income. The difference between the two
panels reflects the quantity-quality tradeoff, and the remaining effect in panel C reflects the behavioral
adjustment. The coefficients in panel C are universally smaller than those in panel B, suggesting that
children’s higher quality helps to alleviate the negative effect of having fewer children.
29

For evidence of quantity-quality tradeoffs in China, see Li, Zhang, and Zhu (2008); Rosenzweig and Zhang (2009); Li and
Zhang (2017); Qin, Zhuang, and Yang (2017)

21

Visits and Contacts from Children
Whereas the existing literature has paid great attention to children’s financial transfers to parents, few
studies have focused on the role of children’s company. In the model section, we highlight two potential
risks in old age when parents have fewer children: lower transfers, T (N ), and less company from children,
S (N ). Note that parents can self-insure the former risk by increasing savings (Ay ), but there is no way
to insure against the latter risk. Moreover, children’s company can be a more important determinant of
parents’ mental health status, such as depression. Bures, Koropeckyj-Cox, and Loree (2009) stress the
importance of children within the social network of parents and in preventing loneliness in old age.
[Table 7 About Here]
Table 7 shows how the exposure to the “Later, Longer, Fewer” policies affects children’s frequency of
contacting and visiting parents. We find that family planning policies reduce children’s monthly contacts
with parents by 3.08 times per month and monthly visits to parents by 3.00 times per month. The decline
is larger for rural children than urban children. Note that from parents’ perspectives, the effect is further
exaggerated by a smaller number of children.
The decline in frequencies of contacting and visiting parents can be further decomposed into a quantityquality effect and a behavioral adjustment effect. In columns (4)–(6), we additionally control for children’s
characteristics and observe a large decline in the estimated effects of the family planning policies (about
36%). This suggests that children with more advanced education and higher income are even less attached to their parents. Two reasons can potentially explain the negative correlation between children’s
achievements and their attention to their parents. First, better education raises children’s accessibility
to migration (Zhao 1997). As a result, better-educated children can live further away from their parents
thereby increasing the costs of visiting. This echoes our previous finding that the LLF policies reduce
parents’ chances of having children live nearby. Second, children of higher quality earn a higher wage
rate in the labor market, so their opportunity costs of visiting are higher. The study of Ma and Wen
(2016) lends support to this conjecture. They find that when parents are healthy and can help children
with house-work, they will co-reside with higher-educated children. On the contrary, when parents are
unhealthy and need help from children, they will co-reside with lower-educated children.
What explains the remaining effects in columns (4)–(6) of Table 7 after controlling for children’s observable characteristics? On the one hand, our controls of children’s quality are not complete, and the
remaining effects may simply capture the residuals. “Quality” is a very complex measure that covers a
much broader scope than human capital and labor market performance. On the other hand, having fewer
siblings can directly reshape people’s personalities. One concrete example is the “Little Emperor” syndrome. Blake (1981) and Cameron et al. (2013) document that an only child tends to be self-centered,
22

less cooperative, and less conscientious; therefore, children born under the family planning policies may be
more selfish and less altruistic toward their parents.
Summary
In this subsection, we estimate the effect of the “Later, Longer, Fewer” policies on children’s provision of
old-age support to their parents. We use three measures of support: co-residence, financial transfer, and
visits (or contacts). LLF policies have negative impacts on all three measures. These findings confirm our
assumption in the theoretical framework that financial transfers and psychological support are increasing
(N )
functions of the number of children ( ∂T∂N
> 0 and

∂S(N )
∂N

> 0).

Another important finding is that the quantity-quality tradeoffs of children play different roles in
financial support and in psychological support. In terms of financial support, better-educated children
earn more in the labor market and also transfer more income to their parents. This alleviates the financial
consequences of having fewer children. However, the opposite is true for the psychological support. Children
of higher “quality” are contacting their parents less often, either because of higher opportunity costs, more
selfish personalities, or both.

5.3

Effect on Parental Well-being in Old Age

Our theoretical framework generates three testable implications when the number of children declines as a
result of the family planning policies (see Table 1): (1) the elderly parents consume more; (2) the effect on
physical health in old age is less positive than that in young age; (3) the effect on old-age mental health is
less positive than that on old-age physical health. This subsection discusses the causal impacts of family
planning policies on a set of indirect welfare measures and tests the three implications.
Consumption
[Table 8 About Here]
Table 8 reports the influence of LLF policies on household expenditures in old age. We restrict our
sample to the elderly parents who are not co-residing with their children. In the case of co-residency, we
will not be able to distinguish the expenditures of the parents from those of their children. Table 5 suggests
that the LLF policies do not affect the decisions of co-residing, despite the finding that the policies make
children live further away from parents conditional on non-coresidence.
Although panel A of Table 8 seemingly suggests there is no overall policy effect on expenditures,
some interesting patterns emerge when we further decompose total expenditures into smaller categories.

23

Strictly speaking, what our theoretical model predicts is about consumption, not expenditures. The lifecycle hypothesis also predicts “consumption smoothing,” not “expenditure smoothing.” There exists a gap
between expenditure and consumption—people do not derive utility from all types of expenditures (e.g.,
health expenditures). Panels B and C suggest that households who are more exposed to the LLF policies
spend more on food and living expenses (e.g., communication, transportation, utilities, household items).
Previous literature finds that the one-child policy induces more food consumption for parents when they
are young (Wu and Li 2012). The persistently positive effect on old age simply echoes the wisdom of
consumption smoothing and is consistent with the first testable implication of our model.
Our findings of the negative policy effect on health expenditures also call for attention. So far, our
empirical evidence has not yet pinned down the specific reasons of this decline: is it because elderly parents
become healthier or because they are less likely to seek treatment in case of illness (e.g., no children are
taking them to hospitals)? Note that the two scenarios yield vastly different welfare implications. In
the subsequent analysis, we find some evidence that family planning positively affects parents’ (especially
mothers’) physical health status; however, we still cannot rule out the possibility of the second unfortunate
scenario.
Physical Health
[Table 9 About Here]
Table 9 reports the effect of LLF policies on a set of health outcomes. Column (1) finds no effect on
self-rated life satisfaction. Columns (2) and (3) look at two other subjective health measures: self-rated
health and self-perceived life expectancy. Self-rated health has been shown to be an independent predictor
of future mortality, despite the inclusion of numerous other health indicators (Idler and Benyamini 1997).
The estimations suggest that exposure to family planning prolongs mother’s perceived life expectancy.
Previous studies highlight the immediate or short-term effects of family planning on reducing maternal
mortality (Chen et al. 1974; Boerma 1987; Menken, Duffy, and Kuhn 2003). Our results suggest that such
an effect persists into old age. No similar effect is observed among fathers.
Columns (4)–(8) of Table 9 use more objective health measures as the dependent variables: BMI,
underweight, limitations in ADL, limitations in IADL, and hypertension. We find no significant effects on
most of those outcomes, except that mothers experience a decline in hypertension. Anthropometric gains
that are generally observed when parents are young (Canning and Schultz 2012; Wu and Li 2012) do not
show up in old age. This finding is consistent with our second testable implications, and our theoretical
framework offers a possible explanation. On the one hand, the positive effect on the physical health in
young age partially translates into better old-age health because health is an accumulative outcome (Strauss

24

and Thomas 1998). On the other hand, reduced support from children as a result of family planning may
offset the positive effect to some extent.
Mental Health
[Table 10 About Here]
The most surprising finding from Table 9 is that family planning greatly worsens parents’ symptoms of
depression measured with the CES-D scale (column (9)). Table 10 further breaks the CES-D scale into ten
smaller questions. Interestingly, if we list the top four contributors to the increased degree of depression
for mothers and fathers separately, three out of four top contributors are common: feel everything they
are doing is an effort; feel lonely; feel unhappy. Our previous analysis suggests that the elderly parents
suffer from neither reduced consumption nor worse physical health; therefore, a lower amount of children’s
company becomes a candidate explanation.
Our theoretical framework shows that if mental health is more sensitive to children’s support than
physical health, family planning would have more negative effects on parents’ mental well-being. Sociologists stress the importance of children within a social network of elderly parents (Bures, Koropeckyj-Cox,
and Loree 2009) and identify social isolation as an important risk factor for depression (Cappeliez and
Flynn 1993). Two pieces of evidence further support this conjecture. The first is that the effect on women
is more than twice that on men (Table 9, column (9)). Psychological literature shows that women are more
likely to feel negative emotions (Fischer et al. 2004; Else-Quest et al. 2012) and react more negatively to
unpleasant experiences (Grossman and Wood 1993; Bradley et al. 2001; Chentsova-Dutton and Tsai 2007).
Therefore, if we view China’s coercive family planning as an unpleasant experience that restricts households’ ability to have their desired number of children, women can react more negatively to the policies.
Second, the last column of Table 11 suggests rural parents, who experience greater declines in the number
of children (Table 4), are more negatively affected in terms of mental health. The reductions in having
children living nearby and in contacts and visits from children are also larger for rural parents (Table 7).
The mental health status of the rural elderly, therefore, calls for special attention. Rural suicide rates
among the elderly are three to five times higher than the urban rates (Li and Zheng 2009).
[Table 11 About Here]

5.4

Heterogeneous Effect of Family Planning

So far, our analysis has focused on the average treatment effect of family planning policies. A natural
next step would be understanding its heterogeneity—who is more affected by family planning? Because
the “Later, Longer, Fewer” policies impose uniform rules upon all households, we expect households with
25

higher initial fertility rates to experience greater shocks. We test this conjecture in two steps. In the first
step, we generate a counterfactual number of children for each household if there were no family planning
policies using the following equations:
Ni,p,c,t = γ0 + Γ (Urbani , Edui , FPPp,c ) + γ 2 Xi,p,c,t + Yeart + εi,p,c,t ,

(3)

bi,p,c,t = γ
b (Urbani , Edui , 0) + γ
b 2 Xi,p,c,t + Yeart .
N
b0 + Γ

(4)

Ni,p,c,t represents the number of children that the household ever give birth to,30 and function Γ(.) represents
all possible interactions among the three elements. By doing this, we allow the exposure to family planning
policies to have differential effects according to household’s hukou and education. Note that we purposefully
leave cohort fixed effects and provincial fixed effects uncontrolled for in equation (3) because including them
would absorb all the variations in FPPp,c . We, therefore, are only using the fertility variations generated by
Urbani and Edui (and their interactions). After estimating equation (3), we can obtain the counterfactual
bi,p,c,t ) by setting FPPp,c to zero (equation (4)). In our sample, N
b has a mean of 4.38,
number of children (N
b
which is 0.82 higher than the average number of children ever born, with a standard deviation of 0.63. N
is higher for rural households (4.67, versus 3.62 for urban households) and for those who did not finish a
junior high education (4.60, versus 3.78 for junior high graduates and above).
In the second step, we can exam the heterogeneous effect of family planning using the following specification:

bi,p,c,t + β3 FPPp,c × N
bi,p,c,t
yi,p,c,t = F β0 + β1 FPPp,c + β2 N


+β 4 Xi,p,c,t + f Agei,c,t + Provp + Yeart + εi,p,c,t .

(5)

Table 12 and Table 13 report the coefficients β3 for various outcomes. The analysis is consistent with our
conjecture that households with higher initial fertility are more affected (Table 12, column (1); Table 13,
columns (1) and (3)). Despite that they experience a greater increase in household consumption, they suffer
from a greater reduction in the probability of having children living nearby. Women with higher initial
fertility report greater increases in mental health issues. The heterogeneity is sizable. For example, if we
take having at least one child in a county/district as the dependent variable, we find that households that
b increased by one) would experience a greater decline of 2.43 (0.007×3.47)
have one more “initial” child (N
percentage points in that probability. The magnitude is about one-third of the average treatment of “Later,
Longer, Fewer” policies (Table 5). Following a similar calculation, we find that the effect of family planning
on women’s depression symptoms (measured by CES-D scale) would be amplified by 25% for a woman
30

Using the number of living children yields identical implications.

26

with one more initial child.
[Table 12 and Table 13 About Here]
Those pieces of findings are very close to previous rural-urban comparisons. Is the heterogeneity solely
driven by households’ hukou status? To answer this question, we add the interaction term Urbani × FPPp,c
to equation (5). Table 12 column (2) shows that the heterogeneous effects on living arrangements are fully
explained by rural-urban differences. However, regarding physical and mental health, the heterogeneity
persists or even become more salient when we control for the interaction between policy exposure and hukou
status (Table 13, columns (2) and (4)). Moreover, two additional results show up: if people have higher
initial fertility, men would report greater increases in depression symptoms and women would subjectively
rate her health poorer if they are more exposed to family planning policies.
We would like to add one additional remark here. If there were no family planning policies, households
with lower socioeconomic status (e.g., rural, less-educated) would tend to have more children. Children
also play a more important role in old-age support for this group of people because of their less accessibility
to public old-age security systems. Figure 4 shows that in 2015, only 25.7% of the urban elderly report
to financially rely on their children. The ratio is 72.6% for the rural elderly. Those people with higher
initial fertility rates who tend to be generally less able to handle external shocks, turn out to be the mostconstrained group when family planning policies impose some birth restrictions. We can see that family
planning may bring unintended consequences on welfare inequality.

6

Conclusions

What are the long-term consequences of family planning policies? Understanding this question is crucial
in designing population policies as an increasing number of countries start to adopt some kind of family
planning policy. China is among the earliest countries to initiate family planning, and its policies were
considered the most stringent in the world. China’s experience provides valuable opportunities for case
studies. By exploiting provincial heterogeneity in implementing the “Later, Longer, Fewer” policies, we
evaluate how exposure to the family planning policies changes people’s life in old age. Previous studies
generally find positive effects of family planning policies on parents’ consumption and health status, either
because the policies reduce a mother’s risk during childbirth or because they free up family resources
as a result of having fewer children to rear. However, the negative side gradually emerges as parents
turn older—there are fewer children that can take care of and accompany the elderly parents. This will
negatively affect the elderly’s physical and mental well-being.
Our empirical analysis brings good and bad news. The good news is that the physical well-being of the
27

elderly becomes slightly better as a consequence of family planning. We find that elderly parents spend
more on food and living expenditures. Mothers expect themselves to live longer and are less likely to suffer
from hypertension. Household medical expenditures also become smaller. Why does a smaller number
of children not necessarily threaten elderly parents’ material well-being? Because there are two channels
that can neutralize the effect of having fewer children. The first channel is the quantity-quality tradeoff.
The financial support from each child actually increases because children become better educated and earn
a higher income. The second channel is self-insurance through higher savings. Anticipating that they
will receive fewer transfers from children, parents can save more when young to prevent the downfall of
consumption in old age.
The bad news is that the mental well-being of the elderly parents becomes more worrisome. Under the
influence of the family planning policies, together with the rapid economic growth, children live further
away from and interact less frequently with their parents. Despite the better material conditions, elderly
parents feel more depressed. The negative effect on mental health is even more salient among mothers
and rural parents. What makes things worse is that children with higher “quality” provide even less
psychological support to their parents, probably because of their higher opportunity costs. To conclude,
our study calls for greater attention on elderly people’s social network and mental health status.
Our research has its own limitations. The empirical analysis mainly provides reduced-form estimations without a comprehensive analysis of the mechanisms. Our study involves many variables, whose
mechanisms can vary tremendously from each other. Future studies need to solve two challenges to better
understand how family planning affects people’s well-being in old age. First, many outcomes in old age
are cumulative ones (e.g., health). Strictly speaking, any event that takes place when a person is still
young can have persistent effects into his or her old age. Second, it is not sufficient to study only the
elderly people themselves if we wish to understand fully their well-being status. We also need to unveil
the complex parent-child interactions. Ideally, we not only need to know parents’ responses to the policy
changes, but we also need to know how children respond to their parents’ responses, parents’ higher-order
responses to their children’s responses, et cetera

28

References
Ahn, Namkee. 1994. “Effects of the One-Child Family Policy on Second and Third Births in Hebei,
Shaanxi and Shanghai.” Journal of Population Economics 7 (1): 63–78.
Ananat, Elizabeth Oltmans, and Daniel M Hungerman. 2012. “The Power of the Pill for the Next Generation: Oral Contraception’s Effects on Fertility, Abortion, and Maternal and Child Characteristics.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 94 (1): 37–51.
Angrist, Joshua D, and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2008. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
Companion. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Bailey, Martha J. 2006. “More Power to the Pill: the Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on Women’s Life
Cycle Labor Supply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (1): 289–320.
. 2010. ““Momma’s Got the Pill”: How Anthony Comstock and Griswold v. Connecticut Shaped
US Childbearing.” American Economic Review 100 (1): 98–129.
Bailey, Martha J, Brad Hershbein, and Amalia R Miller. 2012. “The Opt-in Revolution? Contraception
and the Gender Gap in Wages.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (3): 225–54.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Xin Meng, and Nancy Qian. 2010. “The Life Cycle Model and Household Savings:
Micro Evidence from Urban China.” Working Paper, Yale University.
Blake, Judith. 1981. “The Only Child in America: Prejudice versus Performance.” Population and
Development Review 7 (1): 43–54.
Boerma, Ties. 1987. “The Magnitude of the Maternal Mortality Problem in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Social
Science & Medicine 24 (6): 551–558.
Bradley, Margaret M, Maurizio Codispoti, Dean Sabatinelli, and Peter J Lang. 2001. “Emotion and
Motivation II: Sex Differences in Picture Processing.” Emotion 1 (3): 300–319.
Buber, Isabella, and Henriette Engelhardt. 2008. “Children’s Impact on the Mental Health of Their
Older Mothers and Fathers: Findings from the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe.”
European Journal of Ageing 5 (1): 31–45.
Bulte, Erwin, Nico Heerink, and Xiaobo Zhang. 2011. “China’s One-Child Policy and ‘the Mystery of
Missing Women’: Ethnic Minorities and Male-Biased Sex Ratios.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
Statistics 73 (1): 21–39.
Bures, Regina M, Tanya Koropeckyj-Cox, and Michael Loree. 2009. “Childlessness, Parenthood, and
Depressive Symptoms among Middle-aged and Older Adults.” Journal of Family Issues 30 (5): 670–
687.
Cáceres-Delpiano, Julio, and Marianne Simonsen. 2012. “The Toll of Fertility on Mothers’ Wellbeing.”
Journal of Health Economics 31 (5): 752–766.
Cai, Fang, John Giles, and Xin Meng. 2006. “How Well do Children Insure Parents against Low Retirement
Income? An Analysis Using Survey Data from Urban China.” Journal of Public Economics 90 (12):
2229–2255.
Cai, Yong. 2010. “China’s Below-Replacement Fertility: Government Policy or Socioeconomic Develop-

29

ment?” Population and Development Review 36 (3): 419–440.
Cameron, Lisa, Nisvan Erkal, Lata Gangadharan, and Xin Meng. 2013. “Little Emperors: Behavioral
Impacts of China’s One-Child Policy.” Science 339 (6122): 953–957.
Canning, David, and T Paul Schultz. 2012. “The Economic Consequences of Reproductive Health and
Family Planning.” The Lancet 380 (9837): 165–171.
Cappeliez, Philippe, and Robert J Flynn. 1993. “Implications for Assessment, the Understanding of Social
Etiology and Intervention.” In Depression and the Social Environment, edited by Philippe Cappeliez
and Robert J Flynn, 395–405. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Chen, Feinian, Guangya Liu, and Christine A Mair. 2011. “Intergenerational Ties in Context: Grandparents Caring for Grandchildren in China.” Social Forces 90 (2): 571–594.
Chen, Guodong, and Xiaoyan Lei. 2009. ““Fertility Effect” or “Supporting Effect?”—Quantity of Children
and Parental Health.” Frontiers of Economics in China 4 (4): 601–616.
Chen, Lincoln C, Melita C Gesche, Shamsa Ahmed, AI Chowdhury, and Wiley Henry Mosley. 1974.
“Maternal Mortality in Rural Bangladesh.” Studies in Family Planning 5 (11): 334–341.
Chen, Yi, and Yingfei Huang. 2018. “The Power of the Government: China’s Family Planning Leading. Group and the Fertility Decline since 1970.” GLO Discussion Paper Series 204, Global Labor
Organization (GLO).
Chentsova-Dutton, Yulia E, and Jeanne L Tsai. 2007. “Gender Differences in Emotional Response Among
European Americans and Hmong Americans.” Cognition and Emotion 21 (1): 162–181.
Choukhmane, Taha, Nicolas Coeurdacier, and Keyu Jin. 2016. “The One-Child Policy and Household
Savings.” Working Paper.
Chu, Leung-Wing, and Iris Chi. 2008. “Nursing Homes in China.” Journal of the American Medical
Directors Association 9 (4): 237–243.
Cleland, John, Stan Bernstein, Alex Ezeh, Anibal Faundes, Anna Glasier, and Jolene Innis. 2006. “Family
Planning: The Unfinished Agenda.” The Lancet 368 (9549): 1810–1827.
Coale, Ansley J., and Chen Sheng Li. 1987. Basic Data on Fertility in the Provinces of China, 1940–82.
East-West Population Inst.
Curtis, Chadwick C., Steven Lugauer, and Nelson C. Mark. 2015. “Demographic Patterns and Household
Saving in China.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (2): 58–94.
de Silva, Tiloka, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2017. “Population Control Policies and Fertility Convergence.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (4): 205–28.
Ding, Qu Jian, and Therese Hesketh. 2006. “Family Size, Fertility Preferences, and Sex Ratio in China
in the Era of the One Child Family Policy: Results from National Family Planning and Reproductive
Health Survey.” British Medical Journal 333 (7564): 371–373.
Ebenstein, Avraham. 2010. “The “Missing Girls” of China and the Unintended Consequences of the One
Child Policy.” Journal of Human Resources 45 (1): 87–115.

30

Edlund, Lena, Hongbin Li, Junjian Yi, and Junsen Zhang. 2013. “Sex Ratios and Crime: Evidence from
China.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (5): 1520–1534.
Else-Quest, Nicole M, Ashley Higgins, Carlie Allison, and Lindsay C Morton. 2012. “Gender Differences
in Self-Conscious Emotional Experience: A Meta-Analysis.” Psychological Bulletin 138 (5): 947–981.
Fischer, Agneta H, Patricia M Rodriguez Mosquera, Annelies EM Van Vianen, and Antony SR Manstead.
2004. “Gender and Culture Differences in Emotion.” Emotion 4 (1): 87–94.
Garcı́a, Jorge Luis. 2018. “The Household- and Aggregate-Level Fertility Consequences of China’s OneChild Policy.” Working Paper.
Ge, Suqin, Dennis Tao Yang, and Junsen Zhang. 2018. “Population Policies, Demographic Structural
Changes, and the Chinese Household Saving Puzzle.” European Economic Review 101:181–209.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F Katz. 2002. “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s
Career and Marriage Decisions.” Journal of Political Economy 110 (4): 730–770.
Gove, Walter R, and Michael R Geerken. 1977. “The Effect of Children and Employment on the Mental
Health of Married Men and Women.” Social Forces 56 (1): 66–76.
Grossman, Michele, and Wendy Wood. 1993. “Sex Differences in Intensity of Emotional Experience: a
Social Role Interpretation.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 65 (5): 1010–1022.
Gu, Hongzhang. 2009. Chinese Educated City Youth: The Whole Story (in Chinese). People’s Daily
Publishing House.
Hank, Karsten. 2010. “Childbearing History, Later-life Health, and Mortality in Germany.” Population
Studies 64 (3): 275–291.
Holmlund, Helena, Helmut Rainer, and Thomas Siedler. 2013. “Meet the Parents? Family Size and the
Geographic Proximity Between Adult Children and Older Mothers in Sweden.” Demography 50 (3):
903–931.
Huang, Wei. 2016. Fertility Restrictions and Life Cycle Outcomes: Evidence from the One Child Policy
in China. (Job Market Paper).
Huang, Wei, Xiaoyan Lei, and Ang Sun. 2016. “When Fewer Means More: Impact of One-Child Policy
on Education of Girls.” Working Paper, Harvard University.
Huang, Wei, Xiaoyan Lei, and Yaohui Zhao. 2016. “One-Child Policy and the Rise of Man-Made Twins.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (3): 467–476.
Huang, Wei, and Yi Zhou. 2015. “One-Child Policy, Marriage Distortion, and Welfare Loss.” IZA
Discussion Papers 9532, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Hull, Terence H. 1990. “Recent Trends in Sex Ratios at Birth in China.” Population and Development
Review 16 (1): 63–83.
Hurt, Lisa S, Carine Ronsmans, and Suzanne L Thomas. 2006. “The Effect of Number of Births on
Women’s Mortality: Systematic Review of the Evidence for Women who Have Completed their Childbearing.” Population Studies 60 (1): 55–71.

31

Idler, Ellen L, and Yael Benyamini. 1997. “Self-Rated Health and Mortality: A Review of Twenty-Seven
Community Studies.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 38 (1): 21–37.
Islam, Asadul, and Russell Smyth. 2015. “Do Fertility Control Policies Affect Health in Old Age?
Evidence from China’s One-Child Experiment.” Health Economics 24 (5): 601–616.
Jia, Ruixue, and Torsten Persson. 2017. “Individual vs. Social Motives in Identity Choice: Theory and
Evidence from China.” Working Paper.
Joshi, Shareen, and T Paul Schultz. 2013. “Family Planning and Women’s and Children’s Health: Longterm Consequences of an Outreach Program in Matlab, Bangladesh.” Demography 50 (1): 149–180.
Kelsey, Jennifer L, Marilie D Gammon, and Esther M John. 1993. “Reproductive Factors and Breast
Cancer.” Epidemiologic Reviews 15 (1): 36–47.
Kruk, Kai Eberhard, and Steffen Reinhold. 2014. “The Effect of Children on Depression in Old Age.”
Social Science & Medicine 100:1–11.
Lee, Jaerim, and Jean W Bauer. 2013. “Motivations for Providing and Utilizing Child Care by Grandmothers in South Korea.” Journal of Marriage and Family 75 (2): 381–402.
Lee, Yean-Ju, and Zhenyu Xiao. 1998. “Children’s Support for Elderly Parents in Urban and Rural
China: Results from a National Survey.” Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology 13 (1): 39–62.
Lei, Xiaoyan, John Giles, Yuqing Hu, Albert Part, John Strauss, and Yaohui Zhao. 2012. “Patterns
and Correlates of Intergenerational Nontime Transfers: Evidence from CHARLS.” In Aging in Asia:
Findings From New and Emerging Data Initiatives, edited by James Smith and Malay Majmundar,
207–227. Washington DC: National Academies Press.
Lei, Xiaoyan, John Strauss, Meng Tian, and Yaohui Zhao. 2015. “Living Arrangements of the Elderly in
China: Evidence from the CHARLS National Baseline.” China Economic Journal 8 (3): 191–214.
Li, Bingjing, and Hongliang Zhang. 2017. “Does Population Control Lead to Better Child Quality?
Evidence from China’s One-Child Policy Enforcement.” Journal of Comparative Economics 45 (2):
246–260.
Li, Hong, and Martin B Tracy. 1999. “Family Support, Financial Needs, and Health Care Needs of Rural
Elderly in China: A Field Study.” Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology 14 (4): 357–371.
Li, Hongbin, Junjian Yi, and Junsen Zhang. 2011. “Estimating the Effect of the One-Child Policy on the
Sex Ratio Imbalance in China: Identification Based on the Difference-in-Differences.” Demography 48
(4): 1535–1557.
Li, Hongbin, Junsen Zhang, and Yi Zhu. 2005. “The Effect of the One-Child Policy on Fertility in China:
Identification Based on the Differences-in-Differences.” Discussion Papers 00019, Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Department of Economics.
. 2008. “The Quantity-Quality Trade-Off of Children in a Developing Country: Identification
Using Chinese Twins.” Demography 45 (1): 223–243.
Li, Hongbin, and Hui Zheng. 2009. “Ultrasonography and Sex Ratios in China.” Asian Economic Policy
Review 4 (1): 121–137.

32

Li, Xia, Zeping Xiao, and Shifu Xiao. 2009. “Suicide Among the Elderly in Mainland China.” Psychogeriatrics 9 (2): 62–66.
Liang, Jimin, and Shengli Chen. 1993. Data Analysis of National Fertility and Birth Control Survey,
Volumn 3—Fertility and Birth Control (in Chinese). China Population Publishing House.
Liu, Haoming. 2014. “The Quality-Quantity Trade-Off: Evidence from the Relaxation of China’s OneChild Policy.” Journal of Population Economics 27 (2): 565–602.
Logan, John R, and Fuqin Bian. 1999. “Family Values and Coresidence with Married Children in Urban
China.” Social Forces 77 (4): 1253–1282.
Loh, Charis, and Elizabeth J Remick. 2015. “China’s Skewed Sex Ratio and the One-Child Policy.” The
China Quarterly 222:295–319.
Lu, Bei, Xiaoting Liu, and John Piggott. 2015. “Informal Long Term Care in China and Population
Ageing: Evidence and Policy Implications.” Population Review 54 (2): 28–41.
Lu, Yu, and Zhenwu Zhai. 2009. Sixty Years of New China Population (in Chinese). China Population
Publishing House.
Lumsdaine, Robin L, and Stephanie JC Vermeer. 2015. “Retirement Timing of Women and the Role of
Care Responsibilities for Grandchildren.” Demography 52 (2): 433–454.
Ma, Sen, and Fangqi Wen. 2016. “Who Coresides with Parents? An Analysis Based on Sibling Comparative Advantage.” Demography 53 (3): 623–647.
McElroy, Marjorie, and Dennis Tao Yang. 2000. “Carrots and Sticks: Fertility Effects of China’s Population Policies.” American Economic Review 90 (2): 389–392.
Menken, Jane, Linda Duffy, and Randall Kuhn. 2003. “Childbearing and Women’s Survival: New
Evidence from Rural Bangladesh.” Population and Development Review 29 (3): 405–426.
Miller, Grant. 2010. “Contraception as Development? New Evidence from Family Planning in Colombia.”
Economic Journal 120 (545): 709–736.
Miller, Grant, and Kimberly Singer Babiarz. 2016. “Family Planning Program Effects: Evidence from
Microdata.” Population and Development Review 42 (1): 7–26.
Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security. 2016. 2016 China Labor Statistical Yearbook.
Mommaerts, Corina. 2018. “Are Coresidence and Nursing Homes Substitutes? Evidence from Medicaid
Spend-down Provisions.” Journal of Health Economics 59:125–138.
Myers, Caitlin Knowles. 2017. “The Power of Abortion Policy: Reexamining the Effects of Young
Women’s Access to Reproductive Control.” Journal of Political Economy 125 (6): 2178–2224.
Ness, Roberta B, Helena M Schotland, Katherine M Flegal, and Frances S Shofer. 1994. “Reproductive
History and Coronary Heart Disease Risk in Women.” Epidemiologic Reviews 16 (2): 298–314.
Oliveira, Jaqueline. 2016. “The Value of Children: Inter-generational Support, Fertility, and Human
Capital.” Journal of Development Economics 120:1–16.
Peng, Peiyun. 1997. Encyclopedia of Chinese Family Planning (in Chinese). China Population Publishing
33

House.
Pop-Eleches, Cristian. 2006. “The Impact of an Abortion Ban on Socioeconomic Outcomes of Children:
Evidence from Romania.” Journal of Political Economy 114 (4): 744–773.
Poston, Dudley, and Baochang Gu. 1987. “Socioeconomic Development, Family Planning, and Fertility
in China.” Demography 24 (4): 531–551.
Qian, Nancy. 2009. “Quantity-Quality and the One Child Policy: The Only-Child Disadvantage in School
Enrollment in Rural China.” Working paper 14973, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Qin, Xuezheng, Castiel Chen Zhuang, and Rudai Yang. 2017. “Does the One-Child Policy Improve Children’s Human Capital in Urban China? A Regression Discontinuity Design.” Journal of Comparative
Economics 45 (2): 287–303.
Read, Sanna, Emily Grundy, and Douglas A Wolf. 2011. “Fertility History, Health, and Health Changes
in Later Life: a Panel Study of British Women and Men Born 1923–49.” Population Studies 65 (2):
201–215.
Rose, Elaina. 2000. “Gender Bias, Credit Constraints and Time Allocation in Rural India.” Economic
Journal 110 (465): 738–758.
Rosenzweig, Mark, and Junsen Zhang. 2014. “Co-residence, Life-Cycle Savings and Inter-generational
Support in Urban China.” NBER working papers 20057, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Junsen Zhang. 2009. “Do Population Control Policies Induce More Human
Capital Investment? Twins, Birth Weight and China’s “One-Child” Policy.” Review of Economic
Studies 76 (3): 1149–1174.
Ross, John, and John Stover. 2001. “The Family Planning Program Effort Index: 1999 Cycle.” International Family Planning Perspectives 27 (3): 119–129.
Scharping, Thomas. 2003. Birth Control in China 1949–2000. New York: Routledge Curzon.
Schultz, T. Paul. 2008. Chapter 52 of Population Policies, Fertility, Women’s Human Capital, and
Child Quality, edited by T. Paul Schultz and John A. Strauss, Volume 4 of Handbook of Development
Economics, 3249–3303. Elsevier.
Schultz, T. Paul, and Yi Zeng. 1995. “Fertility of Rural China. Effects of Local Family Planning and
Health Programs.” Journal of Population Economics 8 (4): 329–350.
Spence, Naomi J. 2008. “The Long-Term Consequences of Childbearing: Physical and Psychological
Well-being of Mothers in Later Life.” Research on Aging 30 (6): 722–751.
Steingrimsdottir, Herdis. 2016. “Reproductive Rights and the Career Plans of US College Freshmen.”
Labour Economics 43:29–41.
Strauss, John, and Duncan Thomas. 1998. “Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development.” Journal of
Economic Literature 36 (2): 766–817.
Sun, Rongjun. 2002. “Old Age Support in Contemporary Urban China from Both Parents’ and Children’s
Perspectives.” Research on Aging 24 (3): 337–359.

34

Umberson, Debra, and Walter R Gove. 1989. “Parenthood and Psychological Well-being: Theory,
Measurement, and Stage in the Family Life Course.” Journal of Family Issues 10 (4): 440–462.
Upadhyay, Ushma D, Jessica D Gipson, Mellissa Withers, Shayna Lewis, Erica J Ciaraldi, Ashley Fraser,
Megan J Huchko, and Ndola Prata. 2014. “Women’s Empowerment and Fertility: a Review of the
Literature.” Social Science & Medicine 115:111–120.
Walder,
Andrew
G.
2017.
China
Political
Events
url=https://stanford.app.box.com/s/1p228gewy2pjd3817ksq9kd4d6cz3jy8.

Dataset,

1966–1971.

Walder, Andrew G., and Yang Su. 2003. “The Cultural Revolution in the Countryside: Scope, Timing
and Human Impact.” The China Quarterly 173:74–99.
Wang, Fei. 2016. “Using New Measures to Reassess the Fertility Effects of China’s Family Planning
Policies.” Working Paper.
Wang, Fei, Liqiu Zhao, and Zhong Zhao. 2017. “China’s Family Planning Policies and Their Labor
Market Consequences.” Journal of Population Economics 30 (1): 31–68.
Wei, Shang-Jin, and Xiaobo Zhang. 2011. “The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence from Rising Sex
Ratios and Savings Rates in China.” Journal of Political Economy 119 (3): 511–564.
Weng, Haoling H, Lori A Bastian, Donald H Taylor Jr, Barry K Moser, and Truls Ostbye. 2004. “Number
of Children Associated with Obesity in Middle-Aged Women and Men: Results from the Health and
Retirement Study.” Journal of Women’s Health 13 (1): 85–91.
Whyte, Martin K., Feng Wang, and Yong Cai. 2015. “Challenging Myths about China’s One-Child
Policy.” The China Journal 74:144–159.
Whyte, Martin King. 2005. “Continuity and Change in Urban Chinese Family Life.” The China Journal
53:9–33.
Wu, Xiaoyu, and Lixing Li. 2012. “Family Size and Maternal Health: Evidence from the One-Child
Policy in China.” Journal of Population Economics 25 (4): 1341–1364.
Zeng, Zhen, and Yu Xie. 2014. “The Effects of Grandparents on Children’s Schooling: Evidence from
Rural China.” Demography 51 (2): 599–617.
Zhang, F. Qian. 2004. “Economic Transition and New Patterns of Parent-Adult Child Coresidence in
Urban China.” Journal of Marriage and Family 66 (5): 1231–1245.
Zhang, Junsen. 1990. “Socioeconomic Determinants of Fertility in China.” Journal of Population Economics 3 (2): 105–123.
. 2017. “The Evolution of China’s One-Child Policy and Its Effects on Family Outcomes.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 31 (1): 141–160.
Zhang, Xianglan, Xiao-Ou Shu, Yu-Tang Gao, Gong Yang, Honglan Li, and Wei Zheng. 2009. “Pregnancy,
Childrearing, and Risk of Stroke in Chinese Women.” Stroke 40 (8): 2680–2684.
Zhao, Yaohui. 1997. “Labor Migration and Returns to Rural Education in China.” American Journal of
Agricultural Economics 79 (4): 1278–1287.

35

Zhao, Yaohui, John Strauss, Gonghuan Yang, John Giles, Peifeng Hu, Yisong Hu, Xiaoyan Lei, Albert Park, James P Smith, and Yafeng Wang. 2013. “China Health and Retirement Longitudinal
Study—2011–2012 National Baseline Users’ Guide.” Beijing: National School of Development, Peking
University.
Zhong, Bao-Liang, Helen FK Chiu, and Yeates Conwell. 2016. “Elderly Suicide Trends in the Context of
Transforming China, 1987–2014.” Scientific Reports 6:37724.
Zimmer, Zachary, and Kim Korinek. 2008. “Does Family Size Predict Whether an Older Adult Lives
with or Proximate to an Adult Child in the Asia-Pacific Region?” Asian Population Studies 4 (2):
135–159.
. 2010. “Shifting Coresidence Near the End of Life: Comparing Decedents and Survivors of a
Follow-up Study in China.” Demography 47 (3): 537–554.
Zimmer, Zachary, and Julia Kwong. 2003. “Family Size and Support of Older Adults in Urban and Rural
China: Current Effects and Future Implications.” Demography 40 (1): 23–44.

36

Figures
Figure 1: National Total Fertility Rate and Sex Ratio at Birth, 1949–2002

8

118

6
112
4

109
106

Sex Ratio at Birth

Total Fertility Rate

115

2
103
0
1950

1960

1970

Year

1980

Total Fertility Rate

1990

2000

100

Sex Ratio at Birth

Data source:
Total fertility rate 1949–2002: Lu and Zhai (2009) “Sixty Years of New China Population.”
Sex ratio at birth 1960–1988: Liang and Chen (1993).
Sex ratio at birth 1989–2000: China Population Statistics Yearbook.

Figure 2: Years of Establishment of Provincial Family Planning Leading Group

Year
Missing
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975

37

Figure 3: Trends of Total Fertility Rate, Early Establishment Provinces versus Late Establishment
Provinces

Total Fertility Rate

0.2
5
0.0
4
-0.2
3

2
1966

-0.4

1968

1970

1972

1974
Year

1976

1978

1980

Differences in TFR

0.4

6

-0.6
1982

TFR - Leading Group established 1970-1971
TFR - Leading Group established 1973-1975
Differences between Two Groups

Figure 4: Answers to “Who do you think you can rely on financially for old-age support?”

1.0

Share

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
2011

2013
Year
Rural: rely on children
Urban: rely on children

Source: authors’ calculations based on CHARLS.

38

2015
Rural: rely on pension
Urban: rely on pension

Figure 5: Example of Constructing the Exposure to Policy (for cohort born in 1945)

Age-Specific Fertility Rate

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

15

20

25

30

Age

Shandong

39

35

40
Beijing

45

50

Tables
Table 1: Predictions of the Theoretical Framework

Period

Variable

Effect of Lower N

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Young

Consumption (Cy )
Physical Health (h1,y )
Mental Health (h2,y )
Savings (Ay )

Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive

(5)
(6)
(7)

Old

Consumption (Co )
Physical Health (h1,o )
Mental Health (h2,o )

Positive
More negative than (2)
More negative than (6)

40

Table 2: Summary Statistics of Parents
Level

Individual

Level

Household

41

Variables

Mean

S.D.

Obs.

Variables

Mean

S.D.

Obs.

Age
Male
Education
Illiterate
Some Elementary School
Elementary School
Middle School
High School and Above
Self-rated Satisfaction
Completely satisfied
Very satisfied
Somewhat satisfied
Not very satisfied
Not at all satisfied
Self-rated Health
Excellent
Very good
Good
Fair
Poor
Measures of Health
Changes of Living 10–15 More Years
BMI
Underweight
ADL
IADL
Hypertension
CES-D scale

69.909
0.468

6.767
0.499

16657
16694

0.352
0.182
0.235
0.110
0.064

0.478
0.386
0.424
0.313
0.244

16695
16695
16695
16695
16695

0.298
2.982
1.27
3.558
3.516
1964.0

0.458
4.198
0.444
1.647
1.667
3511.6

11119
11119
11119
11119
11119
10915

0.038
0.275
0.578
0.087
0.022

0.192
0.446
0.494
0.282
0.148

14502
14502
14502
14502
14502

Widow
Couple’s Age Gap
Hukou
Number of Children Ever Born
Number of Living Children
Annual Net Transfer from Children (RMB)
Living Arrangement
Children in Home
Children in Village/Community
Children in County/District
Annual Household Expenditure
Total Expenditure (RMB)
Food Expenditure (RMB)
Living Expenditure (RMB)
Health Expenditure (RMB)

0.403
0.69
0.885

0.491
0.463
0.32

11119
11119
11119

22169.9
8977.5
3816.7
2661.9

23639.5
10549.7
9438.3
8953.5

8130
8130
8130
8130

0.033
0.101
0.300
0.371
0.194

0.180
0.302
0.458
0.483
0.396

16308
16308
16308
16308
16308

0.486
23.102
0.082
0.225
0.508
0.323
7.631

0.256
3.453
0.274
0.835
1.166
0.468
6.428

12745
12801
12801
16695
16695
13242
16695

Table 3: Summary Statistics of Children

Level

Children

Variables

Mean

S.D.

Obs.

Age
Male
Annual Net Transfer to Parents (RMB)
Education
Illiterate
Did Not Finish the Elementary School
Elementary School
Middle School
High School and Above
Frequency of Visiting Parents
30 times a month
10–15 times a month
4 times a month
Twice a month
Once a month
Less than once amonth
Almost never
Frequency of Contacting Parents
30 times a month
10–15 times a month
4 times a month
Twice a month
Once a month
Less than once amonth
Almost never
Annual Income of Child and Child-in-law
Under 2000 RMB
2000–20000 RMB
20000–50000 RMB
Above 50000 RMB

42.244
0.531
597.3

8.744
0.499
1241.8

40273
41828
34399

0.079
0.137
0.262
0.313
0.209

0.269
0.344
0.44
0.464
0.407

41340
41340
41340
41340
41340

0.214
0.071
0.084
0.081
0.118
0.39
0.042

0.41
0.257
0.277
0.273
0.323
0.488
0.201

33969
33969
33969
33969
33969
33969
33969

0.059
0.104
0.152
0.146
0.172
0.112
0.253

0.236
0.306
0.359
0.353
0.377
0.316
0.435

25549
25549
25549
25549
25549
25549
25549

0.118
0.359
0.301
0.222

0.323
0.48
0.459
0.416

26963
26963
26963
26963

42

Table 4: Effect of Family Planning on Fertility
Sample

All
(1)

M’s Exposure to LLF
M’s Exposure to OCP
F’s Exposure to LLF

Observations
Sample Mean
M’s Exposure to LLF
43

M’s Exposure to OCP
F’s Exposure to LLF

Observations
Sample Mean
Other Controls
Age FE
Year FE
Province FE

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Panel A: Number of Living Children
-0.245***
-0.242***
-0.347***
(0.0412)
(0.0679)
(0.0681)
-0.178*** -0.00435
(0.0442)
(0.0689)
-0.173***
0.105
(0.0497)
(0.0750)
5,115
3.303

5,115
3.303

5,115
3.303

4,822
3.267

4,822
3.267

Panel B: Number of Children Ever Born
-0.325***
-0.341***
-0.428***
(0.0450)
(0.0667)
(0.0691)
-0.224***
0.0213
(0.0454)
(0.0643)
-0.227***
0.115
(0.0525)
(0.0746)

Rural

Urban

(6)

(7)

-0.292***
(0.0480)

-0.119
(0.0782)

3,733
3.498

1,381
2.776

-0.373***
(0.0540)

-0.175**
(0.0779)

5,115
3.440

5,115
3.440

5,115
3.440

4,822
3.397

4,822
3.397

3,733
3.681

1,381
2.789

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All regressions are OLS. Standard errors are clustered at cohort-province level. Other control
variables include widow, couple’s age gap, hukou, and education.

Table 5: Effect of Family Planning on Living Arrangements (conditional on having at least one living child)

Sample

All

Rural

Urban

(1)

(2)

(3)

Panel A: Children in Home
M’s Exposure to LLF
0.00236
0.00636
(0.0113)
(0.0126)
Observations
Sample Mean

10,755
0.410

7,900
0.422

-0.0130
(0.0214)
2,854
0.378

Panel B: Children in Village/Community
M’s Exposure to LLF -0.0254** -0.0326*** -0.00976
(0.0104)
(0.0103)
(0.0221)
Observations
Sample Mean

10,752
0.699

7,897
0.727

2,854
0.622

Panel C: Children in County/District
M’s Exposure to LLF -0.0222*** -0.0251*** -0.0127
(0.00661)
(0.00745) (0.0134)
Observations
Sample Mean
Other Controls
Age FE
Year FE
Province FE

10,752
0.893

7,871
0.894

2,828
0.886

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All regressions are Probit model (average marginal
effect reported). Standard errors are clustered at cohort-province level. Other control variables include widow, couple’s age
gap, hukou, and education.

44

Table 6: Effect of Family Planning on Inter Vivos Transfers (conditional on having at least one child
outside the household)

Sample

All

Rural

Urban

(1)

(2)

(3)

Panel A: (Parents’ Perspective) Net Transfer from Children
M’s Exposure to LLF
-114.1
-12.23
-326.9
(114.5)
(117.3)
(254.0)
Observations
Sample Mean

10,004
2127

7,414
2230

2,589
1830

Panel B: (Children’ Perspective) Net Transfer to Parents
M’s Exposure to LLF
24.24
13.55
91.41*
(20.97)
(22.46)
(49.23)
Observations
Sample Mean

28,976
599.6

22,601
592.1

6,375
626.2

Panel C: (Children’ Perspective) Net Transfer to Parents
Conditional on Children’s Characteristics
M’s Exposure to LLF
12.22
-7.026
87.98*
(18.52)
(19.41)
(48.10)
Observations
Sample Mean
Other Controls
Age FE
Year FE
Province FE

27,666
606.3

21,482
600.4

6,184
626.8

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All regressions are OLS. Standard errors are
clustered at cohort-province level. Other control variables include widow, parents’ age gap, hukou, and education. Children’s
characteristics include age, gender, education, and income.

45

Table 7: Effect of Family Planning on Children’s Attachment to Parents (conditional on having at least one child outside the household)

Sample

All

Rural

Urban

Children’s Characteristics Not Controlled
(1)
M’s Exposure to LLF

Observations
Sample Mean
M’s Exposure to LLF

46

Observations
Sample Mean
Children’s Characteristics
Other Controls
Age FE
Year FE
Province FE

(2)

(3)

All

22,756
9.311

6,702
11.37

Urban

Children’s Characteristics Controlled
(4)

Panel A: Monthly Contacts with Parents
-0.889***
-0.948***
-0.430
-0.574***
(0.216)
(0.240)
(0.439)
(0.222)
29,458
9.780

Rural

28,176
9.837

Panel B: Monthly Visits to Parents
-0.867***
-0.929***
-0.687
-0.554**
(0.236)
(0.257)
(0.458)
(0.233)

(5)

(6)

-0.546**
(0.242)

-0.425
(0.475)

21,663
9.362

6,513
11.42

-0.478*
(0.251)

-0.755
(0.508)

28,582
8.036

22,070
7.763

6,512
8.959

27,345
8.067

21,017
7.787

6,328
8.995

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All regressions are OLS. Standard errors are clustered at cohort-province level. Other control
variables include widow, parents’ age gap, hukou, and education. Children’s characteristics include age, gender, education, and income.

Table 8: Effect of Family Planning on Household Expenditures (conditional on not co-residing with children)

Sample

All

Rural

Urban

(1)

(2)

(3)

Panel A: log(Annual Total Expenditure)
M’s Exposure to LLF
0.0256
0.0362
-0.0268
(0.0272) (0.0329) (0.0508)
Observations
Sample Mean

4,799
19132

3,380
15670

1,417
27406

Panel B: log(Food Expenditure)
M’s Exposure to LLF 0.104** 0.124**
0.0413
(0.0466) (0.0594) (0.0632)
Observations
Sample Mean

4,799
8047

3,380
6219

1,417
12410

Panel C: log(Living Expenditure)
M’s Exposure to LLF 0.0728* 0.0824*
0.0485
(0.0388) (0.0479) (0.0669)
Observations
Sample Mean

4,799
3185

3,380
2714

1,417
4312

Panel D: log(Health Expenditure)
M’s Exposure to LLF -0.137** -0.174** -0.00541
(0.0672) (0.0763) (0.127)
Observations
Sample Mean
Other Controls
Age FE
Year FE
Province FE

4,799
2729

3,380
2353

1,417
3632

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All regressions are OLS. Standard errors are clustered
at cohort-province level. Other control variables include widow, couple’s age gap, hukou, and education.

47

Table 9: Effect of Family Planning on Parents’ Health Status

Dependent Variables

M’s Exposure to LLF

Observations
M’s Exposure to LLF

48

Observations
Other Controls
Age FE
Year FE
Province FE

Self-Rated
Satisfaction

Self-Rated
Health

Chances of
Living 11–15
More Years

BMI

Underweight

ADL

IADL

Hypetension

CES-D
Scale

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.0157
(0.0262)

0.0160
(0.0390)

-0.0207
(0.0295)

-0.0159
(0.0431)

-0.00150
(0.0220)

0.409*
(0.235)

6,790
2.780

7,411
3.525

7,530
0.176

7,530
0.385

6,101
0.289

7,530
7.034

-0.0150
(0.0428)

-0.00975
(0.0557)

0.0128
(0.0613)

-0.0765
(0.0777)

-0.0626**
(0.0280)

1.064***
(0.369)

7,209
2.791

8,054
3.662

6,197
0.466

6,370
23.52

6,267
0.0748

8,266
0.203

8,266
0.505

6,597
0.345

8,266
8.837

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Panel A: Father
0.0135
-0.0253
-0.0109
(0.0116)
(0.268)
(0.0134)
6,138
0.504

5,920
22.63

5,830
0.0873

Panel B: Mother
0.0379**
-0.0517
-0.0118
(0.0159)
(0.242)
(0.0154)

Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Regression model: variables underweight and hypertension use Probit regression (average marginal
effect reported); other variables use OLS. Standard errors are clustered at cohort-province level. Other control variables include widow, couple’s age gap, hukou, and
education.

Table 10: Effect of Family Planning on Parents’ Depression Symptoms
Dependent Variables

M’s Exposure to LLF

Observations
M’s Exposure to LLF

49

Observations
Other Controls
Age FE
Year FE
Province FE

Bothered
by
Trifles

Difficulty
in
Concentration

Felt
Depressed

Difficulty
in doing
Everything

Felt
Fearful

Insomnia

Felt
Lonely

Could not
Continue
Life

Felt
Unhappy

Felt
Hopeless

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.000783
(0.0217)

-0.00536
(0.0173)

-0.00710
(0.0201)

0.00962
(0.0209)

0.0210
(0.0138)

0.0152
(0.0110)

0.0239
(0.0235)

-0.0189
(0.0192)

7,017
0.233

6,950
0.239

7,014
0.232

7,059
0.276

6,959
0.133

6,914
0.0887

7,037
0.362

6,864
0.494

0.0132
(0.0310)

-0.00165
(0.0262)

0.0203
(0.0309)

-0.0491
(0.0304)

0.0364
(0.0247)

0.0188
(0.0197)

0.0267
(0.0290)

0.0218
(0.0290)

7,504
0.341

7,388
0.328

7,477
0.343

7,499
0.367

7,589
0.135

7,623
0.441

7,541
0.220

7,475
0.142

7,569
0.402

7,278
0.509

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Panel A: Father
0.0339*
0.00620
(0.0190)
(0.00865)
7,013
0.287

6,957
0.0627

Panel B: Mother
0.0643**
0.00558
(0.0278)
(0.0200)

Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Regression model: variables underweight and hypertension use Probit regression (average marginal
effect reported); other variables use OLS. Standard errors are clustered at cohort-province level. Other control variables include widow, couple’s age gap, hukou, and
education.
The ten symptoms are: was bothered by things that don’t usually bother me; had trouble keeping my mind on what I was doing; felt depressed; felt everything I did was
an effort; felt fearful; sleep was restless; felt lonely; could not get “going”; was unhappy; felt hopeless about the future.

Table 11: Effect of Family Planning on Parents’ Health Status (Cont.)
Dependent Variables

M’s Exposure to LLF

Observations
M’s Exposure to LLF

Observations
M’s Exposure to LLF

50
Observations
M’s Exposure to LLF

Observations
Other Controls
Age FE
Year FE
Province FE

Self-Rated
Satisfaction

Self-Rated
Health

(1)

(2)

Chances of
Living 11–15
More Years

BMI

Underweight

ADL

IADL

Hypetension

CES-D
Scale

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

-0.0172
(0.0328)

0.0262
(0.0463)

-0.00558
(0.0242)

0.739***
(0.278)

5,544
0.180

5,544
0.406

4,640
0.282

5,544
7.567

0.00565
(0.0580)

-0.100
(0.0868)

0.00711
(0.0446)

-0.371
(0.413)

1,986
0.164

1,986
0.329

1,452
0.311

1,986
5.544

-0.0360
(0.0562)

-0.190**
(0.0948)

-0.0581*
(0.0321)

1.112**
(0.436)

6,493
0.211

6,493
0.546

5,339
0.346

6,493
9.286

0.0347
(0.0987)

0.118
(0.104)

-0.0615
(0.0540)

0.987
(0.703)

Panel A: Father, Rural
0.0179
-0.390
0.00134
(0.0119)
(0.346)
(0.0166)

0.0473
(0.0311)

0.0616
(0.0463)

4,961
2.788

5,459
3.567

-0.0615
(0.0501)

-0.111
(0.0740)

1,829
2.759

1,952
3.408

0.0102
(0.0544)

0.0594
(0.0689)

5,625
2.802

6,334
3.702

-0.102
(0.0806)

-0.165*
(0.0932)

1,584
2.751

1,720
3.516

1,422
0.537

1,237
24.37

797
0.0740

1,773
0.175

1,773
0.356

1,246
0.343

1,773
7.192

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

4,432
0.480

4,506
22.23

4,459
0.101

Panel B: Father, Urban
0.00202
0.949***
-0.0470***
(0.0243)
(0.299)
(0.0175)
1,706
0.566

1,414
23.92

1,096
0.0538

Panel C: Mother, Rural
0.0274
-0.286
-0.00816
(0.0175)
(0.273)
(0.0175)
4,775
0.445

5,133
23.31

5,064
0.0808

Panel D: Mother, Urban
0.0820***
0.422
-0.0326
(0.0246)
(0.471)
(0.0498)

Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Regression model: variables underweight and hypertension use Probit regression (average marginal
effect reported); other variables use OLS. Standard errors are clustered at cohort-province level. Other control variables include age, gender, widow, hukou, and education.

Table 12: Heterogeneous Effect of Family Planning on Living Arrangements, Net Transfers from Children,
and Household Consumption

Category

Living Arrangement

Dependent Variable

Children in Home
Children in Village/Community
Children in County/District

Coef of Policy Exposure
×Predicted Fertility
(1)

(2)

-0.007
(0.006)
-0.013***
(0.005)
-0.007**
(0.003)

0.014*
(0.008)
0.006
(0.007)
0.001
(0.004)

Net Transfers from Children

Net Transfers from Children

-4.239
(54.223)

69.445
(75.093)

Household Consumption

log(Annual Total Expenditure)

0.019*
(0.010)
0.029
(0.019)
0.034**
(0.013)
-0.034
(0.030)

0.006
(0.017)
0.015
(0.029)
0.027
(0.021)
-0.055
(0.052)

N

Y

log(Food Expenditure)
log(Living Expenditure)
log(Health Expenditure)
Policy Exposure×Hukou

Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Only the coefficients (or the marginal effects) β3 from
equation (5) are reported. We use OLS for all continuous dependent variables and Probit for all binary variables. Standard
errors are clustered at cohort-province level.

51

Table 13: Heterogeneous Effect of Family Planning on Physical and Mental Health

Category

Dependent Variable

Coef of Policy Exposure
×Predicted Fertility
Female

Male
Physical Health

Self-Rated Satisfaction
Self-Rated Health
Chances of Living
11–15 More Years
BMI
Underweight
ADL
IADL
Hypetension

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.003
(0.009)
0.001
(0.013)
0.005
(0.004)
0.001
(0.059)
0.026
(0.031)
0.003
(0.013)
0.008
(0.018)
0.000
(0.021)

0.002
(0.015)
-0.018
(0.022)
0.004
(0.006)
-0.012
(0.070)
0.022
(0.040)
-0.016
(0.021)
-0.018
(0.029)
0.016
(0.034)

0.005
(0.012)
0.021
(0.015)
0.001
(0.004)
-0.063
(0.063)
0.008
(0.033)
0.023
(0.015)
-0.005
(0.019)
-0.013
(0.023)

0.017
(0.014)
0.038*
(0.020)
-0.000
(0.005)
-0.042
(0.078)
-0.017
(0.042)
0.020
(0.017)
-0.007
(0.027)
-0.013
(0.027)

Mental Health

CES-D Scale

0.055
(0.071)

0.233**
(0.116)

0.266***
(0.095)

0.295**
(0.116)

Depression Symptoms

Bothered by Trifles

0.005
(0.006)
0.002
(0.006)
0.001
(0.006)
0.007
(0.006)
0.006*
(0.003)
-0.011*
(0.006)
0.003
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.004)
-0.005
(0.006)
-0.004
(0.007)

0.010
(0.008)
0.013
(0.009)
0.013
(0.008)
0.008
(0.009)
0.005
(0.004)
0.002
(0.009)
0.014**
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.006)
0.001
(0.009)
-0.012
(0.011)

0.005
(0.008)
0.006
(0.007)
-0.000
(0.007)
0.012*
(0.007)
0.010**
(0.005)
0.007
(0.007)
-0.000
(0.006)
0.011**
(0.005)
0.007
(0.007)
0.012
(0.007)

0.003
(0.009)
0.005
(0.008)
0.003
(0.008)
0.021**
(0.009)
0.011*
(0.006)
0.001
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.008)
0.010*
(0.006)
0.020**
(0.009)
0.009
(0.009)

N

Y

N

Y

Difficulty in Concentration
Felt Depressed
Difficulty in Doing
Everything
Felt Fearful
Insomnia
Felt Lonely
Could not Continue Life
Felt Unhappy
Felt Hopeless
Policy Exposure×Hukou

Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Only the coefficients (or the marginal effects) β3 from
equation (5) are reported. We use OLS for all continuous dependent variables and Probit for all binary variables. Standard
errors are clustered at cohort-province level.

52

Appendix A: Robustness against other Contemporaneous Events
This appendix discusses the robustness of our estimated effects of family planning policies against other
contemporary events. The key variation we use in our empirical analysis is the establishment years of
provincial Family Planning Leading Group, who was responsible for enforcing the “Later, Longer, Fewer”
policies. Because the establishment of the provincial leading groups spanned from 1970 to 1975, the two
most important contemporaneous events are the Cultural Revolution and the Sent-Down Movement. More
importantly, both historical events can affect the fertility decision directly. The Cultural Revolution from
1966 to 1976 was a catastrophic political event for large sections of the population, with the number of
victims (fatalities plus those imprisoned or persecuted) estimated to be close to 30 million (Walder and Su
2003). The Cultural Revolution brought violence and uncertainties. If we believe fertility is a procyclical
decision, the Cultural Revolution would suppress the desire to have children. The impact of the Sent-Down
Movement is even more obvious. From 1967 until 1978, an estimated 17.7 million urban youths were sent
down to rural areas (Gu 2009). Those young people were at the peak of their fertility but were sent to an
unfamiliar place away from their hometown.
Table A1 discusses the robustness to other important events during the early 1970s in two steps.
First, we construct the exposure to the Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) and the Sent-Down Movement
(1968–1978) in a similar way as we construct the exposure to the “Later, Longer, Fewer” policies. More
specifically,
EXPO CulturalRevolutionpc =
EXPO SentDownpc =

49
X

AFRp (a) I [1966 ≤ c + a ≤ 1976]

a=15
49
X

AFRp (a) I [1968 ≤ c + a ≤ 1978] .

a=15

In the second step, we take into account the fact that provinces can be shocked differently by the two events.
We proxy the provincial intensity of the Cultural Revolution with the provincial aggregate fatalities during
the revolution, which are taken from Walder (2017). We proxy the provincial intensity of the Sent-Down
Movement by the total number of people who were sent down to the countryside during the movement,
which is taken from Gu (2009). Table A1 suggests that exposure to the Cultural Revolution does not affect
households’ fertility decision. The Sent-Down Movement had some negative effects, which is not surprising
given the nature of the movement. The important takeaway here is that the estimated coefficients in Table
A1 are very close to those in Table 4. This suggests that even if those two events may independent effects
on fertility, they will not bias our estimated effects of the family planning policies.

53

Table A1: Robustness to the Cultural Revolution and the Sent-Down Movement
Dependent Variables

M’s Exposure to LLF
M’s Exposure to the CR

Number of Living Children
(mean = 3.290)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.249***
(0.0420)
0.0316
(0.0959)

-0.249***
(0.0420)
0.102
(0.0871)
-0.0219
(0.0188)

-0.247***
(0.0431)

-0.258***
(0.0442)

-0.323***
(0.0457)
-0.0175
(0.0894)

-0.324***
(0.0457)
0.0458
(0.0894)
-0.0197
(0.0190)

-0.321***
(0.0466)

-0.333***
(0.0479)

0.00883
(0.0752)

0.0229
(0.0765)
-0.0458**
(0.0219)

-0.0233
(0.0701)

-0.00821
(0.0711)
-0.0492*
(0.0266)

M’s Exposure to the CR
*Provincial CR Intensity
M’s Exposure to the SDY
M’s Exposure to the SDY
*Provincial SDY
54

Observations
Other Controls
Age FE
Year FE
Province FE

Number of Children Ever Born
(mean = 3.427)

5,115

5,115

5,115

5,115

5,115

5,115

5,115

5,115

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All regressions are OLS. Standard errors are clustered at province-cohort level. Other control
variables include widow, hukou, and education. “Provincial Cultural Revolution Intensity” is approximated by the provincial aggregate fatalities during the Cultural
Revolution, which are taken from Walder and Su (2003). “Provincial Sent-Down Movement Intensity” is approximated by the total number of people who were sent
outside the province during the movement, which is taken from Gu (2009).

