NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BEHAVIOR WITHIN A CLINICAL TRIAL AND IMPLICATIONS FOR MAMMOGRAPHY
GUIDELINES
Amanda E. Kowalski
Working Paper 25049
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25049

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018, Revised November 2020

Saumya Chatrath, Neil Christy, Tory Do, Simon Essig Aberg, Bailey Flanigan, Pauline Mourot,
Srajal Nayak, Dominik Piehlmaier, Ljubica Ristovska, Sukanya Sravasti, and Matthew Tauzer
provided excellent research assistance. I thank Anthony Miller, Teresa To, Cornelia Baines, and
Claus Wall, investigators of the Canadian National Breast Screening Study, for sharing data and
for answering questions. I thank Zach Brown, Zoey Chopra, Emily Horton, Pat Kline, Lee
Lockwood, Magne Mogstad, Michael Ricks, Brock Rowberry, Atheendar Venkataramani,
graduate public finance students at the University of Michigan, and seminar participants at the
2018 American Economic Association Annual Meeting, ASHEcon 2019, the 2018 Canadian
Health Economics Study Group, Columbia University, the 2018 London-Paris Public Economics
Workshop, the NBER Health Care 2018 Fall Meeting, the NBER Aging 2019 Spring Meeting,
the 2018 North American Summer Meetings of the Econometric Society, Indiana University,
Princeton, and the University of Michigan for helpful comments. NSF CAREER Award 1350132
and NIA Grant P30-AG12810 provided support. I dedicate my research on breast cancer to Elisa
Long. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Amanda E. Kowalski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Behavior within a Clinical Trial and Implications for Mammography Guidelines
Amanda E. Kowalski
NBER Working Paper No. 25049
September 2018, Revised November 2020
JEL No. C18,I1,I12
ABSTRACT
Mammography guidelines have weakened in response to evidence that mammograms diagnose
breast cancers that would never eventually cause symptoms, a phenomenon called
"overdiagnosis." Given concerns about overdiagnosis, instead of recommending mammograms,
US guidelines encourage women aged 40-49 to get them as they see fit. To assess whether these
guidelines target women effectively, I propose an approach that examines mammography
behavior within an influential clinical trial that followed participants long enough to find
overdiagnosis. I find that women who are more likely to receive mammograms are healthier and
have higher socioeconomic status. More importantly, I find that the 20-year level of
overdiagnosis is at least 3.5 times higher among women who are most likely to receive
mammograms. At least 36% of their cancers are overdiagnosed. These findings imply that US
guidelines encourage mammograms among healthier women who are more likely to be
overdiagnosed by them. Guidelines in other countries do not.
Amanda E. Kowalski
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Ave.
Lorch Hall 213
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
aekowals@umich.edu

1

Introduction

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) weakened their mammography guidelines in
2009 (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, 2009) in response to evolving evidence from clinical trials.
Although their previous guidelines recommended regular mammography for asymptomatic women
aged 40 and older (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, 2002), their updated guidelines left the
mammography decision for women in their 40s to individual women and their doctors. The precise
USPSTF guidelines, as confirmed in 2016, state: “The decision to start screening mammography
in women prior to age 50 years should be an individual one. Women who place a higher value on
the potential benefit than the potential harms may choose to begin biennial screening between the
ages of 40 and 49 years” (Siu, 2016). The USPSTF recommends regular mammography for women
aged 50 to 74 and does not provide guidelines for women older than 74 given insufficient evidence.
These guidelines raise a question that motivates my analysis: do the current USPSTF guidelines
for women in their 40s induce mammograms among the women most likely to benefit from them?
To address this question, I propose an approach to inform targeting within clinical guidelines that
examines behavior within a clinical trial. I apply this approach to data from a clinical trial that
has been important to the evolution of mammography guidelines. I proceed in two steps. First, I
investigate selection heterogeneity: are women who are more likely to receive mammograms different
from other women? Second and more importantly, I investigate treatment effect heterogeneity: are
women who are more likely to receive mammograms more likely to experience better or worse
health outcomes because of them?
Mammography can lead to better health outcomes through the early detection and treatment
of breast cancer that would eventually cause symptoms, but it can also lead to worse health outcomes through the early detection and treatment of breast cancer that would not eventually cause
symptoms. The article that conveys the 2016 USPSTF guidelines notes, “The most important
harm is the diagnosis and treatment of noninvasive breast cancer that would otherwise not have
become a threat to a woman’s health, or even apparent, during her lifetime (that is, overdiagnosis
and overtreatment)” (Siu, 2016). Overdiagnosis is distinct from false-positive diagnosis. The latter refers to “a positive test in an individual who is subsequently recognized not to have cancer.
By contrast, an overdiagnosed patient has a tumor that fulfills the pathological criteria for cancer”(Welch and Black, 2010). The magnitude of overdiagnosis could be meaningfully large. Bleyer
and Welch (2012) find that as mammography has increased dramatically over time, diagnosis of
early-stage breast cancer has more than doubled while diagnosis of late-stage breast cancer has
fallen only slightly, leading them to conclude that 31% of breast cancers detected in the US in 2008
were overdiagnoses.
Overdiagnosis can pose significant health risks, which makes it an important outcome to study.
It can expose women to unnecessary chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and surgery, which can all be lifethreatening. Even absent subsequent medical care, breast cancer diagnosis itself can be harmful.
Providing a perspective in the New England Journal of Medicine, Welch and Fisher (2017) argue
that the “psychological effects of overutilization and overdiagnosis are also worrisome: turning

2

people into patients may undermine their sense of resilience, which is fundamental to health.”
The main concern that has spurred changes in guidelines is that overdiagnosis can be so harmful
that the harms of mammograms can outweigh the benefits. To inform the 2016 USPSTF guidelines,
the task force conducted a meta-analysis (Nelson et al., 2016) of clinical trials conducted worldwide
(Habbema et al., 1986; Tabar et al., 1995; Nyström et al., 2002; Bjurstam et al., 2003; Miller et al.,
2014; Moss et al., 2015). Combining the latest results across trials, the meta-analysis does not find
a statistically significant reduction in all-cause mortality across all age groups or within any age
group. Furthermore, some trials show imprecise increases in all-cause mortality within some age
groups, suggesting that the harms can outweigh the benefits (Nyström et al., 2002; Miller et al.,
2014). In addition, no trials show statistically significant reductions in breast cancer mortality
for women in their 40s. Some trials do show statistically significant reductions in breast cancer
mortality for women in older age groups, but breast cancer mortality need not capture all harms
of mammography, especially because overdiagnosis may lead to deaths not clearly caused by breast
cancer. Given limited evidence showing benefits, there is a stronger rationale to engage with
evidence showing harms through overdiagnosis.
Growing concern about overdiagnosis has prompted the weakening of mammography recommendations around the world to the point that the current US recommendations are stronger than
those in many other countries. Mammography guidelines made by different authorities rely on the
same trials considered by the USPSTF but place more weight on some than others. Within the US,
guidelines from the American College of Physicians and American Academy of Family Physicians
are similar to those from the USPSTF for women in their 40s, as are guidelines from the American
Cancer Society for women aged 40-44 (CDC, 2020). All of these guidelines leave mammography
decisions up to individual women and their doctors under the implicit assumption that doing so
effectively recommends mammograms to women most likely to benefit from them. Outside the US,
European Breast Guidelines do not recommend mammography for any asymptomatic women aged
40-44 (Schünemann et al., 2019) and are therefore weaker. Guidelines in most large individual European countries, including the United Kingdom, Switzerland, France, and Spain, are even weaker
in the sense that they do not recommend mammography for any asymptomatic women through
age 49 (Ebell et al., 2018).1 Canadian guidelines are even weaker in that they recommend against
mammography for asymptomatic women through age 49 (Klarenbach et al., 2018).
One explanation for why the Canadian guidelines are the weakest is that the Canadian National
Breast Screening Study (CNBSS), a large trial that has been influential to the USPSTF guidelines,
provides some of the most compelling evidence on overdiagnosis. The basis of this evidence is that if
mammograms only lead to early detection of breast cancer that would eventually cause symptoms,
incidence in the control arm should completely “catch up” to incidence in the intervention arm
over time as breast cancers that cause symptoms are diagnosed. However, 25 years after the first
participants enrolled, breast cancer incidence remained meaningfully higher in the intervention arm
than it was in the control arm (Baines et al., 2016), and the difference is statistically significant.
1
Guidelines in Sweden are a notable exception, as they recommend mammography for women in the same age
range (Ebell et al., 2018).

3

This difference is particularly striking because mammography in the control and intervention arms
likely converged after the active study period of the trial as mammography became widely available
(Baines et al., 2016). Therefore, results from the CNBSS likely reflect the impact of starting
mammography sooner, rather than starting mammography ever. These results are particularly
relevant for the USPSTF guidelines because the previous weakening affected whether women should
begin mammography in their 40s as opposed to their 50s.
I use data shared with me by the investigators of the CNBSS to examine whether overdiagnosis
varies with mammography behavior to inform the current USPSTF guidelines. Crucially for the
approach that I propose, the CNBSS data contain information on mammography behavior: whether
women in the study actually received mammograms, conditional on their random assignment during
the active study period. To the best of my knowledge, the CNBSS is the only trial considered by
the meta-analysis that informs the USPSTF guidelines (Nelson et al., 2016) that tracked takeup
of mammograms for all participants, including those in the control arm. These data show that
during the active study period after the initial enrollment year, a substantial fraction of women in
the control arm received mammograms, and some women in the intervention arm did not.
To allow overdiagnosis to vary with mammography behavior, I specify a heterogeneous treatment effect model in which the “treatment” is mammography. I begin with a model that relies
only on the well-known local average treatment effect (LATE) assumptions of Imbens and Angrist
(1994). Vytlacil (2002) shows that the LATE assumptions are equivalent to the Heckman and Vytlacil (2005) generalized Roy (1951) model of the marginal treatment effect (MTE) (Björklund and
Moffitt, 1987). I therefore draw on the MTE literature (Heckman and Vytlacil, 1999, 2001, 2005;
Carneiro et al., 2011; Brinch et al., 2017; Cornelissen et al., 2018; Mogstad et al., 2018; Kowalski,
2020b) to define heterogeneous selection and to make an ancillary assumption to identify heterogeneous treatment effects. I identify heterogeneous selection under the LATE assumptions alone by
comparing outcomes and covariates across three groups formed by the interaction of mammography behavior and random assignment. Drawing on terminology from Angrist et al. (1996), “never
takers” are the least likely to receive mammograms because they do not receive them regardless of
random assignment, “compliers” are more likely to receive mammograms because they receive them
if and only if assigned to the intervention arm, and “always takers” are the most likely to receive
mammograms because they receive them regardless of random assignment. Comparisons across
these three groups yield richer insights than the comparison across the two trial arms because they
reflect mammography behavior. I use them to identify selection heterogeneity, to provide empirical motivation for the ancillary assumption, and to identify treatment effect heterogeneity under
the ancillary assumption. I identify treatment effect heterogeneity by obtaining a lower bound on
the average treatment effect for always takers that I compare to the average treatment effect for
compliers, also known as the LATE.
First, I find heterogeneous selection: women more likely to receive mammograms are healthier
in terms of long-term breast cancer incidence and mortality. They also have higher socioeconomic
status and are more likely to practice several other health behaviors seen as beneficial. They are
more likely to be nonsmokers, and they have lower body mass index.
4

Second and more importantly, I find treatment effect heterogeneity that aligns with the selection
heterogeneity I find: women more likely to receive mammograms are more likely to be overdiagnosed
by them. Furthermore, the magnitude of heterogeneity in overdiagnosis is meaningful. Among
women most likely to receive mammograms, the always takers, at least 206 out of 10,000 are
overdiagnosed. This level of overdiagnosis is at least 3.5 times higher than the level of overdiagnosis
among compliers, 58 out of 10,000, as estimated by the LATE. Measured as a share of breast cancers
in the intervention arm, the overdiagnosis rate is at least 36% among always takers and 14% among
compliers. I also find suggestive evidence that women more likely to receive mammograms are more
likely to be harmed by them in terms of long-term mortality. The treatment effects on mortality
20 years after enrollment are not statistically different from zero or from each other, which is
unsurprising given that none of the trials included in the meta-analysis that informs the USPSTF
guidelines (Nelson et al., 2016) show statistically significant effects on all-cause mortality. However,
the implied lower bound on the average treatment effect for always takers is economically significant
in the sense that at least 4.9% of their deaths would not have occurred otherwise.
There are several plausible explanations for my findings. My first finding is intuitive if we
expect that women who are healthier and of higher socioeconomic status will be more likely to
practice health behaviors seen as beneficial, including mammography. This finding is consistent
with empirical evidence on socioeconomic status and health behaviors (Goldman and Smith, 2002;
Cutler and Lleras-Muney, 2010; Oster, 2020). My second finding is perhaps counterintuitive if we
expect that women who are more likely to benefit from mammograms in terms of long-term health
outcomes will be more likely to receive them. However, given my first finding that women more
likely to receive mammograms have higher socioeconomic status, Welch and Fisher (2017) provide a
rationale for my second finding. Analyzing breast cancer incidence and mortality in US counties over
time, they find greater rates of overdiagnosis in counties with higher socioeconomic status. They
explain that “wealthier people are exposed to increased observational intensity: they are likely to
be screened more often and by means of such tests...that can detect smaller abnormalities, undergo
more follow-up testing, undergo more biopsies, and they may be served by health systems that
have a lower threshold for labeling results as abnormal.” The differential overdiagnosis that I find
is consistent with their finding and explanation. Furthermore, it is plausible that women more likely
to receive mammograms also pursue more aggressive treatment (Myerson et al., 2018), providing
a potential mechanism for differential harm. Consistent with this mechanism, I find suggestive
evidence that among women diagnosed with breast cancer during the active study period who had
at least part of a breast removed, women more likely to receive mammograms were more likely to
have an entire breast removed.
An alternative and potentially problematic explanation for my findings is that although women
more likely to receive mammograms are healthier on other dimensions, they are more likely to
receive mammograms because they have higher underlying breast cancer risk. As one response
to this concern, I take a conservative approach to sample selection in my main analysis sample.
The CNBSS conducted extensive baseline surveys and clinical exams. I use variables collected
through these means to exclude women with a family history of breast cancer and women with
5

potential knowledge of increased breast cancer risk. As another response, I examine characteristics
of the breast cancers detected during the active study period. I find suggestive evidence that breast
cancers detected in women more likely to receive mammograms are smaller and less invasive, which
could indicate that women more likely to receive mammograms are healthier in terms of their tumor
characteristics, corroborating the selection heterogeneity that I find, or that women more likely to
receive mammograms are more likely to be diagnosed with breast cancer given the same tumor
characteristics, corroborating the treatment effect heterogeneity that I find.
My findings imply that the current USPSTF guidelines for women in their 40s conflate the
women most likely to receive mammograms with the women most likely to benefit from them.
I arrive at this implication by relating always takers within the CNBSS to women who receive
mammograms under the current guidelines. Under the same analogy, compliers would receive
mammograms under the previous stronger guidelines but not under the current guidelines, and
never takers would not receive mammograms under either set of guidelines. The magnitude of
the overdiagnosis rate found by Bleyer and Welch (2012) under the previous stronger guidelines
supports the analogy. Under it, the 31% overdiagnosis rate that they find represents an average
among always takers and compliers. In the CNBSS, I find overdiagnosis rates of at least 36%
for always takers and 14% for compliers, which could average to the rate from the US findings
despite differences in empirical settings. The overdiagnosis that I find among compliers implies
that the previous weakening of the USPSTF guidelines had merit, which is to be expected because
the weakening was partially based on results from the CNBSS, which reflect overdiagnosis for
compliers. However, the overdiagnosis that I find among always takers is a new result. It implies
that there could be merit in a further weakening of the USPSTF guidelines such that they do not
recommend or recommend against mammography for all asymptomatic women in their 40s, in line
with recommendations from other countries. The magnitudes of overdiagnosis I find imply that a
further weakening of the USPSTF guidelines could be even more effective at reducing overdiagnosis
than the previous weakening.
My findings advance the literature on mammography and overdiagnosis. Whereas the metaanalysis that informs the USPSTF mammography guidelines (Nelson et al., 2016) examines average
health impacts within clinical trials, I examine how the effects of mammography vary with mammography behavior, which is important because guidelines can only have an impact through behavior. Outside of the clinical trial literature, a large literature examines mammography behavior
in response to policy interventions that yield natural experiments, but it provides no evidence on
how selection into mammography or treatment effects of mammography vary with such behavior
(Kelaher and Stellman, 2000; Habermann et al., 2007; Kadiyala and Strumpf, 2011, 2016; Finkelstein et al., 2012; Kolstad and Kowalski, 2012; Bitler and Carpenter, 2016, 2019; Fedewa et al.,
2015; Mehta et al., 2015; Ong and Mandl, 2015; Lu and Slusky, 2016; Zanella and Banerjee, 2016;
Cooper et al., 2017; Jacobson and Kadiyala, 2017; Buchmueller and Goldzahl, 2018; Myerson et al.,
2019). This literature has been limited because the methods that it employs do not allow it to
recover selection or treatment effect heterogeneity. Furthermore, it rarely engages with the possibility of overdiagnosis as a health impact, perhaps because individual-level data on mammography
6

behavior that follow individuals in a randomized or natural experiment for long enough to identify
overdiagnosis are not widely available.
Two papers corroborate the selection heterogeneity that I find within natural experiments, but
consistent with the literature, they do not examine treatment effect heterogeneity, and they do not
consider overdiagnosis. Kim and Lee (2017) analyze a national cancer screening program in Korea
that generated discontinuities in eligibility and find selection heterogeneity such that individuals
more likely to receive mammograms are healthier in terms of cancer incidence six years afterward,
body mass index, blood glucose, and cholesterol. In a paper released since I released the first
working paper version of this paper (Kowalski, 2018), Einav et al. (2019) corroborate the selection
heterogeneity from Kim and Lee (2017) by analyzing mammography takeup before and after age
40 in the United States from 2000 through 2014. They cannot observe cancer incidence for women
who did not receive mammograms, so they predict it using a clinical model calibrated with data
from women who did receive mammograms. I demonstrate that this calibration could potentially
contaminate the selection heterogeneity that they find with treatment effect heterogeneity.
I advance the methodological literature on clinical trials by proposing an approach that relates
treatment effect heterogeneity to behavior within a trial to improve targeting within guidelines.
In the process, although doing so is not my focus, I also contribute to the literature on treatment
effect heterogeneity. The brunt of my contributions to that literature appear in my work on the
Oregon Health Insurance Experiment (Kowalski, 2020b), which I introduced in an earlier working
paper (Kowalski, 2016) and apply here. However, I have divided that working paper such that
some content only appears here. Specifically, in this paper, I identify treatment effect heterogeneity
using an ancillary assumption that is weaker than the linearity assumption that I impose elsewhere.
Brinch et al. (2017) propose this weaker assumption in conjunction with a related assumption to test
treatment effect homogeneity, but I demonstrate here that I can test treatment effect homogeneity
with only one assumption. I also demonstrate how to motivate the assumption theoretically and
empirically, and I show that it implies a bound on the average treatment effect for always takers that
is central to my findings. I also perform inference without a power-limiting Bonferroni correction.
In my only other directly related work (Kowalski, 2020a), I do not break new ground, but I use
stylized examples to illustrate recent advances to the literature on treatment effect heterogeneity.
I also provide a Stata command (Kowalski et al., 2018) that can be used to apply these advances
to examine selection and treatment effect heterogeneity in other clinical trials.
In the next section, I provide more information on the CNBSS data and published results.
In Section 3, I present the model. In Section 4, I present my two main findings. I show that
my findings are robust to a wide variety of alternative specifications in Section 5. I conclude by
discussing implications for guidelines and future research in Section 6.

2

CNBSS Background and Replication of Results

Viewing the CNBSS as an influential trial, my focus is not to evaluate the CNBSS itself or previous
work on it. Rather, my focus is to extend analysis of the CNBSS to examine how the results vary
with mammography behavior. I begin by providing background and replicating published results.

7

The CNBSS enrolled almost 90,000 women aged 40-59 between 1980 and 1985. All women were
randomly assigned to an intervention arm or a control arm.2 To evaluate the randomization, Miller
et al. (2002) report balance tests among women in their 40s at enrollment, and they do not find
many meaningful differences between the intervention and control arms. I conduct similar balance
tests with the variables available to me, and I find results consistent with theirs. The independent
Cochrane review considers the CNBSS as one of only three mammography trials with adequate
randomization (Gøtzsche and Jørgensen, 2013).
Intervention arm women received access to annual mammograms and clinical breast examinations during the active study period, which consisted of the enrollment year and 3 to 4 years after
enrollment. The data show that some women in the intervention arm did not receive mammograms
after the enrollment year during the active study period. Some did not return to study centers and
others returned but refused mammography (Miller et al., 1992a). Control arm women in their 40s
at enrollment received an initial clinical breast examination followed by usual care in the community, and control arm women in their 50s at enrollment received access to annual clinical breast
examinations in the initial year and each year of the active study period. The data show that a
substantial fraction of control arm women received mammograms during the active study period,
which is not surprising given that a CNBSS investigator noted in the early 1980s that “many believe that if they demand a mammogram, their doctor will accede to their request” (Baines, 1984).
Although the CNBSS collected data on mammography for all participants during the active study
period, it did not continue doing so afterward.
However, the CNBSS data include two important long-term health outcomes—breast cancer
incidence and all-cause mortality—through linkage to cancer registries that are complete across
Canada (Baines et al., 2016) and the Canadian Mortality Database. The CNBSS is the only trial
considered by the meta-analysis that informs the USPSTF guidelines (Nelson et al., 2016) that
allows for examination of breast cancer incidence and all-cause mortality at least 20 years after
enrollment for all participants. The Cochrane review deems the CNBSS as at low risk of attrition
bias (Gøtzsche and Jørgensen, 2013). The breast cancer incidence data include invasive breast
cancer as well as non-invasive ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). DCIS tumors are considered to be
of ultralow risk, but the word “carcinoma” causes alarm, which has prompted proposals to rename
DCIS tumors “indolent lesions of epithelial origin (IDLE)” (Esserman and Varma, 2019). Since
many DCIS tumors can only be diagnosed by mammograms, it is important that they are included
in analyses of overdiagnosis.
I can closely or exactly replicate the latest results published by the CNBSS investigators. Importantly, I can closely replicate the Baines et al. (2016) result on breast cancer incidence that
shows overdiagnosis, and it is statistically significant.3 I can also exactly replicate the latest re2
Randomization was conducted at the individual level and stratified by 5-year age at enrollment and study
center (Miller et al., 1992a). The randomization process did not intentionally vary the probability of assignment to
intervention across strata, so strata controls are not required.
3
In the Baines et al. (2016) calculation of overdiagnosis 25 years after the first CNBSS participants enrolled, the
difference in breast cancer incidence between the intervention and control arms is 0.41% (=7.43% - 7.02%). In my
replication, the difference is 0.44% (=7.51% - 7.07%). Both differences are statistically significant.

8

sults on all-cause and breast cancer mortality. These results show higher all-cause mortality in the
intervention arm than the control arm (Miller et al., 2014), but the difference is not statistically
significant. Breast cancer mortality is slightly lower in the intervention arm (Miller et al., 2014),
but this difference is not statistically significant either. In terms of statistical significance, the
long-term results are consistent with results published at earlier follow-up lengths (Miller et al.,
1992a,b, 1997, 2000, 2002, 2014).
In the replication results that serve as the foundation for my analysis, I depart from the latest
published results in four ways to increase the relevance of my findings to the USPSTF guidelines
for women in their 40s. First, I only include women aged 40-49 at enrollment in my main analysis
sample, and I examine robustness among women aged 50-59 at enrollment. Second, because the
USPSTF guidelines are intended for asymptomatic women without a genetic predisposition for
breast cancer, and because I aim to exclude women with potential knowledge of increased breast
cancer risk, I exclude women if they report any breast cancer in their family, any previous breast
cancer diagnosis, any other breast disease, or any symptoms. I also exclude women if a nurse
found abnormalities or referred them for review. My main analysis sample includes 19,505 women.
I examine robustness in the full sample of 50,430 women aged 40-49 at enrollment and in the
subsample of excluded women. Third, to make the timing of my findings easier to interpret, I
report results at a fixed follow-up length of 20 years after enrollment, as opposed to a fixed calendar
date that reflects various follow-up lengths. I also examine robustness at earlier follow-up lengths.
Fourth, when analyzing mortality, I only examine all-cause mortality because it is less subjective
than breast cancer mortality and because it can capture a wider range of collateral harms.

3

Model

As the foundation for the model, I rely on the LATE independence and monotonicity assumptions
of Imbens and Angrist (1994). I present implications of these assumptions using simple figures.
The figures motivate the identification of selection heterogeneity under the LATE assumptions and
the identification of treatment effect heterogeneity under a single ancillary assumption beyond the
LATE assumptions.
3.1

First Stage: Mammography

In the model, the treatment is mammography, which I represent with the binary variable D. In the
main specification, I set D = 1 if a participant receives a mammogram in at least one year during
the active study period after the enrollment year, and I set D = 0 otherwise. The instrument Z
is a binary variable such that Z = 1 represents random assignment to the intervention arm and
Z = 0 represents random assignment to the control arm.
I illustrate implications of the first stage of the model in Figure 1. In my main analysis sample,
19% of control women and 95% of intervention women receive mammograms, so the probability
of treatment in control pC is 0.19 and the probability of treatment in intervention pI is 0.95. The
top line depicts the fraction treated in control, and the middle line depicts the fraction treated
in intervention. By the LATE independence assumption, which requires that assignment to intervention or control is random, the bottom line depicts the fraction treated in intervention and
9

control on the same line. This line characterizes the fraction treated p if the entire sample were
assigned to intervention or control. The observed probabilities of treatment in intervention and
control partition the line into three ranges. I label the ranges using terminology from Imbens and
Angrist (1994) in which “always takers” receive treatment regardless of random assignment, “compliers” receive treatment if and only if assigned to the intervention arm, and “never takers” do not
receive treatment regardless of random assignment. The LATE monotonicity assumption precludes
“defiers” who receive treatment if and only if assigned to the control arm because it requires that
assignment to the intervention arm weakly increases mammography for every participant in the
trial.
Figure 1: Ranges of the Fraction Treated p for Always Takers, Compliers, and Never Takers:
Always Takers are More Likely to Receive Mammograms Than Compliers,
Who are More Likely to Receive Mammograms Than Never Takers
Z=0
D=1

D=0

Z=1
D=1

0

pC = 0.19
Always Takers

D=0

Compliers

pI = 0.95
1
Never Takers

Fraction treated p
Note. The treatment D is mammography, which is equal to one if a participant receives a mammogram in at least one year during
the active study period after the enrollment year. The instrument Z is equal to one if a participant is assigned to intervention.
pC is the fraction treated in control P (D = 1 | Z = 0) and pI is the fraction treated in intervention P (D = 1 | Z = 1). The
main analysis sample includes women aged 40-49 at enrollment and excludes those who report any breast cancer in their family,
any previous breast cancer diagnosis, any other breast disease, or any symptoms, as well as those for whom a nurse found
abnormalities or referred them for review.

The main implication of the first stage of the model that I emphasize with Figure 1 is that
there is an ordering from always takers to compliers to never takers, which has been shown by
Imbens and Rubin (1997) and Vytlacil (2002). In the CNBSS, I interpret this ordering in terms of
mammography behavior within the trial. Always takers are the most likely to receive mammograms
(they receive them with probability 1), followed by compliers (they receive them with the probability
of assignment to intervention), followed by never takers (they receive them with probability 0). This
interpretation is useful for the analogy of always takers to the women who receive mammograms
under the current USPSTF guidelines, compliers to the women who would receive mammograms
under the previous but not the current USPSTF guidelines, and never takers to the women who
would not receive mammograms under either guidelines.
3.2

Second Stage: Health Outcomes

I relate a health outcome Y , breast cancer incidence or all-cause mortality, to mammography D as
follows:
Y = YU + (YT − YU )D,

10

where YT represents the potential outcome when treated (D = 1), and YU represents the potential
outcome when untreated (D = 0). The LATE independence assumption implies that both potential
outcomes are independent of assignment to intervention.

Breast Cancer Incidence 20 Years After Enrollment (per 10,000)

Figure 2: Derivation of Average Breast Cancer Incidence for Always Takers, Compliers, and Never Takers:
Averages for Treated and Untreated Compliers Depicted with Lighter Shading
treated
untreated

667

571

453
424

(0.95∗453−0.19∗571)
(0.95−0.19)

385
366

((1−0.19)∗385−(1−0.95)∗667)
(0.95−0.19)

0

pC = 0.19
Always Takers

pI = 0.95 1
Compliers
Fraction treated p

Never Takers

Note. The outcome Y is breast cancer incidence, measured 20 years after enrollment for all participants, based on initial
diagnosis and the exact calendar date of enrollment. The treatment D is mammography, which is equal to one if a participant
receives a mammogram in at least one year during the active study period after the enrollment year. The instrument Z is
equal to one if a participant is assigned to intervention. pC is the fraction treated in control P (D = 1 | Z = 0) and pI is the
fraction treated in intervention P (D = 1 | Z = 1). The main analysis sample includes women aged 40-49 at enrollment and
excludes those who report any breast cancer in their family, any previous breast cancer diagnosis, any other breast disease, or
any symptoms, as well as those for whom a nurse found abnormalities or referred them for review.

The main implication of the second stage of the model that I emphasize with Figure 2 is that it
is possible to derive average treated outcomes of always takers and compliers and average untreated
outcomes of compliers and never takers (Imbens and Rubin, 1997; Katz et al., 2001; Abadie, 2002,
2003). I provide a graphical depiction of derivation in the CNBSS in Figure 2. Consider treated
women in control. These women must be always takers, so their average outcome yields an estimate
of the average treated outcome of always takers.4 I plot this value, 571 breast cancers per 10,000
women, over the support of the fraction treated p for always takers using a dotted line to indicate
that it represents a treated outcome. Next consider untreated women in intervention. These women
must be never takers, so their average outcome yields an estimate of the average untreated outcome

4

E[YT | always takers] = E[Y | D = 1, Z = 0].

11

of never takers.5 I plot this value, 667 breast cancers per 10,000 women, using a dashed line to
indicate that it represents an untreated outcome. Estimation of the average treated and untreated
outcomes of compliers requires a little more work. To estimate the average treated outcome of
compliers, consider treated women in intervention. The average outcome of these women, 453
breast cancers per 10,000 women, represents a weighted average treated outcome of always takers
and compliers, so I plot it over the full support for always takers and compliers. Because we know
the fraction of this support attributable to always takers, and we have estimated their average
outcome, we can back out an estimate of the average treated outcome of compliers.6 I plot this
value, 424 breast cancers per 10,000 women, over the support for compliers. The derivation of the
average untreated outcome of compliers, 366 breast cancers per 10,000, is similar.7

Breast Cancer Incidence 20 Years After Enrollment (per 10,000)

Figure 3: Average Breast Cancer Incidence for Always Takers, Compliers, and Never Takers
treated
untreated

667

571

424
366

LATE = 58
(38)

0

pc = 0.19
Always Takers

pI = 0.95 1
Compliers
Fraction treated p

Never Takers

Note. Bootstrapped standard errors are under point estimates in parentheses. The outcome Y is breast cancer incidence,
measured 20 years after enrollment for all participants, based on initial diagnosis and the exact calendar date of enrollment.
The treatment D is mammography, which is equal to one if a participant receives a mammogram in at least one year during
the active study period after the enrollment year. The instrument Z is equal to one if a participant is assigned to intervention.
pC is the fraction treated in control P (D = 1 | Z = 0) and pI is the fraction treated in intervention P (D = 1 | Z = 1). The
main analysis sample includes women aged 40-49 at enrollment and excludes those who report any breast cancer in their family,
any previous breast cancer diagnosis, any other breast disease, or any symptoms, as well as those for whom a nurse found
abnormalities or referred them for review.

In Figure 3, I remove content from Figure 2 to depict comparisons across always takers, treated
and untreated compliers, and never takers more cleanly. As I show with an arrow, the LATE, the
5

E[YU | never takers] = E[Y | D = 0, Z = 1].
I
E[YT | compliers] = pI p−p
E[Y | D = 1, Z = 1] −
C
7
C
E[YU | compliers] = p1−p
E[Y | D = 0, Z = 0] −
I −pC

6

pC
E[Y
pI −pC
1−pI
E[Y
pI −pC

12

| D = 1, Z = 0].
| D = 0, Z = 1].

average treatment effect for compliers, is equal to the difference between the average treated and
untreated outcomes of compliers (Imbens and Rubin, 1997). This treatment effect on breast cancer
incidence 20 years after enrollment indicates that the level of overdiagnosis among compliers is
58 cancers per 10,000 women and that the rate of overdiaganosis among treated compliers is 14%
(=58/424). I emphasize with the figure that the LATE says nothing about the average treatment
effect for always or never takers, which represent sizeable and distinct fractions of women. The
average treatment effect for any group is equal to the average treated outcome minus the average
untreated outcome. Always takers are treated by definition, so it is not possible to estimate
their average untreated outcome or their average treatment effect without ancillary assumptions.
Similarly, never takers are untreated by definition, so it is not possible to estimate their average
treated outcome or their average treatment effect without ancillary assumptions. However, the
average outcomes that can be derived for always and never takers appear very different from the
average outcomes of compliers. By 20 years after enrollment, 5.71% of always takers and 6.67%
never takers have been diagnosed with breast cancer, as compared to 4.24% of treated compliers
and 3.66% of untreated compliers. These comparisons provide the variation that I use as a starting
point to identify how selection and the treatment effect vary with mammography behavior.
3.3

Definitions of Selection and Treatment Effect Heterogeneity in the Model

Following Kowalski (2020b), I define selection and treatment effect heterogeneity on Y along the
fraction treated p using functions from the MTE literature (see Carneiro and Lee, 2009; Brinch
et al., 2017):
Selection Heterogeneity along Fraction Treated p: MUO(p) = E [YU | p]
Treatment Effect Heterogeneity along Fraction Treated p:

MTE(p) = E [YT − YU | p]

Selection + Treatment Effect Heterogeneity along Fraction Treated p: MTO(p) = E [YT | p] .
The first function, which I refer to as the “marginal untreated outcome (MUO)” function, defines
what I refer to as “selection heterogeneity” along the fraction treated p. Selection heterogeneity
generalizes the concept of “selection bias,” as defined by Angrist (1998) and Heckman et al. (1998)
among others, which is equal to the difference in average untreated outcomes between treated and
untreated participants:
Selection Bias: E[YU | D = 1] − E[YU | D = 0].
Selection bias depends on the fraction of the sample assigned to intervention, a parameter chosen as
part of the trial design, because assignment to intervention determines treatment D for compliers.
Furthermore, selection bias is not identified without ancillary assumptions. In contrast, a different
special case of selection heterogeneity does not depend on the fraction of the sample assigned to
intervention, and it is identified without ancillary assumptions. Randomization makes identification
possible by generating exogenous variation in the fraction treated p, thereby making the average
untreated outcome of compliers distinguishable from the average untreated outcome of never takers.
13

The second function is the “marginal treatment effect (MTE)” function of Heckman and Vytlacil
(1999, 2001, 2005). It defines treatment effect heterogeneity along the fraction treated p. In the
CNBSS, the MTE function characterizes how the impact of mammography on a health outcome
changes as women become less likely to receive mammograms.
The third function, which I refer to as the “marginal treated outcome (MTO)” function, characterizes the sum of selection and treatment effect heterogeneity along the fraction treated p. It
is tempting to assert that there should be no material distinction between treated and untreated
outcomes. However, the treatment effect is defined as the treated outcome minus the untreated
outcome, not the untreated outcome minus the treated outcome. The treatment effect has magnitude and direction, which is why I represent the LATE with an arrow in Figure 3. Renaming the
untreated outcome as the treated outcome and vice versa would change the direction of the treatment effect, illustrating why there is a material distinction between treated and untreated outcomes
in the definitions of selection and treatment effect heterogeneity. Under the reversed definition of
the treatment, there would still be a material distinction: heterogeneity in treated outcomes would
capture selection heterogeneity, and heterogeneity in untreated outcomes would capture the sum
of selection and treatment effect heterogeneity.

4

Findings

Applying the model to the CNBSS, I identify and estimate how selection and treatment effect
vary with mammography behavior. First, under the model that assumes no more than the LATE
assumptions, I find selection heterogeneity: women who are more likely to receive mammograms are
healthier in terms of long-term breast cancer incidence and all-cause mortality. Baseline covariates
that measure socioeconomic status and health behaviors, as well as results from the literature,
corroborate this finding. This finding informs an ancillary assumption that I impose to identify
treatment effect heterogeneity. Second and more importantly, under the ancillary assumption, I
find treatment effect heterogeneity: the 20-year level of overdiagnosis is at least 3.5 times higher
among women most likely to receive mammograms, such that at least 36% of their cancers are
overdiagnosed. I also find suggestive evidence that corroborates this finding: cancers detected
among the women more likely to receive mammograms are smaller and less invasive.
4.1

Selection Heterogeneity: Women More Likely to Receive Mammograms are
Healthier

I identify selection heterogeneity by testing the null hypothesis that the following test statistic is
equal to zero:
E[YU | compliers] − E[YU | never takers].

(1)

I refer to this test as the “untreated outcome test” because it compares the average untreated
outcomes of compliers and never takers. This test is equivalent or similar to tests proposed by
Bertanha and Imbens (2014), Guo et al. (2014), and Black et al. (2017), generalized by Mogstad

14

et al. (2018).8 Unlike previous literature, I demonstrate in Kowalski (2020b) that the untreated
outcome test identifies a special case of selection heterogeneity by expressing the untreated outcome test statistic in (1) as a weighted integral of the MUO function.9 Identification stems from
randomization, which generates compliers and never takers.

Breast Cancer Incidence 20 Years After Enrollment (per 10,000)

Figure 4: Untreated Outcome Test Rejects Selection Homogeneity on Breast Cancer Incidence at
0.3% Level: Women More Likely to Receive Mammograms are Healthier
treated
untreated

667

571
untreated outcome test rejects selection homogeneity:
366 - 667 = -301 6= 0
[0.003]

424
366

LATE = 58
(38)

0

pc = 0.19
Always Takers

pI = 0.95 1
Compliers
Fraction treated p

Never Takers

Note. Bootstrapped standard errors are under point estimates in parentheses, and two-tailed bootstrapped p-values are under
test statistics in brackets. The outcome Y is breast cancer incidence, measured 20 years after enrollment for all participants,
based on initial diagnosis and the exact calendar date of enrollment. The treatment D is mammography, which is equal to
one if a participant receives a mammogram in at least one year during the active study period after the enrollment year. The
instrument Z is equal to one if a participant is assigned to intervention. pC is the fraction treated in control P (D = 1 | Z = 0)
and pI is the fraction treated in intervention P (D = 1 | Z = 1). The main analysis sample includes women aged 40-49 at
enrollment and excludes those who report any breast cancer in their family, any previous breast cancer diagnosis, any other
breast disease, or any symptoms, as well as those for whom a nurse found abnormalities or referred them for review.

Applying the untreated outcome test in the CNBSS, I find selection heterogeneity on breast
cancer incidence and all-cause mortality. As shown in Figure 4, the test statistic indicates that
average breast cancer incidence among untreated compliers was 3.01 percentage points lower, almost
8

The test proposed by Bertanha and Imbens (2014) is similar because they develop their test for a regression
discontinuity context, but it is effectively an equivalent test. Bertanha and Imbens (2014) propose this test as one
component of a test for external validity, but they do not propose it as a test of selection heterogeneity. Similarly,
Guo et al. (2014) propose this test as one component of a test for unmeasured confounding, but they do not discuss
it as a test for selection heterogeneity. Black et al. (2017) propose this test as one of two tests for “selection,” which
they do not define.
R1
9
I express the untreated outcome test statistic as 0 (ω(p, pC , pI ) − ω(p, pI , 1)) MUO(p) dp, where ω(p, pL , pH ) =
1{pL ≤ p < pH }/(pH − pL ). The first term represents the average untreated outcome of compliers, and the second
term represents the average untreated outcome of never takers.

15

50% lower, than it was among never takers. The test statistic is statistically different from zero, and
the untreated outcome test rejects selection homogeneity on breast cancer incidence at the 0.3%
level.10 The test also rejects selection homogeneity on all-cause mortality. The 20-year all-cause
mortality rate is 4.28% for untreated compliers and 9.90% for never takers. The 5.62 percentage
point difference in all-cause mortality between these two groups is meaningfully large, and it is
statistically different from zero at the 0.1% level. All-cause mortality and breast cancer incidence
are both measures of health, and compliers are more likely to receive mammograms than never
takers. Therefore, the selection heterogeneity that I find indicates that women more likely to
receive mammograms are healthier.
Recast in terms of the untreated outcome test, evidence from Kim and Lee (2017) and Einav
et al. (2019) also indicates selection heterogeneity such that women more likely to receive mammograms are healthier. Kim and Lee (2017) compare average cancer incidence of compliers and never
takers, finding that compliers are less likely to have cancer. They restrict analysis to untreated
compliers in some specifications, but they also consider an average of treated and untreated compliers in others, which could taint the selection heterogeneity that they find in those specifications
with an implicit treatment effect for treated compliers. Einav et al. (2019) do not explicitly discuss
compliers and never takers, but their comparison of “responders” to “women who never screen”
effectively compares an average of treated and untreated compliers to never takers. However, they
obtain cancer incidence for never takers through a clinical model calibrated with data from treated
women, which could taint the selection heterogeneity that they find with implicit heterogeneous
treatment effects for compliers and never takers.
4.1.1

Baseline Covariates Corroborate Selection Heterogeneity

The untreated outcome test shows selection heterogeneity based on the comparison of average untreated health outcomes of compliers and never takers. I do not observe untreated health outcomes
of always takers by definition. However, I do observe baseline covariates for always takers, as well
as compliers and never takers. I use these baseline covariates as proxies for untreated health outcomes, allowing me to investigate whether the selection heterogeneity that I find also applies over
the range of the fraction treated p from always takers to compliers.
To derive average baseline covariates for always takers, compliers, and never takers, I begin
with the same approach that I demonstrate in Figure 2 with a covariate X in lieu of an outcome
Y . That approach yields a different average outcome for treated and untreated compliers, but
average baseline covariates should be the same for treated and untreated compliers by the LATE
independence assumption. I therefore obtain an average baseline covariate for all compliers by
weighting the average baseline covariates for treated and untreated compliers by the probabilities
of treated and untreated compliers in the sample, which are equal to the probabilities of assignment
to intervention and control.11
10

For inference, I conduct a nonparametric bootstrap with 1,000 replications and report a two-tailed p-value
constructed from the largest confidence
interval that excludes zero.
h
i
11
I
C
E[X | compliers] = P(Z = 1) pI p−p
E[X | D = 1, Z = 1] − pIp−p
E[X | D = 1, Z = 0]
C
C

16

As shown in Table 1, baseline measures of socioeconomic status tend to vary monotonically from
always takers to compliers to never takers, with always takers having the highest socioeconomic
status. These patterns are consistent with an extensive literature that shows a positive correlation
between socioeconomic status and health (see National Center for Health Statistics (2012) for a
review). Measures of baseline health behavior suggest a potential mechanism: women more likely
to receive mammograms are more likely to practice other health behaviors seen as beneficial. As
shown, smoking status, body mass index, and breast self-examination vary monotonically from
always takers to compliers to never takers, and many of the differences are statistically significant.
Overall, analysis of baseline covariates corroborates the selection heterogeneity that I find from
compliers to never takers. It also supports extension of the finding of selection heterogeneity such
that in the absence of mammograms, always takers would have the best health outcomes, followed
by compliers, followed by never takers.
Table 1: Baseline Covariates Corroborate Selection Heterogeneity:
Women More Likely to Receive Mammograms Have Higher Socioeconomic Status
and Are More Likely to Practice Other Health Behaviors Seen as Beneficial

Baseline Socioeconomic Status
University, trade or business school
In work force
Age at first birth
No live birth
Married
Husband in work force and alive
Baseline Health Behavior
Non-Smoker
Body Mass Index
Used oral contraception
Used estrogen
Any mammograms prior to enrollment
Practiced breast self-examination

(1)
Always
Takers

Means
(2)

Difference in Means

Compliers

(3)
Never
Takers

(1)-(2)

(2)-(3)

0.50
(0.01)
0.65
(0.01)
24.28
(0.11)
0.16
(0.01)
0.80
(0.01)
0.81
(0.01)

0.46
(0.00)
0.64
(0.00)
23.98
(0.05)
0.15
(0.00)
0.81
(0.00)
0.81
(0.00)

0.39
(0.02)
0.65
(0.02)
23.57
(0.20)
0.13
(0.02)
0.75
(0.02)
0.76
(0.02)

0.04
(0.01)
0.02
(0.01)
0.30
(0.14)
0.01
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.01)

0.08
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.02)
0.41
(0.21)
0.01
(0.02)
0.06
(0.02)
0.05
(0.02)

0.78
(0.01)
23.87
(0.10)
0.74
(0.01)
0.13
(0.01)
0.23
(0.01)
0.47
(0.01)

0.75
(0.00)
24.42
(0.04)
0.71
(0.00)
0.13
(0.00)
0.13
(0.00)
0.44
(0.00)

0.63
(0.02)
24.48
(0.22)
0.67
(0.02)
0.15
(0.02)
0.13
(0.01)
0.38
(0.02)

0.03
(0.01)
-0.56
(0.12)
0.03
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.01)
0.10
(0.01)
0.03
(0.01)

0.12
(0.02)
-0.06
(0.23)
0.04
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.02)
0.06
(0.02)

Note. Bootstrapped standard errors are under point estimates in parentheses. Each line of the table reports statistics on a
different baseline covariate X. The treatment D is mammography, which is equal to one if a participant receives a mammogram
in at least one year during the active study period after the enrollment year. The instrument Z is equal to one if a participant
is assigned to intervention. pC is the fraction treated in control P (D = 1 | Z = 0) and pI is the fraction treated in intervention
P (D = 1 | Z = 1). The main analysis sample includes women aged 40-49 at enrollment and excludes those who report any
breast cancer in their family, any previous breast cancer diagnosis, any other breast disease, or any symptoms, as well as
those for whom a nurse found abnormalities or referred them for review. Some differences between statistics might not appear
internally consistent because of rounding.

+ P(Z = 0)

h

1−pC
pI −pC

E[X | D = 0, Z = 0] −

1−pI
pI −pC

i
E[X | D = 0, Z = 1] .

17

4.2

Treatment Effect Heterogeneity: Women More Likely to Receive Mammograms
Experience Higher Levels of Overdiagnosis

The evidence that baseline health outcomes decrease from always takers to compliers to never
takers provides justification for an ancillary assumption that I use to identify treatment effect
heterogeneity on a health outcome Y . The assumption requires weak monotonicity of untreated
outcomes from always takers to compliers to never takers:
M.1. (Weak Monotonicity of the MUO Function) For all p1 , p2 ∈ [0, 1] such that p1 < p2 :
E[YU | p1 ] ≤ E[YU | p2 ] or E[YU | p1 ] ≥ E[YU | p2 ],

where the empirical direction of selection heterogeneity determines the direction of the weak monotonicity. While the model imposes the LATE monotonicity assumption in the first stage, M.1
imposes a related weak monotonicity in the second stage.
Brinch et al. (2017) impose M.1 in conjunction with an analogous weak monotonicity assumption
on the MTO function. I advance the literature here by recognizing that either of the Brinch et al.
(2017) assumptions is sufficient to test for treatment effect heterogeneity. I only impose M.1 because
the selection heterogeneity that I find in terms of untreated outcomes and covariates provides
empirical support for it. In contrast, alternative assumptions on the MTO or MTE functions
entail assumptions about treatment effect heterogeneity. I prefer not to identify treatment effect
heterogeneity with assumptions about treatment effect heterogeneity.
In Figure 5, I demonstrate that M.1 yields an upper bound on the average untreated outcome
of always takers in the CNBSS, which implies a lower bound on the average treatment effect for
always takers. It is well-known that it is possible to estimate bounds on the average treatment
effect for always takers using bounds that arise from the natural range of outcomes (Robins, 1989;
Manski, 1990; Balke and Pearl, 1997) or from ancillary assumptions (Imbens and Rubin, 1997). The
ancillary assumptions made by Olsen (1980), Heckman (1979), and Brinch et al. (2017), discussed
by Kline and Walters (2019), also imply bounds on the average treatment effect for always takers,
but those assumptions are stronger than M.1 and more difficult to motivate in the CNBSS.
As shown in Figure 5, the lower bound on the average treatment effect for always takers is larger
than the LATE, the average treatment effect for compliers, which provides evidence of treatment
effect heterogeneity. I conduct a formal test of the null hypothesis of treatment effect homogeneity
which rejects the null hypothesis if the following test statistic is negative:

E[YU | compliers] − E[YU | never takers]


∗ (E[YT | always takers] − E[YU | compliers) − (E[YT | compliers] − E[YU | compliers) .

(2)

The term in the first line of (2) is the untreated outcome test statistic, which determines whether the
bound on the average treatment effect for always takers is an upper bound or a lower bound. The
term in the second line is the difference between the bound on the always taker average treatment
effect and the LATE. For internal consistency with inference that I perform on other quantities,
I perform inference using a nonparametric bootstrap with 1,000 replications. That is, I report a
18

Breast Cancer Incidence 20 Years After Enrollment (per 10,000)

Figure 5: Test Rejects Treatment Effect Homogeneity on Breast Cancer Incidence at 2.3% Level:
Overdiagnosis is at Least 3.5 Times Higher Among Women Most Likely to Receive Mammograms,
At Least 36% (= 206/571) of Their Cancers are Overdiagnosed
treated
untreated
test rejects treatment effect homogeneity:
-301*(206 - 58) = -44,311 < 0
{0.023}

667

571
always taker
average
treatment effect
lower bound
= 206
(59)

untreated outcome test rejects selection homogeneity:
366 - 667 = -301 6= 0
[0.003]

424
366

LATE = 58
(38)

upper bound

0

pc = 0.19
Always Takers

pI = 0.95 1
Compliers
UD : unobserved net cost of treatment

Never Takers

Note. Bootstrapped standard errors are under point estimates in parentheses, two-tailed bootstrapped p-values are under test
statistics in brackets, and one-tailed bootstrapped p-values are under test statistics in curly braces. The outcome Y is breast
cancer incidence, measured 20 years after enrollment for all participants, based on initial diagnosis and the exact calendar
date of enrollment. The treatment D is mammography, which is equal to one if a participant receives a mammogram in at
least one year during the active study period after the enrollment year. The instrument Z is equal to one if a participant is
assigned to intervention. pC is the fraction treated in control P (D = 1 | Z = 0) and pI is the fraction treated in intervention
P (D = 1 | Z = 1). The main analysis sample includes women aged 40-49 at enrollment and excludes those who report any
breast cancer in their family, any previous breast cancer diagnosis, any other breast disease, or any symptoms, as well as
those for whom a nurse found abnormalities or referred them for review. Some differences between statistics might not appear
internally consistent because of rounding.

one-tailed p-value equal to the fraction of bootstrap replications in which the test statistic in (2)
is positive. Because this inference approach relies on a single test statistic, it is more powerful
than the approach proposed by Brinch et al. (2017). That approach effectively conducts separate
tests on the signs of the first and second terms of (2) and then tests whether both signs are equal
using a Bonferroni correction to account for multiple hypothesis testing, which is power-reducing.
Accordingly, the test rejects the null hypothesis of treatment effect homogeneity at the 4.3% level
under the Brinch et al. (2017) approach and at the 2.3% level under my proposed approach.
The statistical significance of the treatment effect heterogeneity is important, but its magnitude is also meaningful, as are the magnitudes of the treatment effects themselves. As depicted in
Figure 5, the average treatment effect for compliers, the LATE, indicates that by 20 years after
enrollment, breast cancer incidence among compliers who received mammograms during the active
study period was 0.58 percentage points higher than it would have been otherwise. To put this
19

magnitude in context, 20-year breast cancer incidence was 424 per 10,000 among treated compliers,
so the LATE indicates that 14% (=0.58/4.24) of breast cancers, almost 1 in 7, were overdiagnosed.
Turning to always takers, the lower bound on the average treatment effect indicates that breast
cancer incidence among always takers who received mammograms during the active study period
was at least 2.06 percentage points higher than it would have been otherwise. Thus, the average
treatment effect for always takers was at least 3.5 (=2.06/0.58) times higher than it was for compliers. Therefore, the 20-year level of overdiagnosis is at least 3.5 times higher among the women
most likely to receive mammograms, the always takers, than it is among compliers. Furthermore,
given that the 20-year breast cancer incidence rate among always takers is 5.71%, at least 36%
(=2.06/5.71) of their breast cancers are overdiagnosed.
The rates of overdiagnosis that I estimate within my main analysis sample, at least 36% among
always takers and 14% among compliers, fall squarely within the range of overdiagnosis estimates
from literature. Estimates vary in their data sources, their identification strategies, the types of
breast cancers that they consider, and the denominators that they use to calculate overdiagnosis
rates. In a review that includes estimates from clinical trials as well as natural experiments created
by population screening programs, estimates have been reported as high as 52% (Gøtzsche and
Jørgensen, 2013). Within the CNBSS, Miller et al. (2014) reports an overdiagnosis rate of 22%,
and Baines et al. (2016) report several different overdiagnosis rates that vary from 5% to 48%.
Baines et al. (2016) obtain the overdiagnosis rate of 5% by comparing incidence in intervention and
control. This approach provides an average measure of overdiagnosis among all women under the
implicit assumption that overdiagnosis is zero among always and never takers.
I do not provide an estimate of overdiagnosis among never takers. During the active study
period, never takers do not receive mammograms, so they cannot be overdiagnosed, but they
can be underdiagnosed. After the active study period, never takers can receive mammograms
(the term “never taker” gets its meaning within the active study period), so never takers can be
overdiagnosed or underdiagnosed in the long term. I could potentially determine whether never
takers are overdiagnosed or underdiagnosed in the long term by making additional assumptions.
However, assumptions analogous to M.1 on the MTO and MTE functions are either difficult to
defend or uninformative in the CNBSS, so I refrain from imposing them.12 Furthermore, in the
analogy to the USPSTF mammography guidelines, never takers do not receive mammograms under
the current or previous guidelines, so the treatment effect for them is less policy-relevant than the
treatment effects for always takers and compliers.
12

Specifically, weak monotonicity of the MTO function would be difficult to defend in the CNBSS. Such an
assumption would imply that the sum of selection and treatment effect heterogeneity is weakly monotonic from
always takers to never takers to compliers. However, my two main findings show that 1) selection heterogeneity
is increasing in the fraction treated p and 2) treatment effect heterogeneity is decreasing in the fraction treated p.
Therefore, it is unclear if their sum should be decreasing or increasing in the fraction treated p. Baseline covariates
only inform selection heterogeneity; they do not inform the sum of selection and treatment effect heterogeneity. It
could be more palatable to impose weak monotonicity of the MTE function. However, alone, such an assumption
would not identify an average treatment effect for never takers. In conjunction with M.1, such an assumption would
imply that the average treatment effect for never takers is smaller than the LATE, but the implied average treatment
effect for never takers could be positive or negative, so it is uninformative in the CNBSS in the sense that it could
be consistent with overdiagnosis or underdiagnosis.

20

4.2.1

Breast Cancer Characteristics Corroborate Treatment Effect Heterogeneity

One potential concern with my finding of treatment effect heterogeneity, which shows that women
more likely to receive mammograms are more likely to be overdiagnosed by them, is that M.1
does not actually hold, such that always takers would actually have higher breast cancer incidence
than compliers in the absence of mammograms. This could be the case if always takers receive
mammograms because they know that they have a higher risk of breast cancer than compliers,
despite appearing healthier on other dimensions. To address this concern, in addition to selecting
the sample to exclude women with a family history of breast cancer and women with potential
knowledge of increased breast cancer risk, I compare average characteristics of the breast cancers
detected among always takers and treated compliers during the active study period.
As shown in Table 2, I find suggestive evidence that breast cancers detected among always
takers are smaller and less invasive than breast cancers detected among treated compliers. One
potential explanation for this evidence is selection heterogeneity such that always takers with
breast cancer are healthier than compliers with breast cancer, which corroborates my finding of
selection heterogeneity such that women more likely to receive mammograms are healthier. A
second potential explanation is that mammography has a larger average treatment effect on breast
cancer diagnosis for always takers relative to compliers such that given the same or better underlying
health, always takers are more likely to be diagnosed with breast cancer. The second explanation
corroborates my finding of treatment effect heterogeneity such that women more likely to receive
mammograms are more likely to be overdiagnosed by them.
Table 2: Suggestive Evidence that Women More Likely to Receive Mammograms
Have Breast Cancers That Are Smaller and Less Invasive
and Undergo More Aggressive Procedures
Means

Tumor Size Among Breast Cancers (in mm)

Share of Invasive Breast Cancer Among
Breast Cancers (%)

(1)

(2)

Always
Takers

Treated
Compliers

Difference in Means
(1) - (2)

13

18

-5

(2)

(3)

(4)

73
(9)

75
(7)

-2
(13)

22
45
23
(14)
(9)
(7)
Note. Bootstrapped standard errors are under point estimates in parentheses. Lumpectomy is a procedure that involves partial
Note. Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. All outcomes are restricted to those years
removal of a breast, and mastectomy is a more aggressive procedure that involves complete removal of a breast. The treatment
for which
which is treatment
is if defined
duringreceives
the active
study period.
Theonetreatment
is the active study
D is mammography,
equal to one
a participant
a mammogram
in at least
year during
mammography,
equal toY one
if a participant
a which
mammogram
in atis least
oneduring the active
period after the enrollment
year. which
Each isoutcome
is restricted
to the receives
years for
treatment
defined
study period. Theyear
instrument
Z isactive
equalstudy
to oneperiod
if a participant
is assigned year.
to intervention.
pC is the fraction
during the
after the enrollment
Missing mammogram
data intreated in control
P (D = 1 | Z = 0)any
andyear
pI isis the
treated in intervention
P (D
1 | Z =includes
1). The women
main analysis
sample
set fraction
to no mammogram
in that year.
The= sample
aged 40-49
at includes women
aged 40-49 at enrollment and excludes those who report any breast cancer in their family, any previous breast cancer diagnosis,
enrollment, excluding women with any nonzero values of the following breast-related
any other breast disease, or any symptoms, as well as those for whom a nurse found abnormalities or referred them for review.
covariates at baseline: breast cancer in family; any other breast disease; patient reported
symptoms; referred for review by nurse; abnormality found by nurse; ever told has breast
Share of Mastectomy Among Breast Cancers
with Mastectomy or Lumpectomy (%)

21

5

Robustness

I examine the robustness of my two main findings by estimating my main specification with an
alternative outcome, alternative sample restrictions, alternative definitions of mammography, and
alternative follow-up lengths. To facilitate comparisons with my main specification, I summarize
important statistics from the main specification depicted in Figure 5 in Table 3. A specification
shows selection heterogeneity if the untreated outcome test rejects in column (1), and a negative sign
on the untreated outcome test statistic indicates that women more likely to receive mammograms
are healthier. Similarly, a specification shows treatment effect heterogeneity if the test rejects in
column (4), and a negative sign on the test statistic indicates that women more likely to receive
mammograms experience a larger average treatment effect from them.
Table 3: Summary of Findings Depicted in Figure 5
and Robustness to Alternative Outcomes, Sample Restrictions, and Definitions of Mammography

N

(1)
Untreated
Outcome Test
Rejects Selection
Homogeneity

(2)

(3)

Always Taker Average
Treatment Effect
Lower Bound

Local Average
Treatment Effect
LATE

(4)
Test Rejects
Treatment Effect
Homogeneity
(1)*((2)-(3))<0

Main Specification
Outcome is breast cancer incidence, sample is main analysis sample, treatment is defined as mammogram in at least one active study period after enrollment
Breast cancer incidence

19,505

-301
[0.003]

206
(59)

58
(38)

-44,311
{0.023}

Alternative Outcomes
All-cause mortality

19,505

-562
[0.000]

22
(55)

-13
(39)

-19,923
{0.290}

Alternative Sample Restrictions
All excluded participants aged 40-49 at enrollment

30,925

-1,237
[0.000]

309
(45)

79
(44)

All participants aged 40-49 at enrollment

50,430

-826
[0.000]

298
(36)

69
(30)

-284,634
{0.000}

All participants aged 50-59 at enrollment

39,405

-1,555
[0.000]

419
(53)

39
(34)

All participants

89,835

-1,156
[0.000]

332
(30)

55
(22)

19,505

-341
[0.000]

239
(90)

54
(35)

At least three active study period years after enrollment

19,505

-330
[0.000]

167
(142)

55
(36)

All active study period years after enrollment

19,505

-178
[0.005]

158
(181)

64
(42)

Alternative Definitions of Mammography
At least two active study period years after enrollment

-189,397
{0.000}

-591,037
{0.000}
-319,660
{0.000}
-63,347
{0.019}

-36,927
{0.206}

-16,656
{0.312}

Note. Bootstrapped standard errors are under point estimates in parentheses, two-tailed bootstrapped p-values are under test
statistics in brackets, and one-tailed bootstrapped p-values are under test statistics in curly braces. Some p-values are zero if
the test rejects the null hypothesis in all 1,000 bootstrap replications. Each outcome Y is measured 20 years after enrollment
per 10,000 participants for all participants, based on initial occurrence and the exact calendar date of enrollment. In the main
specification, the treatment D is mammography, which is equal to one if a participant receives a mammogram in at least one
year during the active study period after the enrollment year. The instrument Z is equal to one if a participant is assigned to
intervention. The main analysis sample includes women aged 40-49 at enrollment and excludes those who report any breast
cancer in their family, any previous breast cancer diagnosis, any other breast disease, or any symptoms, as well as those for
whom a nurse found abnormalities or referred them for review. Some differences between statistics might not appear internally
consistent because of rounding.

5.1

Alternative Outcome

In the main specification, the outcome is breast cancer incidence. In Figure 6 and Table 3, I also
examine all-cause mortality. As I previously discussed, I find selection heterogeneity in terms of
all-cause mortality that is consistent with the selection heterogeneity that I find in terms of breast
22

cancer incidence: women more likely to receive mammograms are healthier on both dimensions.
The results that I present here also provide suggestive evidence of treatment effect heterogeneity on
all-cause mortality that is consistent with the treatment effect heterogeneity that I find in terms of
breast cancer incidence: women more likely to receive mammograms are more likely to be harmed
by them on both dimensions.
Figure 6: Test Rejects Treatment Effect Heterogeneity on All-Cause Mortality at 29% Level:
Women More Likely to Receive Mammograms Experience Greater Harm From Them,
At Least 4.9% (= 22/451) of Their Deaths Would Not Have Occurred Otherwise

All-Cause Deaths 20 Years After Enrollment (per 10,000)

treated
untreated
test rejects treatment effect homogeneity:
-562*(22 - (-13)) = -19,923 < 0
{0.290}

990

always taker
average
treatment effect
lower bound
= 22
(55)

451

untreated outcome test rejects selection homogeneity:
428 - 990 = -562 6= 0
[0.000]

428
upper bound
415

LATE = -13
(39)

0

pc = 0.19
Always Takers

Compliers

pI = 0.95 1
Never Takers

UD : unobserved net cost of treatment

Note. Bootstrapped standard errors are under point estimates in parentheses, two-tailed bootstrapped p-values are under test
statistics in brackets, and one-tailed bootstrapped p-values are under test statistics in curly braces. Some p-values are zero
if the test rejects the null hypothesis in all 1,000 bootstrap replications. The outcome Y is all-cause mortality, measured 20
years after enrollment for all participants, based on the exact calendar date of enrollment. The treatment D is mammography,
which is equal to one if a participant receives a mammogram in at least one year during the active study period after the
enrollment year. The instrument Z is equal to one if a participant is assigned to intervention. pC is the fraction treated in
control P (D = 1 | Z = 0) and pI is the fraction treated in intervention P (D = 1 | Z = 1). The main analysis sample includes
women aged 40-49 at enrollment and excludes those who report any breast cancer in their family, any previous breast cancer
diagnosis, any other breast disease, or any symptoms, as well as those for whom a nurse found abnormalities or referred them
for review. Some differences between statistics might not appear internally consistent because of rounding.

The magnitude of the lower bound on the average treatment effect on mortality for always
takers is notable. It indicates that always takers experience at least an additional 22 deaths per
10,000 participants when they receive mammograms, which suggests that at least 4.9% (= 22/451)
of their deaths would not have occurred otherwise. For comparison, the World Health Organization
estimates the number of road traffic deaths in the entire U.S. population each year at 1.1 per 10,000
people (World Health Organization, 2015). Therefore, the lower bound on the average treatment
effect for always takers, which is measured over a 20-year period, is comparable to the rate of road
23

traffic deaths over a period of the same length.
Why might women more likely to receive mammograms be more likely to experience harm from
them, as measured in terms of all-cause mortality? As shown in the first two rows of Table 2, I
find suggestive evidence that women more likely to receive mammograms have breast cancers that
are smaller and less invasive. Virtually all women diagnosed with breast cancer during the active
study period underwent lumpectomy or mastectomy. Whereas lumpectomy involves only partial
removal of the breast, mastectomy is a more aggressive procedure that involves complete removal of
the breast. The third row of Table 2 shows that, among women with breast cancer who underwent
either of these procedures during the active study period, 45% of always takers underwent the more
aggressive procedure of mastectomy, compared to only 23% of compliers. These results suggest that
women more likely to receive mammograms may receive more aggressive treatment for smaller, less
invasive breast cancers. These aggressive treatments could lead to increased collateral harms in the
form of all-cause mortality.
5.2

Alternative Sample Restrictions

In the main specification, I consider a sample of women aged 40-49 who do not report any breast
cancer in their family, previous breast cancer diagnosis, any other breast disease, or any symptoms.
I also exclude women if a nurse found abnormalities or referred them for review. In Table 3, I
examine the robustness of my findings to alternative sample restrictions. I consider alternative
sample restrictions that include all excluded participants aged 40-49 at enrollment, all participants
aged 40-49 at enrollment, all participants aged 50-59 at enrollment, and all participants. My
findings of selection and treatment effect heterogeneity hold in all of the reported samples.
5.3

Alternative Definitions of Mammography

In the main specification, I define mammography D such that D = 1 if a participant receives a
mammogram in at least one year during the active study period after the enrollment year, and
I set D = 0 otherwise. I assess robustness to narrower definitions of mammography that require
mammograms in more years of the active study period in Table 3. Given the available data, I
cannot examine robustness to definitions that include mammography after the active study period.
I find selection heterogeneity under all definitions of mammography, and I find treatment effect
heterogeneity under the first alternative definition of mammography. The test for treatment effect
homogeneity is not statistically significant under the two narrowest definitions of mammography,
but it indicates treatment effect heterogeneity in the same direction. The two narrowest definitions
are arguably too extreme because they require that “treated” participants must receive mammograms in three or more active study period years after enrollment, so it is notable that the results
yield the same qualitative conclusions.
5.4

Alternative Follow-up Lengths

In the main specification, breast cancer incidence is measured 20 years after enrollment. Table 4
summarizes results for breast cancer incidence at all earlier annual follow-up lengths. The untreated
outcome test statistic is negative at all follow-up lengths, consistent with selection heterogeneity
24

Table 4: Summary of Findings Depicted in Figure 5
and Robustness to Alternative Follow-up Lengths

Years Since Enrollment

N

(1)
Untreated
Outcome Test
Rejects Selection
Homogeneity

(2)

(3)

Always Taker Average
Treatment Effect
Lower Bound

Local Average
Treatment Effect
LATE

Main specification: 20

19,505

-301
[0.003]

206
(59)

58
(38)

19

19,505

-269
[0.013]

196
(58)

52
(37)

18

19,505

-311
[0.000]

210
(56)

54
(35)

17

19,505

-322
[0.000]

214
(55)

49
(34)

16

19,505

-342
[0.000]

232
(54)

56
(32)

15

19,505

-381
[0.000]

211
(50)

84
(31)

14

19,505

-404
[0.000]

201
(49)

80
(29)

13

19,505

-431
[0.000]

223
(48)

75
(28)

12

19,505

-443
[0.000]

191
(44)

64
(27)

11

19,505

-423
[0.000]

195
(43)

55
(25)

10

19,505

-419
[0.000]

200
(42)

47
(23)

9

19,505

-413
[0.000]

192
(40)

34
(22)

8

19,505

-409
[0.000]

175
(37)

35
(21)

7

19,505

-393
[0.000]

177
(35)

46
(18)

6

19,505

-412
[0.000]

185
(33)

50
(17)

5

19,505

-382
[0.000]

180
(32)

45
(15)

4

19,505

-393
[0.000]

152
(29)

46
(13)

3

19,505

-354
[0.000]

104
(23)

37
(11)

2

19,505

-337
[0.000]

63
(18)

25
(9)

1

19,505

-342
[0.000]

35
(11)

20
(6)

(4)
Test Rejects
Treatment Effect
Homogeneity
(1)*((2)-(3))<0
-44,311
{0.023}

-38,565
{0.023}

-48,503
{0.010}

-52,975
{0.005}

-60,245
{0.003}

-48,650
{0.015}

-49,046
{0.020}

-63,808
{0.007}

-56,156
{0.010}

-59,084
{0.004}

-64,017
{0.000}
-64,955
{0.000}
-57,386
{0.000}
-51,740
{0.000}
-55,761
{0.000}
-51,581
{0.000}
-41,568
{0.003}
-23,679
{0.012}

-12,632
{0.030}
-5,194
{0.097}

Note. Bootstrapped standard errors are under point estimates in parentheses, two-tailed bootstrapped p-values are under test
statistics in brackets, and one-tailed bootstrapped p-values are under test statistics in curly braces. Some p-values are zero if
the test rejects the null hypothesis in all 1,000 bootstrap replications. The outcome Y is breast cancer incidence, measured at
various years since enrollment for all participants, based on initial diagnosis and the exact calendar date of enrollment. The
treatment D is mammography, which is equal to one if a participant receives a mammogram in at least one year during the
active study period after the enrollment year. The instrument Z is equal to one if a participant is assigned to intervention.
The main analysis sample includes women aged 40-49 at enrollment and excludes those who report any breast cancer in their
family, any previous breast cancer diagnosis, any other breast disease, or any symptoms, as well as those for whom a nurse
found abnormalities or referred them for review. Some differences between statistics might not appear internally consistent
because of rounding.

25

such that women more likely to receive mammograms are healthier. Furthermore, the test rejects
treatment effect homogeneity at the 3% level or less at all follow-up lengths after the first year,
consistent with treatment effect heterogeneity such that women more likely to receive mammograms
experience higher levels of overdiagnosis.
Whether overdiagnosis can be estimated in the short term is controversial due to the concept
of lead time, “the time from detection of preclinical cancer by screening to detection of clinical
(symptomatic) cancer in the absence of screening” (Baker et al., 2014). Short follow-up lengths
might not allow for enough lead time, such that excess breast cancer detection in the intervention
arm could just reflect lead time instead of overdiagnosis. However, once there is evidence of overdiagnosis in the long term, estimates from the short term can also be interpreted as estimates of
overdiagnosis (Zahl et al., 2013; Baines et al., 2016). As shown in Table 4, the LATE is positive
and statistically significant in the first year, and it is still statistically significant at longer follow-up
lengths, consistent with overdiagnosis. Consequently, my findings at earlier follow-up lengths could
also reflect overdiagnosis.

6

Implications for Guidelines and Future Research

The CNBSS began decades ago, but my finding that women more likely to receive mammograms
are more likely to be overdiagnosed by them is particularly relevant now. In the United States,
the percentage of women aged 40 and older who received a mammogram within the last two years
increased from 29% in 1987 to 64% in 2015 (National Health Interview Survey, 2017). Many factors
encourage mammography, including public outreach efforts, risk aversion on the part of patients and
doctors, and profit incentives. Given these factors, health insurance coverage for mammograms is
mandatory under the Affordable Care Act, even though coverage for other preventive services is tied
to current USPSTF recommendations.13 Very few factors discourage mammography or encourage
more evidence to be collected on it, which is potentially a reason to take my findings from the
CNBSS even more seriously. Furthermore, as mammograms become increasingly accurate, they
can potentially identify even smaller tumors that would never become life-threatening, leading to
higher levels of overdiagnosis. At the same time, existing breast cancer therapies have become less
harmful, so the impact of overdiagnosis on mortality may have decreased. However, new targeted
breast cancer therapies have also been developed. As therapies become more effective at treating
advanced cancers, there will be less of a need to screen women before they develop symptoms.
Beyond informing mammography guidelines, my findings demonstrate an approach through
which behavior within clinical trials can inform other clinical guidelines. Whenever the USPSTF
determines that “there is at least moderate certainty that the net benefit is small,” it issues a
“C recommendation,” as it did for mammography for women in their 40s, which means that “the
USPSTF recommends selectively offering this service to individual patients based on professional
judgment and patient preferences” (U.S. Preventive Service Task Force, 2017). These C recommendations presuppose selection and treatment effect heterogeneity such that the individuals most
13

Section 2713 of the Affordable Care Act (2010) states that “recommendations of the United States Preventive
Services Task Force regarding breast cancer screening, mammography, and prevention issued in or around November
2009 are not considered to be current.”

26

likely to benefit from a treatment will be the most likely to receive it. However, they are not based
on evidence of selection and treatment effect heterogeneity. By demonstrating that it is possible
to examine selection and treatment effect heterogeneity using the same clinical trial data currently
used to develop guidelines, I enhance the ability of future guidelines to target treatments toward
individuals most likely to benefit from them and away from individuals most likely to be harmed
by them.

References
Abadie, A. (2002). Bootstrap tests for distributional treatment effects in instrumental variable
models. Journal of the American Statistical Association 97 (457), 284–292.
Abadie, A. (2003). Semiparametric instrumental variable estimation of treatment response models.
Journal of econometrics 113 (2), 231–263.
Affordable Care Act (2010). The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Sec. 2713, Coverage
of Preventive Services.
Angrist, J. (1998). Estimating the labor market impact of voluntary military service using social
security data on military applicants. Econometrica 66 (2), 249–288.
Angrist, J. D., G. W. Imbens, and D. B. Rubin (1996). Identification of causal effects using
instrumental variables. Journal of the American statistical Association 91 (434), 444–455.
Baines, C. J. (1984). Impediments to recruitment in the canadian national breast screening study:
response and resolution. Controlled clinical trials 5 (2), 129–140.
Baines, C. J., T. To, and A. B. Miller (2016). Revised estimates of overdiagnosis from the canadian
national breast screening study. Preventive medicine 90, 66–71.
Baker, S. G., P. C. Prorok, and B. S. Kramer (2014). Lead time and overdiagnosis. Journal of the
National Cancer Institute 106.
Balke, A. and J. Pearl (1997). Bounds on treatment effects from studies with imperfect compliance.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 92 (439), 1171–1176.
Bertanha, M. and G. W. Imbens (2014, December). External validity in fuzzy regression discontinuity designs. Working Paper 20773, National Bureau of Economic Research. https:
//www.nber.org/papers/w20773.
Bitler, M. and C. Carpenter (2019, August). Effects of direct care provision to the uninsured:
Evidence from federal breast and cervical cancer programs. Working Paper 26140, National
Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/papers/w26140.
Bitler, M. P. and C. S. Carpenter (2016). Health insurance mandates, mammography, and breast
cancer diagnoses. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (3), 39–68.
Björklund, A. and R. Moffitt (1987). The estimation of wage gains and welfare gains in self-selection
models. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 42–49.
Bjurstam, N., L. Björneld, J. Warwick, E. Sala, S. W. Duffy, L. Nyström, N. Walker, E. Cahlin,
O. Eriksson, L.-O. Hafström, et al. (2003). The gothenburg breast screening trial. Cancer 97 (10),
2387–2396.
27

Black, D. A., J. Joo, R. LaLonde, J. A. Smith, and E. J. Taylor (2017, March). Simple tests for
selection: Learning more from instrumental variables. Working Paper 6932, CESifo. https:
//www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/cesifo1_wp6392.pdf.
Bleyer, A. and H. G. Welch (2012). Effect of three decades of screening mammography on breastcancer incidence. New England Journal of Medicine 367 (21), 1998–2005.
Brinch, C. N., M. Mogstad, and M. Wiswall (2017). Beyond LATE with a discrete instrument.
Journal of Political Economy 125 (4), 000–000.
Buchmueller, T. C. and L. Goldzahl (2018, February). The effect of organized breast cancer screening on mammography use: Evidence from france. Working Paper 24316, National Bureau of
Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w24316.
Carneiro, P., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil (2011). Estimating marginal returns to education.
The American economic review 101 (6), 2754–2781.
Carneiro, P. and S. Lee (2009). Estimating distributions of potential outcomes using local instrumental variables with an application to changes in college enrollment and wage inequality.
Journal of Econometrics 149 (2), 191–208.
CDC (2020). Breast cancer screening guidelines for women.
Cooper, G. S., T. D. Kou, A. Dor, S. M. Koroukian, and M. D. Schluchter (2017). Cancer preventive
services, socioeconomic status, and the affordable care act. Cancer 123 (9), 1585–1589.
Cornelissen, T., C. Dustmann, A. Raute, and U. Schönberg (2018). Who benefits from universal
child care? estimating marginal returns to early child care attendance. Journal of Political
Economy 126 (6), 2356–2409.
Cutler, D. M. and A. Lleras-Muney (2010). Understanding differences in health behaviors by
education. Journal of health economics 29 (1), 1–28.
Ebell, M. H., T. N. Thai, and K. J. Royalty (2018). Cancer screening recommendations: an
international comparison of high income countries. Public Health Reviews 39 (7).
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, T. Oostrom, A. Ostriker, and M. R. Cullen (2019, August). Screening
and selection: The case of mammograms. Working Paper 26162, National Bureau of Economic
Research. https://www.nber.org/papers/w26162.
Esserman, L. J. and M. Varma (2019). Should we rename low risk cancers? BMJ 364, k4699.
Fedewa, S. A., M. Goodman, W. D. Flanders, X. Han, R. A. Smith, E. M. Ward, C. A. Doubeni,
A. G. Sauer, and A. Jemal (2015). Elimination of cost-sharing and receipt of screening for
colorectal and breast cancer. Cancer 121 (18), 3272–3280.
Finkelstein, A. F., S. Taubman, B. J. Wright, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J. P. Newhouse, H. L.
Allen, K. Baicker, and the Oregon Health Study Group (2012). The Oregon health insurance
experiment: Evidence from the first year. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3), 1057–
1106.
Goldman, D. P. and J. P. Smith (2002). Can patient self-management help explain the ses health
gradient? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99 (16), 10929–10934.

28

Gøtzsche, P. C. and K. J. Jørgensen (2013). Screening for breast cancer with mammography.
Cochrane database of systematic reviews (6).
Guo, Z., J. Cheng, S. A. Lorch, and D. S. Small (2014). Using an instrumental variable to test for
unmeasured confounding. Statistics in medicine 33 (20), 3528–3546.
Habbema, J., G. J. v. Oortmarssen, D. J. van Putten, J. T. Lubbe, and P. J. v. d. Maas (1986).
Age-specific reduction in breast cancer mortality by screening: an analysis of the results of the
health insurance plan of greater new york study. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 77 (2),
317–320.
Habermann, E. B., B. A. Virnig, G. F. Riley, and N. N. Baxter (2007). The impact of a change in
medicare reimbursement policy and hedis measures on stage at diagnosis among medicare hmo
and fee-for-service female breast cancer patients. Medical care 45 (8), 761–766.
Heckman, J. (1979). Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica 47 (1), 153–162.
Heckman, J. J., H. Ichimura, J. Smith, and P. Todd (1998). Characterizing selection bias using
experimental data. Econometrica 66 (5), 1017–1098.
Heckman, J. J. and E. Vytlacil (2005). Structural equations, treatment effects, and econometric
policy evaluation. Econometrica 73 (3), 669–738.
Heckman, J. J. and E. J. Vytlacil (1999). Local instrumental variables and latent variable models
for identifying and bounding treatment effects. Proceedings of the national Academy of Sciences 96 (8), 4730–4734.
Heckman, J. J. and E. J. Vytlacil (2001). Local instrumental variables. In C. Hsiao, K. Morimune,
and J. L. Powell (Eds.), Nonlinear Statistical Modeling: Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Symposium in Economic Theory and Econometrics: Essays in Honor of Takeshi Amemiya,
pp. 1–46. Cambridge University Press.
Imbens, G. W. and J. D. Angrist (1994). Identification and estimation of local average treatment
effects. Econometrica 62 (2), 467–475.
Imbens, G. W. and D. B. Rubin (1997). Estimating outcome distributions for compliers in instrumental variables models. The Review of Economic Studies 64 (4), 555–574.
Jacobson, M. and S. Kadiyala (2017). When guidelines conflict: A case study of mammography
screening initiation in the 1990s. Women’s Health Issues 27 (6), 692–699.
Kadiyala, S. and E. Strumpf (2016). How effective is population-based cancer screening? regression
discontinuity estimates from the us guideline screening initiation ages. In Forum for Health
Economics and Policy, Volume 19, pp. 87–139. De Gruyter.
Kadiyala, S. and E. C. Strumpf (2011). Are united states and canadian cancer screening rates
consistent with guideline information regarding the age of screening initiation? International
Journal for Quality in Health Care 23 (6), 611–620.
Katz, L. F., J. R. Kling, J. B. Liebman, et al. (2001). Moving to opportunity in boston: Early results
of a randomized mobility experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2), 607–654.

29

Kelaher, M. and J. M. Stellman (2000). The impact of medicare funding on the use of mammography
among older women: implications for improving access to screening. Preventive medicine 31 (6),
658–664.
Kim, H. B. and S. Lee (2017). When public health intervention is not successful: Cost sharing, crowd-out, and selection in korea’s national cancer screening program. Journal of Health
Economics 53, 100 – 116.
Klarenbach, S., N. Sims-Jones, G. Lewin, H. Singh, G. Thériault, M. Tonelli, M. Doull, S. Courage,
A. J. Garcia, and B. D. Thombs (2018). Recommendations on screening for breast cancer in
women aged 40–74 years who are not at increased risk for breast cancer. CMAJ: Canadian
Medical Association Journal 190 (49), E1441.
Kline, P. and C. R. Walters (2019). On heckits, LATE, and numerical equivalence. Econometrica 87 (2), 677–696.
Kolstad, J. T. and A. E. Kowalski (2012). The impact of health care reform on hospital and
preventive care: evidence from massachusetts. Journal of Public Economics 96 (11-12), 909–929.
Kowalski, A. (2016, June). Doing more when you’re running LATE: Applying marginal treatment
effect methods to examine treatment effect heterogeneity in experiments. Working Paper 22362,
National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w22362.
Kowalski, A. (2020a, October). How to examine external validity within an experiment. Working
Paper 24834, National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w24834.
Kowalski, A. (2020b, November). Reconciling seemingly constradictory results from the Oregon
health insurance experiment and the Massachusetts health reform. Working Paper 24647, National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w24647.
Kowalski, A., Y. Tran, and L. Ristovska (2018). MTEBINARY: Stata module to compute Marginal
Treatment Effects (MTE) With a Binary Instrument. Statistical Software Components, Boston
College Department of Economics.
Kowalski, A. E. (2018, September). Behavior within a clinical trial and implications for mammography guidelines. Working Paper 25049, National Bureau of Economic Research. http:
//www.nber.org/papers/w25049.
Lu, Y. and D. J. Slusky (2016). The impact of women’s health clinic closures on preventive care.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8 (3), 100–124.
Manski, C. F. (1990). Nonparametric bounds on treatment effects. The American Economic
Review 80 (2), 319–323.
Mehta, S. J., D. Polsky, J. Zhu, J. D. Lewis, J. T. Kolstad, G. Loewenstein, and K. G. Volpp
(2015). Aca-mandated elimination of cost sharing for preventive screening has had limited early
impact. The American journal of managed care 21 (7), 511.
Miller, A. B., C. J. Baines, T. To, and C. Wall (1992a). Canadian national breast screening study:
1. breast cancer detection and death rates among women aged 40 to 49 years. CMAJ: Canadian
Medical Association Journal 147 (10), 1459–1476.

30

Miller, A. B., C. J. Baines, T. To, and C. Wall (1992b). Canadian national breast screening study:
2. breast cancer detection and death rates among women aged 50 to 59 years. CMAJ: Canadian
Medical Association Journal 147 (10), 1477–1488.
Miller, A. B., T. To, C. J. Baines, and C. Wall (1997). The canadian national breast screening
study: update on breast cancer mortality. JNCI Monographs 1997 (22), 37–41.
Miller, A. B., T. To, C. J. Baines, and C. Wall (2000). Canadian national breast screening study-2:
13-year results of a randomized trial in women aged 50–59 years. Journal of the National Cancer
Institute 92 (18), 1490–1499.
Miller, A. B., T. To, C. J. Baines, and C. Wall (2002). The canadian national breast screening
study-1: breast cancer mortality after 11 to 16 years of follow-up: a randomized screening trial
of mammography in women age 40 to 49 years. Annals of internal medicine 137 (5 Part 1),
305–312.
Miller, A. B., C. Wall, C. J. Baines, P. Sun, T. To, and S. A. Narod (2014). Twenty five year
follow-up for breast cancer incidence and mortality of the canadian national breast screening
study: randomised screening trial. Bmj 348, g366.
Mogstad, M., A. Santos, and A. Torgovitsky (2018). Using instrumental variables for inference
about policy relevant treatment effects. Econometrica 86 (5), 1589–1619.
Moss, S. M., C. Wale, R. Smith, A. Evans, H. Cuckle, and S. W. Duffy (2015). Effect of mammographic screening from age 40 years on breast cancer mortality in the uk age trial at 17 years’
follow-up: a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet Oncology 16 (9), 1123–1132.
Myerson, R. M., D. Lakdawalla, L. D. Colantonio, M. Safford, and D. Meltzer (2018, February).
Effects of expanding health screening on treatment - what should we expect? what can we learn?
Working Paper 24347, National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/
w24347.
Myerson, R. M., R. Tucker-Seeley, D. Goldman, and D. N. Lakdawalla (2019, September). Does
medicare coverage improve cancer detection and mortality outcomes? Working Paper 26292,
National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w26292.
National Center for Health Statistics (2012). Health, United States, 2011: With special feature on
socioeconomic status and health.
National Health Interview Survey (2017). Use of mammography among women aged 40 and over,
by selected characteristics : United states, selected years 1987 – 2015. https://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/data/hus/2017/070.pdf.
Nelson, H. D., R. Fu, A. Cantor, M. Pappas, M. Daeges, and L. Humphrey (2016). Effectiveness of
breast cancer screening: Systematic review and meta-analysis to update the 2009 us preventive
services task force recommendation effectiveness of breast cancer screening. Annals of internal
medicine 164 (4), 244–255.
Nyström, L., I. Andersson, N. Bjurstam, J. Frisell, B. Nordenskjöld, and L. E. Rutqvist (2002).
Long-term effects of mammography screening: updated overview of the swedish randomised
trials. The Lancet 359 (9310), 909–919.

31

Olsen, R. J. (1980). A least squares correction for selectivity bias. Econometrica: Journal of the
Econometric Society, 1815–1820.
Ong, M.-S. and K. D. Mandl (2015). National expenditure for false-positive mammograms and
breast cancer overdiagnoses estimated at $4 billion a year. Health Affairs 34 (4), 576–583.
Oster, E. (2020, June). Health recommendations and selection in health behaviors. American
Economic Review: Insights 2 (2), 143–60.
Robins, J. M. (1989). The analysis of randomized and non-randomized aids treatment trials using
a new approach to causal inference in longitudinal studies. Health service research methodology:
a focus on AIDS , 113–159.
Roy, A. D. (1951). Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford economic papers 3 (2),
135–146.
Schünemann, H. J., D. Lerda, C. Quinn, M. Follmann, P. Alonso-Coello, P. G. Rossi, A. Lebeau,
L. Nyström, M. Broeders, L. Ioannidou-Mouzaka, et al. (2019). Breast cancer screening and
diagnosis: A synopsis of the european breast guidelines. Annals of internal medicine.
Siu, A. L. (2016). Screening for breast cancer: Us preventive services task force recommendation
statementscreening for breast cancer. Annals of internal medicine 164 (4), 279–296.
Tabar, L., G. Fagerberg, H.-H. Chen, S. W. Duffy, C. R. Smart, A. Gad, and R. A. Smith (1995).
Efficacy of breast cancer screening by age. new results swedish two-county trial. Cancer 75 (10),
2507–2517.
U.S. Preventive Service Task Force (2017).
Grade definitions. u.s. preventive services
task force. november 2017. https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/
grade-definitions. Online. Accessed June 8, 2018.
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (2002). Screening for breast cancer: Recommendations and
rationale. Annals of Internal Medicine 137 (5), 344–346.
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (2009). Screening for breast cancer: U.s. preventive services
task force recommendation statement. Annals of Internal Medicine 151 (10), 716–726.
Vytlacil, E. (2002). Independence, monotonicity, and latent index models: An equivalence result.
Econometrica 70 (1), 331–341.
Welch, H. G. and W. C. Black (2010). Overdiagnosis in cancer. Journal of the National Cancer
Institute 102 (9), 605–613.
Welch, H. G. and E. S. Fisher (2017). Income and cancer overdiagnosis — when too much care is
harmful. New England Journal of Medicine 376 (23), 2208–2209. PMID: 28591536.
World Health Organization (2015). Global status report on road safety 2015. http://www.who.
int/violence_injury_prevention/road_safety_status/2015/en/. Online.
Zahl, P., K. J. Jørgensen, and P. Gøtzsche (2013). Overestimated lead times in cancer screening
has led to substantial underestimation of overdiagnosis. British journal of cancer 109 (7), 2014.
Zanella, G. and R. Banerjee (2016). Experiencing breast cancer at the workplace. Journal of Public
Economics 134, 53–66.
32

