                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         LEVERAGE-INDUCED FIRE SALES AND STOCK MARKET CRASHES

                                         Jiangze Bian
                                          Zhiguo He
                                          Kelly Shue
                                           Hao Zhou

                                     Working Paper 25040
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25040


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




We are grateful to Li An, Markus Brunnermeier, Hui Chen, Will Cong, Zhi Da, Itamar Drechsler,
Darrell Duffie, Larry Harris, John Heaton, Dong Lou, Guangchuan Li, Roger Loh, Gordon
Phillips, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Nick Roussanov, Sheridan Titman, Heather Tookes, and Pietro
Veronesi, Liyan Yang for helpful discussions and insightful comments. Xiao Zhang, and
especially Yiran Fan, provided excellent research assistance. We are grateful to seminar
participants at AQR, BFI Macro Financial Modeling Conference, China Financial Research
Conference, China International Conference in Finance, University of Chicago, Imperial
College London, LBS Academic Symposium, NBER Asset Pricing 2018 Chicago Meeting, NY
Federal Reserve, 2018 Rising Stars Conference at Fordham, Rotterdam, SITE 2018 Financial
Regulation, Tilburg, University of Minnesota, Wharton, and Yale SOM. Zhiguo He
acknowledges financial support from the Center for Research in Security Price at the University
of Chicago Booth School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

Â© 2018 by Jiangze Bian, Zhiguo He, Kelly Shue, and Hao Zhou. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including Â© notice, is given to the source.
Leverage-Induced Fire Sales and Stock Market Crashes
Jiangze Bian, Zhiguo He, Kelly Shue, and Hao Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 25040
September 2018
JEL No. G01,G11,G18,G23

                                         ABSTRACT

We provide direct evidence of leverage-induced fire sales contributing to a market crash using
account-level trading data for brokerage- and shadow-financed margin accounts during the
Chinese stock market crash of 2015. Margin investors heavily sell their holdings when their
account-level leverage edges toward their maximum leverage limits, controlling for stock-date
and account fixed effects. Stocks that are disproportionately held by accounts close to leverage
limits experience high selling pressure and abnormal price declines which subsequently reverse.
Unregulated shadow-financed margin accounts, facilitated by FinTech lending platforms,
contributed more to the crash despite their smaller asset holdings relative to regulated brokerage
accounts.

Jiangze Bian                                    Kelly Shue
University of International Business            Yale School of Management
and Economics                                   165 Whitney Avenue
Beijing                                         P.O. Box 208200
China                                           New Haven, CT 06520-8200
jiangzebian@uibe.edu.cn                         and NBER
                                                kelly.shue@yale.edu
Zhiguo He
University of Chicago Booth                     Hao Zhou
School of Business 5807 S.                      PBC School of Finance
Woodlawn Avenue Chicago,                        Tsinghua University
IL 60637                                        43 Chengfu Road, Haidian District
and NBER                                        Beijing, 100083, P. R. China
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu                      zhouh@pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn
1        Introduction


Excessive leverage and the subsequent leverage-induced re sales are considered to be major contri-

buting factors to many past nancial crises. A prominent example is the US stock market crash of

1929. At the time, leverage for stock market margin trading was unregulated. Margin credit, i.e.,

debt that individual investors borrow to purchase stocks, rose from around 12% of NYSE market

value in 1917 to around 20% in 1929 (Schwert, 1989). In October 1929, investors began facing mar-

gin calls. As investors quickly sold assets to deleverage their positions, the Dow Jones Industrial

Average experienced a record loss of 13% in a single day, later known as Black Monday on October

28, 1929.
             1   Other signicant examples of deleveraging and market crashes include the US housing

crisis which led to the 2007/08 global nancial crisis (see e.g., Mian et al. (2013)) and the Chinese

stock market crash in the summer of 2015. The latter market crash will be the focus of this paper.

    As the worst economic disaster since the Great Depression, the 2007/08 global nancial crisis

greatly revived the interest of academics and policy makers in understanding and measuring the

costs and benets of nancial leverage.             In terms of academic research, the theory has arguably

advanced ahead of the empirics. For instance, in a general equilibrium framework, Brunnermeier

and Pedersen (2009) and Geanakoplos (2010) carefully model a downward leverage spiral in which

tightened leverage constraints trigger re sales, which then depress asset prices, leading to even

tighter leverage constraints. This general equilibrium theory features a devastating positive feedback

loop that is able to match various pieces of anecdotal evidence, and is widely considered to be one

of the leading mechanisms behind the meltdown of the nancial system during the 2007/08 crisis.

Despite its widespread acceptance, there is little direct empirical evidence of leverage-induced re

sales contributing to stock market crashes. Empirical tests of the theory are challenging because

of the limited availability of detailed account-level data on leverage and trading activities.       This

paper contributes to the literature on leverage and nancial crashes by providing direct evidence of

leverage-induced re sales.

    We use unique account-level data in China that track hundreds of thousands of margin investors'

borrowing and trading activities. The Chinese stock market has become increasingly important in

the global economy; for an informative reading, see Carpenter and Whitelaw (2017). With market

value equal to approximately one-third that of the US market, it is now the second largest stock

market in the world.         Our data covers the Chinese stock market crash of 2015, an extraordinary



    1
        For a detailed description of the 1929 stock market crash, see Galbraith (2009).



                                                            1
period that is ideal for examining the asset pricing implications of leverage-induced re sales. The

Chinese stock market experienced a dramatic run-up in the rst half of 2015, followed by an unpre-

cedented crash in the middle of 2015 which wiped out about 30% of the market's value by the end

of July 2015.

    Individual retail investors are the dominant players in the Chinese stock market and were the

main users of leveraged margin trading systems.
                                                             2   Our data covers two types of margin accounts,

brokerage-nanced and shadow-nanced margin accounts, for the three-month span of May to July,

2015. Both margin trading systems grew rapidly in popularity in early 2015. The brokerage-nanced

margin system, which allows retail investors to obtain credit from their brokerage rm, is tightly

regulated by the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC). For instance, investors must be

suciently wealthy and experienced to qualify for brokerage nancing. Further, the CSRC imposes

a market-wide maximum level of leveragethe Pingcang Line beyond which the account is taken

over by the lending broker, triggering forced asset sales.
                                                                     3

    In contrast, the shadow-nanced margin system, aided by the burgeoning FinTech industry, falls

in a regulatory gray area. Shadow-nancing was not initially regulated by the CSRC, and lenders do

not require borrowers to have a minimum level of wealth or trading history to qualify for borrowing.

There is no regulated Pingcang Line for shadow-nanced margin trades.                        Instead, the maximum

leverage limits are individually negotiated between borrowers and shadow lenders. Not surprisingly,

shadow accounts have signicantly higher leverage than their brokerage counterparts.
                                                                                                         4

    On June 12, 2015, the CSRC released a set of draft rules that would tighten regulations on

shadow-nanced margin trading in the future; a month-long stock market crash started on the next

trading day, wiping out almost 40% of the market index.                   The shadow-nanced margin accounts

data is particularly interesting for our study of the market crash, because it is widely believed that

excessive leverage taken by unregulated shadow-nanced margin accounts and the subsequent re

sales induced by the deleveraging process were the main driving forces behind the collapse of the

Chinese stock market in the summer of 2015.
                                                       5   From this perspective, one of our main contributions


   2
       Trading volume from retail traders covers 85% of the total volume, according to Shanghai Stock Exchange
Annual Statistics 2015, http://www.sse.com.cn/aboutus/publication/yearly/documents/c/tjnj_2015.pdf. It is well
known that retail traders play signicant roles even in more developed nancial markets; see, e.g., Foucault et al.
(2011).
   3
       The maximum leverage or Pingcang Line corresponds to the reciprocal of the maintenance margin in the US.
Pingcang in Chinese means forced settlement by creditors.
   4
       This is conrmed in our sample.    The equal-weighted average leverage (measured as assets/equity) is 6.6 for
shadow accounts and only 1.4 for brokerage accounts.
   5
       Common beliefs regarding the causes of the crash are discussed, for example, in a Financial Times article, availa-
ble at https://www.ft.com/content/6eadedf6-254d-11e5-bd83-71cb60e8f08c?mhq5j=e4. Another relevant reading in



                                                             2
is to show how re sales can result when new nancial innovations (FinTech in our case) advance

ahead of regulation, much like unregulated margin trading during the US stock market crash in

1929.

    We begin our empirical analysis by identifying how leverage and leverage constraints aect

individual investor trading behavior. For each account-date, we rst construct a Distance-to-Margin-

Call measure based on the account's leverage (dened as the ratio of asset value to equity value), its

Pingcang Line, and the volatility of the assets held by the account. In the spirit of the Distance-to-

Default measure in Merton-style models, Distance-to-Margin-Call captures the risk that a margin

account will hit its leverage constraint and consequently be taken over by creditors. When Distance-

to-Margin-Call hits zero, the leverage hits the Pingcang Line and the creditor takes over the account.

    In theories such as Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) and Garleanu and Pedersen (2011), costly

forced sales occur if leverage exceeds the account's Pingcang Line and the account is taken over by

the creditor. Forward-looking investors will sell as the account's leverage approaches its Pingcang

Line due to precautionary motives.
                                            6   We nd strong empirical support for these theories in the

data. After controlling for account xed eects and stock-date xed eects, we nd that the selling

intensities of all stocks are negatively related to the account's Distance-to-Margin-Call. The eect

is non-linear, and increases sharply when the Distance-to-Margin-Call edges toward zero.

    The signicant negative relationship between selling intensity and Distance-to-Margin-Call iden-

ties leverage-induced re sales in our paper. We further note that this negative relationship can be

driven by (1) leverage constraints, i.e. forced and preemptive sales that occur when leverage nears

the maximum leverage limit and (2) a portfolio rebalancing motive in which risk-averse investors

actively delever after a drop in asset values induces an increase in leverage. Thus, leverage-induced

re sales in our setting should be viewed as a combination of these two widely-accepted economic

forces: one consists of pre-emptive and forced sales due to leverage constraints and the other is

a rebalancing motive that could occur even in the absence of leverage constraints.                        We provide

several tests that rule in a strong leverage constraint eect, although we do not rule out an ad-

ditional leverage eect. First, we show that the ratio of leverage to the Pingcang line matters for



Chinese is available at http://opinion.caixin.com/2016-06-21/100957000.html.
   6
       In static models such as Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) and Geanakoplos (2010), re sales only occur when
accounts hit the leverage constraint (the Pingcang Line).      However, in a dynamic setting such as Garleanu and
Pedersen (2011), forward looking investors will start to sell before hitting the constraint, knowing that the controlling
creditors who only aim to recover their debt claims will dump the stock holdings by ignoring price impact. Investors'
precautionary selling prior to hitting the leverage constraint can also be explained by runs in nancial markets, as
illustrated by Bernardo and Welch (2004), which is similar in spirit to the bank-run mechanism in Diamond and
Dybvig (1983), Goldstein and Pauzner (2005), and recently He and Xiong (2012)).



                                                           3
selling behavior, even after we exibly control for the account's level of leverage, and proxy for the

Pingcang Line (which may be endogenously determined) using the average Pingcang Line for all

accounts opened on the same day as the account in question. We also nd that the announcement

of regulations that would tighten leverage constraints for shadow-nanced margin accounts led to

large upward jumps in selling intensities for shadow accounts (and not for brokerage accounts), with

especially large jumps for accounts with Distance-to-Margin-Calls closer to zero.

   We nd evidence of strong interactions between leverage-induced selling, market movements, and

stock market trading restrictions.   The relation between Distance-to-Margin-Call and net selling

is two to three times stronger on days when the market is down rather than up.             This result

underscores how leverage-induced re sales in specic stocks feed into and are fed by broad market

crashes. As more margin accounts face leverage constraints, investors will seek to deleverage their

holdings, which will contribute to a market decline. As the market declines, leverage constraints

tighten further, causing investors to intensify their selling activities. We also nd that government

announcements aimed at curbing excessive leverage may have intensied leverage-induced selling

in the short run, triggering market-wide crashes. Further, government-mandated price limits that

restricted trading for individual stocks beyond a within-day price change of 10% had the unintended

consequence of exacerbating re sales crashes in other stocks that were not protected by the price

limits. We nd that investors seeking to deleverage signicantly intensify their selling of unprotected

stocks if other stocks in their portfolios cannot be sold due to stock-specic price limits.

   We then show that stocks that are disproportionately held by margin accounts with low Distance-

to-Margin-Calls experience high selling pressure. We classify accounts whose Distance-to-Margin-

Call is below a threshold as re sale accounts.     We then construct a stock-date level measure

of re sale exposure, which measures the fraction of shares outstanding held by re sale accounts

within our sample of margin accounts. We nd that stocks with higher re sale exposure experience

signicantly more net selling volume from re sale accounts.

   Next, we explore the asset pricing implications of leverage-induced re sales. Following Coval

and Staord (2007), we test the prediction that re sales should cause price drops that revert in

the long run. In our setting, selling pressure from margin accounts close to their Pingcang Lines

can cause re sales if there is insucient liquidity to absorb the selling pressure.    Prices should

then revert back when liquidity returns to the market.       To test this prediction, we do not use

the actual trading choices of re sale accounts, as investors may exercise endogenous discretion

in the choice of which stocks within their portfolios to sell.   Following Edmans et al. (2012), we




                                                  4
instead look at the pricing patterns for stocks with high re sale exposure, i.e., stocks that are

disproportionately held by margin accounts with leverage close to their Pingcang Lines. We nd

that stocks with high re sale exposure signicantly underperform stocks with low re sale exposure,

but these dierences approach zero in the long run. Stocks in the top decile of re sale exposure

underperform stocks in the bottom decile by approximately 5 percentage points within 10 to 15

trading days, and the dierence in performance reverts toward zero within 30 to 40 trading days.

To better identify a causal eect of re sales on asset prices, we also conduct an event study showing

that the relation between FSE and stock returns became signicantly stronger immediately after

a regulatory tightening announcement aimed at curbing shadow margin trading. We further show

that the long-run reversal should not be attributed solely to a large-scale government bailout which

began on July 6, 2015. While the government bailout may have helped stem the aggregate decline in

the market, the government did not disproportionately purchase stocks with high re sale exposure;

we nd the correlations between government purchases and stocks' re sale exposures at dierent

lags are economically small (below 4%) and sometimes even negative.

   Finally, our unique data allows us to perform the following forensic-style analysis: Which margin

trading system, brokerage or shadow, played a more important role in the stock market crash? The

answer to this question is important from a policy perspective because it can shape the focus of

future regulatory oversight. Although practitioners, the media, and regulators have mainly pointed

their ngers at shadow-nanced margin accounts, the answer to this question is not obvious. First,

according to many estimates, total market assets held within the regulated brokerage-nanced sy-

stem greatly exceeded that in the unregulated shadow-nanced system. Second, brokerage-nanced

margin accounts have a lower Pingcang Line that is uniformly imposed by the CSRC. Thus, even

though brokerage accounts have lower leverage on average, these accounts may also be closer to

hitting leverage constraints.

   We nd that the data supports the view that shadow-nanced margin accounts contributed

more to the market crash.       The leverage of brokerage accounts remained low, even relative to

their tighter Pingcang Lines. There were also far fewer stock holdings in re sale accounts within

the brokerage-nanced system than within the shadow-nanced system.           Further, a measure of

re sale exposure constructed from the shadow accounts data sample predicts price declines and

subsequent reversals much more strongly than a similar re sale exposure measure constructed from

the brokerage accounts data sample.

   Overall, we nd strong empirical evidence that leverage-induced re sales, originating primarily




                                                  5
in the FinTech-fueled shadow sector and participated mainly by retail investors, contributed to the

Chinese stock market crash of 2015. We caution that our results do not imply that re sales were

the ultimate cause of the large and persistent drop in the value of the Chinese stock market (the

SSE index fell from a high of over 5000 in early June of 2015 to below 3000, and has stagnated in

the low 3000s in the subsequent three years). The lack of a full recovery in the years after the crash

is consistent with Chinese markets being fundamentally overvalued in the rst half of 2015. While

we cannot know the counterfactual with certainty, it is possible that the Chinese stock market

would have experienced an eventual correction, even without the trigger of leverage-induced re

sales. Our evidence does suggest that re sales contributed to the correction taking the form of a

rapid crash in the days immediately following a regulatory announcement aimed at curbing shadow-

nanced margin trading.
                               7    Our cross-sectional evidence also shows that stocks disproportionately

held by highly-leveraged margin accounts experienced larger percentage declines relative to other

stocks, and that the gap between stocks with high versus low re sale exposure closed once liquidity

returned to the market.            Our ndings parallel common narratives concerning the US 1929 stock

market crash (e.g., Schwert (1989)).
                                            8   Like the Chinese 2015 crash, the US 1929 crash was followed

by many years of market stagnation, consistent with a story of fundamental overvaluation and

eventual correction.       However, deleveraging and re sales by margin traders contributed to the

correction taking the form of dramatic single-day point drops during the summer of 1929.



Related Literature           Our paper is related to the large literature on re sales in various asset

markets including the stock market, housing market, derivatives market, and even markets for real

assets (e.g., aircraft). In a seminal paper by Shleifer and Vishny (1992), the authors argue that asset

re sales are possible when nancial distress clusters at the industry level, as the natural buyers of

the asset are nancially constrained as well. Pulvino (1998) tests this theory by studying commercial

aircraft transactions initiated by (capital) constrained versus unconstrained airlines, and Campbell

et al. (2011) documents re sales in local housing market due to events such as foreclosures. In the

context of nancial markets, Coval and Staord (2007) show the existence of re sales by studying

open-end mutual fund redemptions and the associated non-information-driven sales; Mitchell et al.


   7
       Indeed, an earlier Chinese stock market boom in 2007/08 which ended with a much slower downward correction
is consistent with the view that margin trading contributes to rapid crashes, as margin trading was introduced in the
Chinese stock market only after 2010 (Andrade et al., 2013).
   8
       The Introduction of Schwert (1989) discusses the similarity between the 1987 and 1929 crashes in the US stock
market, noting that regulators feared that cheap credit allowed over-enthusiatic speculators to bid up stock prices,
creating the potential for a crash as prices reverted down to lower (presumably more rational) levels. Similar fears
were expressed in the Congressional hearings that followed the 1929 crash.



                                                          6
(2007) investigate the price reaction of convertible bonds around hedge fund redemptions; Ellul et al.

(2011) show that downgrades of corporate bonds may induce regulation-driven selling by insurance

companies. Recently, re sales have been documented in the market for residential mortgage-backed

securities (Merrill et al. (2016)) and minority equity stakes in publicly-listed third parties (Dinc et al.

(2017)).

    It is worth emphasizing that, although re sales can be triggered by many economic forces, the

seminal paper by Shleifer and Vishny (1992) and the subsequent theory literature focus on the force

of deleveraging. Meanwhile, the existing empirical evidence has not focused on leverage-induced re

sales, which have the additional feature of a downward leverage spiral. In this regard, our paper

diers from the previous empirical literature by documenting a direct link between leverage, selling

behavior, and re sales, with the aid of account-level leverage and trading data. Our paper also

diers from previous empirical work on nancial markets which has mostly focused on re sales

in specic subsets of nancial securities. We show how leverage-induced re sales play a role in a

broad stock market crash.

    Our paper also contributes to the literature on the role of funding constraints, specically margin

and leverage, in asset pricing. Theoretical contributions such as Kyle and Xiong (2001), Gromb and

Vayanos (2002), Danielsson et al. (2002), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), and Garleanu and

Pedersen (2011) help academics and policymakers understand these linkages in the aftermath of the

recent global nancial crisis.
                                    9   There is also an empirical literature that connects various funding

constraints to asset prices.        Our paper follows a similar vein of investigating funding constraints

tied to the market making industry (e.g., Comerton-Forde et al. (2010) and Hameed et al. (2010),

among others).

    Our paper is most closely related to the empirical literature which explores the asset pricing

implications of stock margins and related regulations.                Margin requirements were rst imposed

by Congress through the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934.                    Congress's rationale at the time

was that credit-nanced speculation in the stock market may lead to excessive price volatility

through a pyramiding-depyramiding process.                Indeed, Hardouvelis (1990) nds that a tighter

margin requirement is associated with lower volatility in the US stock market. This is consistent

with an underlying mechanism in which tighter margin requirements discourage optimistic investors

from taking speculative positions (this mechanism also seems to t unsophisticated retail investors


   9
       Another important strand of the literature explores heterogeneous portfolio constraints in a general equilibrium
asset pricing model and its macroeconomic implications, which features an equity constraint, for instance, Basak
and Cuoco (1998); He and Krishnamurthy (2013); Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014).



                                                           7
in the Chinese stock market). Hardouvelis and Theodossiou (2002) further show that the relation

between margin requirements and volatility only holds in bull and normal markets. This nding

points to the potential benet of margin credit, in that it essentially relaxes funding constraints.

This trade-o is cleanly tested in a recent paper by Tookes and Kahraman (2016), which shows the

causal impact of margin on stock liquidity using a regression discontinuity design comparing stocks

on either side of a margin eligibility regulatory threshold.

    There are several concurrent academic articles investigating the Chinese stock market boom and

subsequent crash in the summer of 2015. In contrast with our analysis, most of the other studies use

stock-level data rather than account-level brokerage and shadow margin trading data, e.g., Huang

et al. (2016) and Chen et al. (2017). Using account-level data, but without a focus on margin trading

or shadow nancing, Huang et al. (2018) study trading suspensions that are discretionally chosen by

the listed companies themselves. Focusing on the staggered liberalization of stock-margin lending

and the associated market boom before 2015, Hansman et al. (2018) quantify the price impact

due to the expectations of future margin-driven price increases. Our analysis and conclusions are

complementary to a companion paper by Bian et al. (2018a), which uses the same dataset on

margin traders in the Chinese stock market in 2015. Bian et al. (2018a) focus on contagion among

stocks held in the same leveraged margin accounts and how the magnitude of the contagion can

be amplied through increased account leverage. Bian et al. (2018a) also show that this within-

account contagion can be further transmitted across account networks, again amplied by leverage.

In contrast, this paper aims to provide direct evidence of leverage-induced re sales, which itself

does not require contagion (although contagion can, of course, feed and be fed by re sales). This

paper also diers from Bian et al. (2018a), because our analysis centers on the dierence between the

two types of margin accounts, regulated brokerage accounts and unregulated shadow accounts. Our

ndings concerning the unique nature of shadow-nancing may help researchers and policymakers

understand the role of regulation in the informal nance sector.




2    Institutional Background


Our empirical analysis exploits account-level margin trading data in the Chinese stock market

covering the period from May 1, 2015 to July 31, 2015. We provide institutional background in this

section.




                                                  8
2.1      Margin Trading during the Chinese Stock Market Crash of 2015

The Chinese stock market experienced a dramatic increase in the rst half of 2015, followed by an

unprecedented crash in the middle of 2015. The Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE) composite index

started from around 3100 in January 2015, peaked at 5166 in mid-June, and then free-fell to 3663

at the end of July 2015. It is widely believed that high levels of margin trading and the subsequent

re sales induced by the de-leveraging process were the main driving forces of the market crash.

    There were two kinds of margin trading accounts active in the Chinese stock market during

this time period. One is brokerage-nanced and the other is shadow-nanced, as shown in Figure

1, which depicts the structure and funding sources for the two margin trading systems.
                                                                                                            10   Both

accounts were nonexistent prior to 2010, but thrived after 2014 alongside the surge in the Chinese

stock market. In what follows, we describe these two types of margin accounts in detail. Throughout

the paper, whenever there is no risk of confusion, we use brokerage (shadow) accounts to refer to

brokerage-nanced (shadow-nanced) margin accounts.




2.2      Brokerage-Financed Margin Accounts

Margin trading through brokerage rms was rst introduced to the Chinese stock market in 2010.

After its introduction, margin trading remained unpopular until around June 2014 when brokerage-

nanced debt began to grow exponentially. According to public data on exchanges, the total debt

held by brokerage-nanced margin accounts sat at 0.4 trillion Yuan in June 2014, but more than

quintupled to around 2.2 trillion Yuan within one year. This amounted to approximately 3-4% of

the total market capitalization of China's stock market in mid-June 2015, similar to the relative

size of margin nancing in the US and other developed markets.

    Brokerage-nanced margin trades represented a highly protable business for brokerage rms.

Brokers usually provide margin nancing by issuing short-term bonds in China's interbank market

or borrowing from the China Securities Finance Corporation (CSFC) at a rate slightly higher than

the interbank rate.
                         11   Brokers then lend these funds to margin borrowers at an annual rate of

approximately 8-9%, who then combine their own equity funds to purchase stocks (the left side of




  10
       In Chinese, they are called Chang-Nei fund matching and Chang-Wai fund matching, which literally means
on-site and o-site nancing.   In a companion paper by Bian et al. (2018a), whose analysis is based on the
same data set as our paper, shadow-nanced is called peer-nanced, which emphasizes that margin credit can be
supplied via either formal institutions like brokerage rms or informal lending providers like wealthy individuals.
  11
       For   a   brief    explanation   of   the    China     Securities   Finance     Corporation     (CSFC),        see
https://www.ft.com/content/c1666694-248b-11e5-9c4e-a775d2b173ca.



                                                          9
Figure 1 Panel A).
                         12   With a risk-free rate of around 4% during our sample period, this business

oered brokers higher prots than commissions, which were only about 4 basis points (or 0.04%) of

trading volumes.

    Almost all brokerage-nanced margin account holders in China are retail investors.
                                                                                                           13   Due to

concerns of potential trading frenzies from household investors, the regulatory body of the Chinese

securities market, the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), sets high qualication

standards for investors to engage in brokerage-nanced margin trading. A qualied investor needs

to have a trading account with the broker for at least 18 months, with a total account value (cash

and stockholdings combined) exceeding 0.5 million Yuan.

    The minimum initial margin set by the CSRC is 50%, implying that investors can borrow at most

50% of asset value when they open their brokerage accounts. More importantly for our analysis,

the CSRC also imposes a minimum margin, which requires that every brokerage account maintains

its debt below 1/1.3 of its current total asset value (cash + stock holdings). Once the debt-to-asset

ratio of a margin account increases above 1/1.3, and if borrowers fail to inject equity to reduce the

account's debt-to-asset ratio the next day, the account will be taken over by the brokerage rm.

    In China, practitioners call this maximum allowable leverage ratio, which equals               Asset/Equity =
1.3/(1.3 âˆ’ 1) = 4.33,         the Pingcang Line, which means forced settlement line.            Brokerage rms

have discretion to set dierent Pingcang Lines for their customers, as long as the line lies below this

regulatory maximum of 4.33. However, we do not observe any instances of a lowered maximum allo-

wable leverage limit in our sample, which is from one of the leading brokerage rms in China. This

suggests that the CSRC has been quite stringent in regulating the brokerage-nancing business.
                                                                                                                    14

    Once the account leverage exceeds the Pingcang Line, control of the account reverts to the lender

(the brokerage rm).          The lender then has discretion to sell assets without borrower permission,



   12
        For the rate at which the CSFC lent to security rms, see http://www.csf.com.cn/publish/main/1022/1023/1028/index.html.
For the rate at which security rms lent to margin borrowers, see http://m.10jqka.com.cn/20170726/c599327374.shtml.
   13
        The regulatory body CSRC banned professional institutional investors from conducting margin trades through
brokers in China.
   14
        Besides regulating leverage, the CSRC also mandated that only the most liquid stocks (usually blue-chips) were
marginable, i.e., eligible for investors to obtain margin nancing.    However, this regulation only aected margin
buying when the accounts were rst opened. Investors were able to use cash from previous sales to buy other non-
marginable stocks, as long as their accounts remained below the Pingcang Line. In our data, 23% of stock holdings
in brokerage accounts are non-marginable stocks during the week of June 8-12, 2015 (the week leading up to the
crash). When the prices of stock holdings in a leveraged brokerage account fell, the leverage rose, and the account
engaged in either preemptive sales to avoid approaching the Pingcang Line or forced sales after it was taken over after
crossing the Pingcang Line. Regardless of the situation, investors sold both marginable and non-marginable stocks,
rendering the initial margin eligibility of the stocks largely irrelevant when we study the role of leverage-induced re
sales in the stock market crash. Moreover, shadow-nanced margin accounts were not regulated and could always
buy non-marginable stocks on margin.



                                                           10
and generally sells all assets very aggressively without regard for price impact or execution costs

(see Footnote 32 for a detailed discussion of creditor incentives to liquidate assets). This aggressive

selling may help the lender recover debt at the expense of the remaining equity value of the borrower.

Therefore, borrowers may actively delever before hitting the Pingcang Line to avoid potential equity

losses once the lender seizes control.




2.3      Shadow-Financed Margin Accounts

During the rst half of 2015, aided by the burgeoning FinTech industry in China, many Chinese

retail investors engaged in margin trading via the shadow-nancing system, in addition to, or instead

of, the brokerage-nancing system. Shadow-nanced margin trading started attracting investors in

2014, alongside the rapid growth of the FinTech industry in China. The shadow-nancing system,

similar to many nancial innovations in history, existed in a regulatory gray area. Shadow-nancing

was not initially regulated by the CSRC, and lenders did not require borrowers to have a minimum

level of asset wealth or trading history to qualify for borrowing. In turn, shadow-nanced borrowers

paid higher interest rates of around 11-14%, which are 3-5 percentage points higher than their

counterparts in the brokerage-nanced market.

    Shadow-nancing usually operated through a web-based trading platform which provided various

service functions that facilitated trading and borrowing.
                                                              15   The typical platform featured a mother-

child dual account structure, with each mother account oering trading access to many (in most

cases, hundreds of ) child accounts.      Panel B of Figure 1 depicts such a mother-child structure.

The mother account (the middle box) is connected to a distinct trading account registered in a

brokerage rm with direct access to stock exchanges (the top box). The mother account belongs

to the creditor, usually a professional nancing company.            Each mother account is connected to

multiple child accounts, and each child account is managed by an individual retail margin trader

(the bottom boxes).

    On the surface, a mother account appears to be a normal unlevered brokerage account, albeit

with unusually large asset holdings and trading volume. In reality, these large brokerage accounts

were mother accounts, which used a FinTech software program to transmit the orders submitted

by associated child accounts in real time to stock exchanges. As shown, the professional nancing

company which manages the mother account provides margin credit to child accounts; its funding



  15
       HOMS, MECRT, and Royal Flush were the three leading electronic margin trading platforms in China during
2015.



                                                       11
sources include its own capital as mezzanine nancing as well as borrowing from China's shadow

banking sector. Through this umbrella-style structure, a creditor can lend funds to multiple margin

traders, while maintaining dierent leverage limits for each trader (child account).

   Similar to brokerage-nanced margin accounts, a child account in the shadow-nanced margin

system had a maximum allowable leverage limiti.e., the Pingcang Linebeyond which the child

account would be taken over by the mother account (the creditor), triggering forced sales. Often,

this switch of ownership was automated through the software system, by simply triggering the

expiration of the borrower's password and immediate activation of that of the creditor.

   Unlike the brokerage-nanced margin system, there were no regulations concerning the maximum

allowable leverage for each child account.     Instead, the creditor (the mother account) and the

borrower/investor negotiated the maximum allowable leverage limit for each account, resulting in

account-specic Pingcang Lines for shadow accounts. The Pingcang Line never changes during the

life of an account. In our sample, unregulated shadow accounts have much higher Pingcang Lines on

average than their regulated brokerage peers (see Table 1). Just as with brokerage-nanced market

accounts, control of the account reverts to the creditor (the mother account) once leverage exceeds

the Pingcang Line. The mother account generally sells assets aggressively without regard for price

impact or execution costs. As a result, foresighted borrowers may delever in a precautionary way,

by actively selling before hitting the Pingcang Line to avoid potential losses once the lender seizes

control.

   Whereas funding for brokerage accounts came from either the brokerage rm's own borrowed

funds or from borrowing through the CSFC, funding for shadow-nanced margin accounts came from

a broader set of sources that are directly, or indirectly, linked to the shadow banking system in China.

The right hand side of Figure 1 Panel A lists these sources of credit. Besides the capital injection

by nancing companies who were running the shadow-nanced margin business and equity from

shadow margin traders, the three major funding sources were Wealth Management Products (WMP)

raised from depositors via commercial banks, Trust and Peer-to-Peer (P2P) informal lending, and

borrowing through pledged stock rights.

   As suggested by the gray color on the right hand side of Figure 1 Panel A, the shadow-nanced

margin system operated in the shadow.      Regulators do not know the detailed breakdown of the

shadow funding sources and therefore do not know the exact leverage ratio associated with this

system, let alone the total size of the shadow-nancing market.       According to a research report

issued by Huatai Securities, just before the stock market collapse in June 2015, borrowing from WMP




                                                  12
peaked at around 600 billion Yuan and P2P informal lending peaked at about 200 billion Yuan.
                                                                                                                  16

For pledged stock rights, there is much less agreement on how much borrowing through pledged

stock rights owed back to the stock market; we gauge 250-500 billion Yuan to be a reasonable

estimate.
            17   Summing up, the estimated total debt held by shadow-nanced margin accounts was

about 1.0-1.4 trillion Yuan at its peak, consistent with the estimates provided by China Securities

Daily on June 12, 2015.
                             18



2.4      Lack of Regulation over Shadow-Financed Margin Accounts

The Chinese stock market stagnated for several years after the crisis of 2008 and began rapidly

rising around the middle of 2014.          Recent research has argued that a major cause of the market

boom without corresponding real sector growth was leverage-fueled margin trading.
                                                                                                  19   Although the

government and professional traders warned that the stock market run-up may represent a bubble,

new investors continued to rush into the market and the index grew by 60% from the beginning to

the mid of 2015.

    As explained in the previous section, the shadow-nancing market was unregulated during our

sample period. Shadow-nanced margin investors could purchase any stock using margin as long

as the total account leverage did not exceed the account-specic Pingcang Line, without any re-

gulation on the Pingcang Line itself.           While the shadow-nancing market remained unregulated

in the rst half of 2015, many investors and media outlets believed that the CSRC would release

regulatory guidelines in the near future. For instance, on May 22, 2015, newspapers reported that

the government had asked several leading broker/securities rms to engage in self-examinations of

services provided to shadow-nanced margin accounts, and that providers of these illegal activi-

ties had received warnings from the CSRC as early as March 13, 2015.
                                                                                      20   On June 12, 2015, the

CSRC released a set of draft rules that would strength the self-examinations of services provided

  16
       These estimates are given in Figure 1 of the report issued by Huatai Securities on July 5th, 2015, which is
available at https://wenku.baidu.com/view/565390bd43323968001c9234?pcf=2.
  17
       A pledge of stock rights in China is an agreement in which the borrower pledges the stocks as a collateral to
obtain credit, often from commercial banks, for real investment. It is illegal to use borrowed funds to invest in the
stock market, though, during the rst half of 2015, it was reported that some borrowers lent these borrowed funds to
professional lending rms who then lent them out to shadow-nanced margin traders to purchase stocks. Given the
total borrowing of 2.5 trillion Yuan through pledged stock rights in early June 2015, we estimate that about 10-20%
of the borrowing owed back to the stock market.
  18
       http://news.xinhuanet.com/fortune/2015-06/12/c_127907477.htm.
  19
       Huang et al. (2016) show that the Chinese government's regulatory and monetary policies supported the growth
of the stock market; Liao and Peng (2017) explore price and volume dynamics during the market boom using a
model with extrapolative beliefs and the disposition eect; and Bian et al. (2018a) show that the outstanding debt
of brokerage-nanced margin trades closely tracks the Shanghai composite index level.
  20
       See a review article in Chinese, available at http://opinion.caixin.com/2016-06-21/100957000.html.



                                                          13
to shadow-nanced margin accounts and explicitly ban new shadow-nanced margin accounts.
                                                                                                                21

A month-long stock market crash started the next trading day on Monday, June 15, 2015, wiping

out almost 40% of the market index. In response, the Chinese government began to aggressively

purchase stocks to support prices around July 6, 2015, and the market stabilized in mid-September

2015. In this paper, we show that leverage-induced selling pressure by margin investors, especially

shadow-nanced margin investors, led to widespread re sales that contributed to the crash in the

interim period of June and July 2015.




2.5      Trading Regulations

Chinese regulators had several trading regulation policies in place during our sample period of

May-July 2015, generally with the goal of reducing market turbulence. First, while there were no

stock-specic or market-wide automatic trading suspension triggers,
                                                                                22   listed rms could apply for

trading suspensions with a typical length of days or weeks. These applications were actively used

by rms that were concerned about continuously dropping market values, and the CSRC often

approved these applications.
                                  23   In the main analysis, we impute stock returns for days in which a

stock experienced trading suspensions, based on the stock's previous closing price and next opening

price; our results are robust to this treatment as shown in Section 5.3.

    Second, Chinese regulators enforced a daily 10-percent rule (see e.g., Chen et al. (2018b) for a

detailed analysis). Under this rule, each individual stock was allowed to move a daily maximum of

10 percent from the previous closing level in either direction, before triggering a price limit. Once

triggered, all trades at prices beyond the limit was prohibited. For example, if the previous day's

closing price was $10, and today's price dropped to $9, the price limit would be triggered, and the

stock could not trade at less than $9. While the stock could technically continue trading within

the 10 percent range, the de factco consequence of a triggered price limit was often a near-complete

halt in trading for the aected stock. In later analysis, we explore whether these price limits may

have had the unintended consequence of exacerbating re sales crashes in other stocks that were

not protected by the price limits.




  21
       See the Chinese version available at http://www.sac.net.cn/gz/zlgz/201507/t20150713_124222.html.
  22
       The CSRC implemented the controversial market-wide circuit breaker in the rst trading week of 2016, but
suspended it immediately at the end of that week. For details and a thorough theoretical analysis, see Chen et al.
(2018a).
  23
       For a thorough analysis for trading suspensions during the Chinese stock market crash in the summer of 2015,
see Huang et al. (2018).



                                                         14
3        Data and Summary Statistics


In this section, we start by describing our data samples.               We then dene account leverage, and

show that, during our sample period, leverage is highly countercyclical with the market index, with

signicant cross-account heterogeneity.            We then dene each account's Distance-to-Margin-Call,

which measures the tightness of the leverage constraint that each account faces at the start of each

day. Finally, we discuss summary statistics for our data sample.




3.1        Data

We use a mixture of proprietary and public data from several sources. The rst dataset contains the

complete equity holdings, cash balances, and trading records of all accounts from a leading brokerage

rm in China. This brokerage rm is one of the largest brokers in China, with 5.5% of the market

share in the brokerage business in 2015. This sample contains data on nearly ve million accounts,

over 95% of which are retail accounts.             Approximately 180,000 of these accounts are eligible for

brokerage-nanced margin trading, hereafter referred to as brokerage-nanced margin accounts or

brokerage accounts. After the data cleaning, the total credit to these brokerage-nanced margin

accounts represents about 5% of the outstanding brokerage margin credit to the entire stock market

in China. The remaining accounts are unleveraged, non-margin brokerage accounts, which we use

in some analyses to form a control group.

     The second dataset contains all trading and holding records of more than 300,000 investor

accounts from a large web-based trading platform in China, i.e., shadow-nanced margin accounts

or shadow accounts.         After applying lters to focus on active accounts (with details provided in

Appendix A), we retain a nal sample of a little over 150,000 shadow accounts, with total debt

reaching 56 billion Yuan in June 2015. For comparison, recall that Section 2.3 estimates that the

debt associated with shadow accounts peaked at around 1-1.4 trillion Yuan, implying that our

sample covers approximately 5% of the shadow-nanced margin system.

     As discussed previously, a key advantage of these two datasets is that we observe the assets and

debt of each margin account, and hence its leverage on each trading day.
                                                                                    24   An implicit assumption in

our analysis is that both data samples are representative of the two margin-based nancing systems

in China. Though it is impossible to verify the representativeness of our sample of shadow-nanced

    24
         We observe end-of-day debt levels for all brokerage-nanced margin accounts and about half of shadow-nanced
margin accounts. For the remaining shadow-nanced margin accounts, we infer daily debt levels from their initial debt
and subsequent cash ows between these shadow child accounts and their associated lending mother accounts.
See Appendix A for details.



                                                           15
margin accounts (we are among the rst to analyze detailed shadow-nanced margin trading data),

we can verify the representativeness of our brokerage sample.                     We nd that the cross-sectional

correlation in trading volume between our brokerage sample and the entire market is about 94%,

suggesting the high representativeness of our brokerage sample.
                                                                             25   In addition to the two proprietary

account-level datasets, we obtain daily closing prices, trading volume, stock returns and other stock

characteristics from the WIND database, which is widely regarded as the leading vendor for Chinese

market data.




3.2         Leverage

We dene leverage for account          j   at the start of day   t   as



                                                          total assetsjt
                                                Levjt =                  .                                             (1)
                                                             equityjt

T otal assetsjt    is the total market value of assets held by account            j   at the start of day   t,   including

stock and cash holdings in Yuan value.            Equityjt   is equity value held by account        j   at the start of

day    t,   equal to total assets minus total debt. Under this denition, an account with zero debt has

leverage equal to 1.

      As explained previously, the Pingcang Line is the maximum leverage the investor can hold

before control of the account is transferred to the creditor (either the brokerage rm or the mother

account). When leverage nears the Pingcang Line, the investor will receive a margin call, requiring

her to either add more equity or liquidate her portfolio holdings to repay the debt. If the investor

does not lower the account leverage after receiving a margin call, her account will be taken over

by the creditor.      The creditor then has discretion over all the trading decisions of the account.
                                                                                                                        26

To reduce the inuence of these outliers, we cap leverage at 100 in our analysis; this treatment is

mostly innocuous as our main analysis allows for exible non-parametric estimation with respect to

the measure of leverage.

      Panel A of Figure 2 plots the equity-weighted-average leverage for the brokerage- and shadow-


  25
       For each trading day, we calculate the cross-sectional correlation in each stock's trading volume between the
brokerage sample and the entire market; we then average across all trading days from May to July in 2015.
  26
       Although the creditor generally liquidates stock holdings aggressively for debt repayment after gaining control,
the creditor may be unable to sell due to daily 10% price limits or trading suspensions, leading to cases in which the
account leverage increases far beyond the Pingcang Line. More specically, stock prices may continue to drop by -10%
every day before the sell orders can be executed (simply because there are no buyers at these price limits). There
were also trading suspensions for many stocks during our sample period. In these situations, the market prices of
these stocks are frozen, leaving the leverage of the holding account unchanged. We exclude these latter observations
with trading suspensions in identifying re sale accounts in Section 4.1.



                                                           16
nanced margin account samples, together with the SSE composite index, which is widely used

as the representative market index in China.                By weighting each account's leverage by equity in

each account, the resulting average leverage is equal to total brokerage- or shadow-nanced margin

account assets scaled by total brokerage- or shadow-nanced margin account equity, respectively.

We observe that during the three-month period from May to July 2015, the leverage of shadow

accounts uctuates more dramatically than that of brokerage accounts.                     But the gure does not

imply that brokerage leverage did not move; the correlation between these two leverage series is

91%. Further, there is a strong negative correlation between both leverage series and the SSE index

(-84% for shadow and -68% for brokerage). When the stock index began to plummet in the middle

of June, shadow leverage grew and hit its peak at around July 10th, when SSE index reached its

lowest point. Overall, Panel A of Figure 2 shows that leverage displays signicant counter-cyclical

trends and across-account-type heterogeneity.
                                                       27

    We can also contrast the equity-weighted average level of leverage (shown in the previous gure)

with the asset-weighted average level of leverage in the market.                  Highly leveraged accounts, by

denition, have very little equity but can control a substantial amount of assets. Panel B of Figure

2 shows that, relative to the equity-weighted average, asset-weighted levels of leverage were much

higher throughout our sample period and sharply increased toward a high of almost 7-to-1 when

the market crashed. This contrast illustrates the fact that highly leveraged accounts with very little

equity controlled a growing portion of market assets during the market crash.




3.3       Distance-to-Margin-Call (DMC)

Our analysis will be based on an account-date-level measure that captures the re-sale risk of

each margin-nanced account at the start of each trading day.                   In the spirit of the Distance-to-

Default measure in the Merton (1974) credit risk model, we calculate the size of the negative shock

to the asset value of the stock portfolio held by each account that would be enough to push the

account leverage to its Pingcang Line and trigger the control shift from margin investors to creditors


   27
        There are two forces that drives the dynamics of leverage when asset prices uctuate. The rst is the passive
valuation eect, which drives leverage up when asset prices fall, by the denition of leverage (assets/(assets-debt));
this leads leverage to be counter-cyclical (e.g., He and Krishnamurthy (2013); Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014)).
The second is the active deleveraging eect, in which investors respond to the negative fundamental shock by selling
more assets, which contributes to pro-cyclical leverage.      Clearly, pro-cyclical leverage requires a stronger active
deleveraging eect, so much so that the resulting leverage goes down with falling asset prices (e.g., Fostel and
Geanakoplos (2008); Geanakoplos (2010), and Adrian and Shin (2013)). He et al. (2017) discuss these two forces in
various asset pricing models in detail, and explains why the rst valuation eect often dominates in general equilibrium
and hence counter-cyclical leverage ensues.    In our sample, the rst valuation eect is empirically stronger, which
explains the counter-cyclical leverage pattern in Panel A of Figure 2.



                                                            17
(brokerage rms or mother accounts).

      Specically, we rst calculate
                                                      A,
                                                     Ïƒjt       which is the volatility of the stock portfolio currently held in

the account       j   at date t.
                                     28   For each account-date observation with total asset value               Ajt , equity value
Ejt ,     and Pingcang Line           Lev j ,    we then dene the account's Distance-to-Margin-Call, denoted by                  Z,
such that
                                                                          AZ
                                                               Ajt âˆ’ Ajt Ïƒjt
                                                                          AZ
                                                                                = Lev j .                                         (2)
                                                               Ejt âˆ’ Ajt Ïƒjt

In words, the account's Distance-to-Margin-Call (DMC) equals the number of standard deviations

of downward movements in asset values (of the assets currently held in the account's portfolio)

necessary to push the current level of leverage up to its Pingcang Line. The Pingcang Line never

changes over the life of account. Hence                         Lev j   has no date-t subscript, and an account's DMC varies

over time due to changes in its leverage and asset volatility.

      From Eq. (2), we can calculate                   Zjt      as an explicit function of current leverage      Levjt = Ajt /Ejt ,
Pingcang Line            Lev j ,    and asset volatility
                                                                   A:
                                                                  Ïƒjt

                                                       Levj âˆ’ Levjt     1                     1
                                           Zjt =                    Â·   A
                                                                           Â·                         .                            (3)
                                                         Levj âˆ’ 1      Ïƒjt                  Levjt
                                                       |    {z    }                         | {z }
                                                     Leverage-to-Pingcang Volatility Amplication
                                                                      |{z}


We further dene Leverage-to-Pingcang                            LPjt   as



                                                                         Levj âˆ’ Levjt
                                                               LPjt â‰¡                 .                                           (4)
                                                                          Levj âˆ’ 1

The DMC measure                 Z   depends on the account's Leverage-to-Pingcang (the rst term), the volatility

of the asset holdings (the second term), and nally the amplication due to the account's current

leverage (the third term). An account has a low DMC and hence is more likely to receive a margin

call, if this account has a lower Leverage-to-Pingcang, greater asset volatility
                                                                                                            A , or higher leverage.
                                                                                                           Ïƒjt
      For account-days with no debt (so leverage is 1), we let                       Zjt take on the value of an arbitrary large
number (100); this treatment does not aect our analysis because we only use bins for                                    Zjt   in our

regressions. For any account-day observation with strictly positive leverage but below the Pingcang

Line,       Zjt > 0,     and a smaller           Z   implies a greater risk of the account being taken over.               We also

observe some accounts with leverage exceeding their respective Pingcang Lines, i.e.,                                 Levjt > Levj
so   Zjt < 0.     As explained in Section 3.2, these accounts have been taken over by creditors who may

     28                   A
          We calculate   Ïƒjt   for account   j   at date   t   based on the account holdings and estimated covariance matrix of these
holdings. The covariance matrix is estimated using data from 5/1/2014 to 4/30/2015.



                                                                           18
be unable to sell due to price limits and trading suspensions.

    Figure 3 shows the distribution of DMC for each day, pooling together the brokerage and shadow

samples; for ease of illustration, we plot the log of DMC, i.e.,   ln Z .   A key advantage of our analysis

is that we can exploit the within-day heterogeneity in DMC across leveraged margin accounts. We

observe a qualitatively similar pattern for the severity of leverage constraints: the upper percentile

lines (50th and 80th) remain relatively at throughout the sample period, whereas the 10th and

20th percentile lines dropped dramatically when the market index plummeted.




3.4   Summary Statistics

Table 1 reports summary statistics for our data sample. We separately report statistics for observa-

tions at the account-day, account-stock-day, and stock-day levels, where each day is a trading day.

In addition, we report statistics separately for the brokerage- and shadow-nanced margin account

samples. Consistent with Panel A of Figure 2, we nd average leverage in shadow accounts is more

than four times larger than that in brokerage accounts. Shadow accounts also display substantially

greater dispersion in leverage, with a standard deviation of 12.8 compared to a standard deviation

of 0.5 for brokerage accounts.

    In terms of of leverage constraints, the Pingcang Lines of shadow accounts are, on average, three

times larger than the Pingcang Line of 4.3 that applies to all brokerage accounts. However, shadow

accounts are also more likely to face leverage constraints despite their higher leverage limits. This

point is evident from the dierence in DMCs across the two margin-nanced accounts: on average,

the DMC of shadow accounts are about one-fourth of that of brokerage accounts.

    We also use data from non-margin brokerage accounts as a benchmark for the trading activity

of unlevered accounts. These accounts have zero debt and hence their leverage is equal to 1. While

these accounts are part of our brokerage dataset, they are not included when we refer to brokerage

accounts which always refer to brokerage-nanced margin accounts.




4     Empirical Results


In this section, we empirically test how account-level leverage relates to selling pressure, re sales,

and asset prices. We begin by presenting analysis that pools the brokerage- and shadow-nanced

margin account samples.     In later analysis, we will show that the main eects are driven by the

relatively small pool of shadow-nanced margin accounts that faced severe leverage constraints.




                                                  19
4.1      Account-Stock-Level Evidence: Leverage-Induced Fire Sales

We expect that the selling intensity of each trading account increases as its Distance-to-Margin-

Call nears zero. A general feature of a portfolio choice problem with nancial constraints is that

forward-looking agents who are averse to losing control of their trading accounts will start selling

their risky holdings in a precautionary way before hitting the leverage constraint. Margin investors

may be averse to hitting the Pingcang Line because creditors will sell stocks aggressively to recover

their debt claims, ignoring execution costs and without regard to potential temporary price declines.

For a more detailed explanation, see footnote 32. As                          Z   approaches zero, the investor's risk of losing

control of the account increases, so we expect net selling to increase.



4.1.1 Selling Intensity
We rst show that accounts with tighter leverage constraints, proxied by lower Distance-to-Margin-

Call (DMC)        Zjt   dened in Eq. (3) as of the start of each trading day, tend to sell more of their

holdings over the course of the day. We sort                    Zjt   in decreasing order into 10 bins (one bin for                   Z > 20,
two equally spaced bins for            Z âˆˆ (10, 20]        and   Z âˆˆ (5, 10],         and ve equally spaced bins for              Z âˆˆ [0, 5])
                                              j
indexed by k , and construct dummy variables Ikt                        =1     if     Zjt   falls in the   k th   bin. We also create two

additional bins: bin 0 for unlevered accounts, and bin 11 for accounts with                                       Zjt < 0,     which occurs if

Levjt    exceeds   Levj .
    We then examine how the account DMC at the beginning of each day                                        t relates to investor selling
during that day. We estimate the following regression


                                                          11
                                                 j                  j
                                                                       + Î½it + Î±j + Îµjit ,
                                                          X
                                                Î´it   =         Î»k Ikt                                                                      (5)
                                                          k=1

          j
where    Î´it   is account   j 's   net selling of stock         i,   dened as



                      j              net shares sold of stock            i   by account        j   during day      t
                     Î´it â‰¡                                                                                                 .
                             shares of stock          i   held by account         j   at the beginning of day          t

Because we are interested in selling behavior, the sample is restricted to stocks held by account                                             j
at the start of day       t.29     The sample is also restricted to stock-days during which the stock did not

experience a trading suspension (note, this diers from the incidence of hitting the stock's daily

  29                                                                                       j
       Net buying of stock    i    by account j on date t results in negative values for Î´it , and the value is                     unbounded
since some accounts may purchase         stock i without much holding of stock i to start with. To avoid these                      outliers, we
truncate the observations from below by -1.2. Results are insensitive to this treatment.



                                                                       20
price limit under which trading is still allowed subject to a price limit).                  We regress net selling

 j
Î´it   on dummy variables for each bin representing dierent DMCs.                      The omitted category is bin

0, representing unlevered brokerage accounts (which include all non-margin accounts and margin

accounts that hold zero debt).

      The main coecients of interest are the selling intensities          Î»k 's,   which measure the dierence in

selling intensity within each bin relative to the omitted category of unlevered accounts. It is worth

emphasizing that Eq.      (5) includes stock-date xed eects         Î½it    and account xed eects      Î±j .   The

stock-date xed eects control for the possibility that all accounts in our sample may be more likely

to sell a stock on a particular day; essentially, we compare the selling intensities for the same stock

on the same day but sitting in accounts with dierent DMCs. The account xed eects capture the

account-specic unobservable eecte.g., some accounts may be more likely to sell than others on

average during our sample period.

      The theory in Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), Geanakoplos (2010), and Garleanu and Pe-

dersen (2011) implies that closeness to margin calls triggers net selling by leveraged accounts. As

a result, we expect the selling intensity     Î»k   to increase with   k,   i.e., a higher selling intensity for ac-

counts with lower DMCs, in regression (5). Our empirical results strongly support this theoretical

prediction, as shown in Figure 4 which plots selling intensity              Î»k      for each bin representing DMC.

The regression analogue for the gure is presented in Column 1 of Table 2. Relative to unlevered

accounts, accounts in bin 11 with    Z <0      (these are accounts that have hit the leverage constraint

and have been taken over by lenders) increase net selling by 0.19. This additional selling intensity of

0.19 is equivalent to 60% of a standard deviation in the level of net selling activity across accounts.

Further, these coecients may underestimate the extent to which investors desire to sell, as we

include observations corresponding to stocks with partially limited daily trading due to the daily

10-percent rule.



Fire Sale Accounts        In Figure 4,   Î»k   is close to zero for accounts that are far away from margin

calls (Z is large), and increases sharply when the DMC edges toward 3. In other words, for the

same stock on the same day, investors begin to intensify their selling (by selling an extra 6.4% of

initial asset holdings relative to unlevered accounts) when a two-to-three standard deviation return

movement would lead to loss of control of their accounts. For this reason, from now on, we refer

to accounts with    Zâ‰¤3    as re sale accounts. These accounts are signicantly more likely to face

margin calls and to contribute to re sales of assets. In later tests, we also show that our results




                                                        21
are not sensitive to the exact cuto of   Z = 3.


4.1.2 Asymmetry with Respect to Market Conditions
One important prediction of models with leverage-nanced agents is downward leverage spirals (e.g.,

Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)). That is, the magnitude of leverage-induced selling should vary

asymmetrically with market downturns and upturns. Asymmetric behavior with respect to market

performance has been documented by Hameed et al. (2010) and Tookes and Kahraman (2016) in

various related contexts.

   The theory predicts that precautionary motives should lead investors that are close to receiving

margin calls to exhibit high selling intensity, even when the aggregate market does well. However,

conditional on a given DMC at the start of day t, leverage constraints will tighten further on average

if the market return over day   t   is negative. Thus, we expect that the relation between DMC and

selling intensity will be stronger if the market return on that day is negative.

   Figure 5 and Appendix Table B.1 show how DMC at the start of day         t   aects selling intensity,

conditional on whether the market return is positive or negative on day         t.   Consistent with the

predictions above, we nd that lower DMC leads to higher selling intensity even when market returns

are positive; but the relation between DMC and net selling is two to three times stronger on days

when the market is down. These results underscore how leverage-induced re sales in specic stocks

feed into and are fed by broad market crashes. As more margin accounts face leverage constraints,

investors will seek to deleverage their holdings, which will contribute to a market decline. As the

market declines, leverage constraints tighten further, causing investors to intensify their selling

activities, conditional on each level of DMC.



4.1.3 Leverage and Leverage-to-Pingcang
Recall that we construct the DMC measure as a proxy for the risk of an account being taken over

by the creditor. This risk measure depends on the account leverage, how close the leverage is to

the Pingcang Line, and the asset volatility of its holdings. Eq. (3) essentially combines these three

inputs in a particular structural way. Do our re sale results hold without imposing this structure?

   For ease of illustration, we focus on two terms in Eq. (3): leverage and Leverage-to-Pingcang.

Focusing on these two measures also has the advantage of shedding light on the role of leverage

versus leverage constraints (represented by the Pingcang Line), which we discuss further in the next

subsection.



                                                   22
    Following the format of regression (5), in Table 3 we regress net selling on bins for Leverage-

to-Pingcang       LPjt   dened in Eq. (4), ve bins for the account's level of leverage, and interactions

between the leverage bins and an indicator for accounts with                  LPjt â‰¤ 0.4     (we choose   0.4   because

selling intensity increases sharply after this cuto ); as before, stock-date xed eects and account

xed eects are included. We focus this analysis on shadow-nanced margin accounts only. This

is because Pingcang Lines vary across accounts in the shadow sample, allowing us to separately

identify the eects of Leverage-to-Pingcang, leverage, and potential interactions. In contrast, the

brokerage sample has the same Pingcang Line across accounts, so there is a one-to-one mapping

between leverage and Leverage-to-Pingcang.

    First, we nd that Leverage-to-Pingcang, as a proxy for the leverage constraint, predicts higher

selling intensity, after controlling for leverage. Moreover, the coecients for the interaction between

leverage bins and the leverage constraint (the indicator for accounts with                  LP â‰¤ 0.4)   are generally

increasing in leverage.        This positive interaction term lends support to the theoretical reasoning

underlying the construction of the DMC in Eq. (3).
                                                                30



4.1.4 Economic Mechanisms
This section investigates complementary mechanisms for the negative empirical relation between

DMC and account selling intensity in Figure 4. It is worth emphasizing again that, since we control

for stock-date and account xed eects in our baseline specication, this strong negative relation

cannot be explained by any mechanisms that only varies at the stock-date or account level.



Leverage and/or Leverage Constraint?                      We dene the negative relation between DMC and

net selling as leverage-induced re sales. These re sales can result from two related forces. First,

leverage constraints could lead to both forced sales when control shifts from investors to creditors

once leverage exceeds the Pingcang Line, as well as precautionary sales in which investors delever to

avoid hitting the Pingcang Line. Second, leverage itself, even in the absence of nancing constraints,

may lead risk-averse investors to sell risky stocks for rebalancing purposes (e.g., Merton (1971)).

Because the reciprocal of account leverage enters the DMC measure in Eq. (3), this simple leverage-

based rebalancing force in Merton (1971) can also contribute to the negative relation between selling


   30
        While very high leverage predicts increased net selling, the relation between leverage and net selling seems to
be reversed for the range with low leverage. This empirical pattern is consistent with the view that investors choose
to take on more leverage when they are feeling more bullish and/or speculative and therefore are more likely to buy
rather than sell assets, holding leverage constraints (Leverage-to-Pingcang) constant. However, as leverage constraints
begin to bind, investors become more likely to sell assets if the level of leverage is also high.



                                                           23
intensity and DMC documented in Figure 4. Note, a handful of general equilibrium asset pricing

papers, such as Kyle and Xiong (2001) and He and Krishnamurthy (2013), have shown that leverage

itself can play an important role in downturns in nancial markets without leverage constraints.

      In our sample, we can rule in the role of leverage constraints by looking at the net selling

activity of accounts with negative DMC (i.e.,                   Z < 0),    which have been taken over by creditors

and are engaged in forced sales.
                                             31   Once the creditor gains the control over the trading account, he

generally dumps the stock holdings as soon as possible (subject to daily trading limits) to recover

his debt claims, ignoring any price impact or execution cost triggered by his aggressive selling.
                                                                                                                     32   In

Section 4.3, we also show that our results are robust to the more conservative treatment in which

we only classify account-date observations with                 Z<0      as re sale accounts.

      We can further isolate the role of leverage constraints from leverage for accounts in which the

investor remains in control (accounts with               Z > 0).     In other words, we can distinguish precautionary

sales due to fear of hitting a leverage constraint from a simple deleveraging motive. First, Section

4.1.3 takes advantage of the fact that shadow accounts vary in their Leverage-to-Pingcang, holding

the level of leverage constant; in that section, we showed that higher Leverage-to-Pingcang (a tighter

leverage constraint) leads to higher selling intensity after controlling for account-level leverage. This

evidence lends support to the leverage constraint mechanism.

      However, a potential concern with the evidence in Section 4.1.3 is that the Pingcang Line is not

randomly assigned to margin investors. There could be endogenous matching of creditors oering

higher or lower Pingcang Lines with investors with heterogeneous risk aversion when opening their

accounts, and this unobserved risk aversion could directly impact selling behavior as accounts near

their leverage constraints.              To address this concern, we use each account's predicted Pingcang

Line, which is more likely to be an exogenous proxy for the account's leverage constraint. Instead


     31
          Some margin accounts in our sample have leverage signicantly above their Pingcang Lines. These observations
likely correspond to cases in which creditors have gained control, but are unable to immediately sell their holdings
due to daily price limits (the 10-percent-rule). Creditors can sell the stock holdings the next day (within the      Â±10%
return range), and can also exercise discretion in terms of whether and what to sell.
     32
          While a creditor will generally prefer to sell aggressively upon gaining control over a trading account, this
intuition may not hold in extreme cases. Suppose that the creditor has a debt claim          D   over the stock held by the
account. In the context of re sales, it is important to distinguish between the market value       A   and the (immediate)
post-sale price     A âˆ’ âˆ†,   where   âˆ†   captures the price impact of immediate selling. For example, suppose the Pingcang
Line equals 10, a common value in our shadow account sample. When leverage just hits 10 (implying that        A/E = 10,
soD = 0.9 Â· A), the creditor who just gained control is eager to sell the stock and willing to accept any price impact
âˆ† < 0.1 Â· A. This is because the creditor only needs to recover D = 0.9 Â· A for his debt claim, and the loss due to price
impact is borne by the investor (who holds an equity claim). This logic also implies that the creditor will become
more cautious in selling if the account leverage rises further, say 20 (in this situation, the creditor is only willing to
accept a price impact        âˆ† < 0.05 Â· A).    Hence, for the very small portion of our sample with leverage far above the
Pingcang Line, selling should become less aggressive, even after the creditor gains control. This empirical prediction
is supported in our data (available upon request).



                                                                24
of using each account's actual Pingcang Line (which could result from endogenous matching), we

proxy for the account's leverage constraint using the average Pingcang Line for all accounts opened

on the same day as the account in question.        Variation in average Pingcang Lines over time are

likely to be driven by aggregate funding conditions rather than individual preferences. As shown in

Table 4 which reports the updated regression estimates using this proxy for leverage constraints, we

nd that higher Leverage-to-Predicted-Pingcang bins strongly predict net selling average controlling

exibly for the level of leverage. Consistent with a leverage constraints channel, the basic monotone

pattern with respect to leverage constraints persists even after controlling for account-level leverage.

   While the aforementioned tests rule in a leverage constraints channel, we do not rule out the

existence of a leverage channel. The exact distinction between the two channels is less crucial for the

purpose of understanding the role of leverage (margin) and associated re sales during the Chinese

stock market crash. Recall that we refer to the negative relation between selling intensity and DMC

in Figure 4 as leverage-induced re sales. This overall eect can be viewed as the combination of two

economic forces: rebalancing due to leverage, and precautionary and forced sales due to the leverage

constraint. Both forces are rooted in leverage. Because in later sections we are only interested in

the implications of leverage taken by margin accounts and resulting sales as a whole, we leave the

detailed quantitative distinction between the leverage eect and the leverage constraint eect for

future, more structural-based, research.



Regulatory Shocks        Another important economic force that could impact leverage-induced re

sales is regulatory shocks. We now investigate how the selling intensities of brokerage and shadow

accounts dier in their responses to regulatory shocks that occurred before the onset of the market

crash. As mentioned in Section 2.4, two regulatory tightening announcements were made which had

the potential to trigger spikes in the selling intensities of shadow-nanced margin accounts: the May

22 event, in which some brokerage rms were required to self-examine their provision of services

toward shadow-nanced margin accounts, and the June 12 event, in which the CSRC released a set

of draft rules that would explicitly ban new shadow accounts.

   For both events, we estimate    Î»k 's   for the ve trading days before and after the regulatory an-

nouncements, which were released after-hours on Fridays. The results are plotted in Figure 6, and

detailed regression results are presented in Appendix Table B.2. We nd that the two regulatory

announcements led to small and inconsistent changes in the selling intensities for brokerage ac-




                                                    25
counts.
           33   In contrast, news of regulatory tightening signicantly increased the selling intensities of

shadow accounts within each DMC bin. The June 12 announcement, in particular, led to dramati-

cally higher selling intensities for shadow accounts with DMC below 3. This evidence is consistent

with the widely-held view that news of potential future regulatory tightening triggered re sales by

shadow accounts.

    These event studies also help establish a causal link between leverage constraints and selling

pressure from shadow accounts close to margin calls.                The sharp increase in selling intensity by

shadow accounts immediately following these regulatory announcements (and the concurrent muted

reaction by brokerage margin investors) points to the working of leverage constraints because shadow

account investors feared increased constraints due to regulatory oversight.                   As with the previous

account-level evidence presented in Figure 4, the regressions for these event studies control for

stock-date and account xed eects, so the empirical patterns cannot be explained by the fact that

low DMC shadow accounts held an unobservably dierent set of stocks or engaged in dierent selling

behaviors on average during the event study sample period.



The Disposition Eect and Leverage: Stabilization vs. Amplication                                       We also ex-

plore another, more behavioral, explanation. Margin accounts that have recently experienced poor

account-level returns will tend to be accounts with low DMC. Poor account-level returns may di-

rectly lead investors to sell, if, for example, investors extrapolate and believe that poor past returns

will persist. This channel is not fully accounted for by the stock-date and account xed eects in

Equation (5), because it operates within an account over time. In supplementary results, shown in

Appendix Table B.3, we nd a similar and slightly stronger relation between DMC and net selling

after also controlling for account-level returns in the past ten days. This occurs because lower past

account-level returns actually predicts lower, not higher, net selling, consistent with the well-known

disposition eect in which investors tend to sell to realize gains and hold on to losers to avoid

realizing losses.

    It is interesting to note that this disposition eect tends to stabilize any negative fundamental

shocks, because investors are reluctant to sell to realize losses. Thus, the disposition eect channel

can partly oset the amplication eect due to leverage. These two eects coexist in the Chinese

stock market, although we nd that the latter leverage-amplication eect dominates during our

sample period.

   33
        There are very few brokerage account observations corresponding to the far right bins representing DMC close
to zero. As a result, the estimated selling intensities for those bins are insignicantly dierent from zero.



                                                          26
4.2      Stock-Level Evidence: Fire Sale Exposure and Selling Pressure

Selling pressure occurs when more investors wish to sell a stock than can quickly be absorbed

by investors on the other side, leading to short-term price declines and long-run reversals.                                          We

hypothesize that stocks that are disproportionately held by margin accounts that have high risk of

hitting their Pingcang Lines, i.e., re sale accounts with DMC                          Zjt â‰¤ 3,     are more exposed to re

sale risk. To test this hypothesis, we dene stock              i's   re sale exposure (F SE ) on day                  t    as:



                           total shares of stock   i   held in re sale accounts at the start of day                     t
                F SEit =                                                                                                     .        (6)
                                           outstanding shares of stock              i   on day   t

In the numerator, we only count the number of shares held by margin accounts that are classied as

re sale accounts as of the start of day t. Table 1 presents summary statistics of our                                 F SE      measure.



4.2.1     F SE     and Actual Net Selling
In the following analysis, we purposely do not use the actual trading choices of re sale accounts,

as investors may exercise endogenous discretion in the choice of which stocks within their portfolios

to sell. We instead look at the pricing patterns for stocks with high re sale exposure (i.e., stocks

that are disproportionately held by margin accounts with leverage close to their Pingcang Lines);

see Edmans et al. (2012) for a similar treatment.

   One necessary step of this approach is to check whether higher-F SE stocks indeed experience

greater selling by re sale accounts. To check this, we estimate the following regression to examine

the eect of      F SE   on stock-level selling pressure:




                                    Î´it = Î² Â· F SEit + controlsit + si + Ï„t + Îµit .                                                   (7)




Here, we construct the stock-level selling pressure from re sale accounts,                          Î´it ,   by



                                 net shares of stock    i   on day    t   sold by re sale accounts
                         Î´it =                                                                                .
                                         outstanding shares of stock            i   on day   t

In regression (7),       controlsit   is a vector of control variables including the stock's volatility and

turnover in the past 60 days, market capitalization measured in                           t âˆ’ 3,     and 10 variables for the

stock's daily returns in the past 10 days. We also control the stock xed eects                                  si   and date xed

eects   Ï„t .
   Table 5 presents the regression results. Across all specications, we nd that re sale exposure



                                                              27
signicantly increases stock-level selling pressure.                   The estimates in Column 4 of Panel A imply

that a one standard deviation rise in                F SE   increases the selling pressure of each stock by 40% of a

standard deviation. We also nd that                   F SEit   can explain a substantial amount of the variation in

our measure of selling pressure             Î´it .   A regression of selling pressure on     F SEit   alone, with no other

control variables, yields an R-squared of 15%. This R-squared is large relative to the R-squared of

23.5% obtained from a more saturated regression in which we also control for stock and date xed

eects, past returns, and a large set of other time-varying stock characteristics. Thus,                       F SEit   can

explain a substantial percentage of the variation in selling pressure from highly-leveraged accounts,

and controlling for additional stock characteristics only marginally adds to the explanatory power

of the regression.

      In Figure 7, we plot the net selling by re sale accounts in our sample of margin accounts, as a

percentage of total volume on each calendar day. The sample is restricted stocks in the top decile

of   F SEit ,    calculated as of the start of each day. As expected, we nd that average net selling by

re sale accounts is positive over time. Net selling by re sale accounts also negatively covaries with

the market index, consistent with the idea that poor market returns amplify selling pressure from

re sale accounts. Finally, the gure shows that re sale accounts represent a disproportionately

large percentage of trading volume relative to the amount of assets held within these accounts

(shown later in Figure 10),
                                    34   which motivates our next set of tests which examines the asset pricing

implications of selling pressure from re sale accounts.



4.2.2 Attributes of High-F SE Stocks
What types of stocks have high                  F SE   in our data?     Table 6 reports the results when we regress

F SE        on various stock characteristics. First, not surprisingly, stocks that experience negative past

returns (in the past 10 days) are associated with higher                   F SE .   Second, higher volatility, which can

push the account closer to its Pingcang Line, also contributes to greater                       F SE ;   this is consistent

with the prediction of Eq.               (3).   We also nd that larger rms in terms of market capitalization

tend to have lower         F SE ,   although this relation reverses once we introduce stock and date xed

eects. This positive relation between market capitalization and                     F SE   could occur because, holding

the stock constant, growing stocks are heavily covered in the media and therefore more salient to

margin traders.         Finally, investors may be more willing to take highly-levered positions in more



     34
          Our sample of margin accounts represents approximately 5% of the margin market, so the total net selling
pressure from re sale accounts is likely to be approximately twenty times larger (see Section 4.4 for details).



                                                                  28
liquid stocks, explaining the nding that higher          F SE   stocks tend to have greater turnover.

    These results suggest that re sale exposure is not randomly assigned across stocks. In the next

section, we will account for non-random assignment when we examine how re sale exposure aects

stock prices.




4.3      Stock-Level Evidence: Fire Sale Exposure and Stock Prices

In this section, we show how re sale exposure aects stock prices. If there is insucient liquidity

in the market to absorb the selling pressure from margin accounts that are close to margin calls, re

sales should cause stock prices to decline in the short run. In the long run, prices should revert to

fundamental value once liquidity returns to the market. Thus, we expect stocks with high                   F SE   to

underperform stocks with low        F SE   over the short-run and to revert to similar levels in the long-run,

a pattern that is hard to reconcile with standard frictionless rational settings.

    We present two empirical strategies to test this conjecture. For both empirical strategies, we

impute stock returns for days in which the stock experienced an outright trading suspension using

prices before and after, assuming equally-compounded daily returns during the suspension period.

For days in which stocks experienced binding daily price limits of             Â±10%,    we use the actual return

on that day.
                 35

    A potential concern with our tests of how            F SE   aects stock-level returns is that stocks with

high    F SE    may decline in value during our sample period for fundamental reasons unrelated to re

sales.    After all,   F SE   is not randomly assigned across stocks; as shown in the previous section,

high     F SE   stocks tend to have negative past returns, higher volatility, and higher turnover.               We

address this concern in three ways.           First, we directly control for each stock's past returns and

observable characteristics (and exploit within-stock variation in             F SE   over time in the regression

analysis). Second, we focus on documenting a long run reversal, which is consistent with a re sale

channel and inconsistent with a negative fundamental shock. The long run reversal is also dicult

to reconcile with a standard frictionless rational model of asset prices.              Third, we show that the

relation between       F SE   and price drops is substantially stronger immediately following regulatory

tightening announcements.          These regulatory tightening announcements are unlikely to coincide

exactly with negative stock fundamental shocks; rather the announcements likely changed investor

expectations of future leverage constraints, which led to increased re sales for high              F SE   stocks.



  35
       In previous regression analysis in which we used past returns as a control variable, we computed returns using
the same methodology.



                                                          29
       Another potential concern is that our ndings of a long-run return reversal for high                        F SE   stocks

may be dependent on a large-scale government bailout of Chinese nancial markets that began in

early July. Specically, we will present evidence of a strong long-run reversal of high                            F SE   stocks

relative to low-F SE stocks. This pattern might be driven by the possibility that Chinese regula-

tors knew of the details of the brokerage and shadow margin systems and therefore targeted the

bailout at high           F SE    stocks. However, this conjecture contradicts most post-bailout narratives of

the government response to the crisis, which characterize the government as being severely under-

informed about the details of the shadow-nanced margin system and lacking a coherent trading

strategy (Bian et al. (2018a), Bian et al. (2018b)).                          Moreover, using stock-day-level government

net purchasing data in July 2015, we can calculate the correlation between                              F SE   and government

purchases at various lags. We nd that the correlation between government purchases and indivi-

dual stock          F SE   is close to zero, and sometimes even negative.                   This evidence shows that, while

the bailout may have helped stem the aggregate decline in the market, the government did not

disproportionately purchase stocks with high re sale exposure. Therefore, the government bailout

cannot explain the cross-sectional evidence of a long-run return reversal of high                         F SE   stocks relative

to low          F SE         36
                       stocks.



4.3.1 Double Sorts
We begin by exploring abnormal returns to a double-sorted long-short portfolio. On each trading

day        t,   we sort all stocks held by re sale accounts into four quartiles according to their return

over the period           [t âˆ’ 10, t âˆ’ 1].   Within each quartile, we then sort stocks into 10 bins according to

their       F SE    at the start of each day         t.   For each quartile of previous period returns, we construct

a long-short strategy that longs the bin with the highest                         F SE   and shorts the bin with the lowest

F SE .
       In Figure 8, we plot the cumulative returns for this long-short strategy in event time, averaged

across all calendar trading days              t.   For all four quartiles of past 10-day returns, we nd a distinct

U-shape for the cumulative abnormal returns of the long-short portfolio.                              The gures show that,

controlling for past returns, stocks in the top decile of                        F SE   underperform stocks in the bottom

decile of        F SE    by approximately 5 percentage points within 10 to 15 trading days after the date in

      36
           The government purchase data was shared with us for the purposes of conducting this test by Bian et al. (2018b).
The government engaged in secondary market purchases on July 6-9, July 15-17, and July 28-31, 2015. For each stock,
we compute the stock-day government purchase               GPi,t   as a fraction of the outstanding market cap, and calculate the
correlation between      GPi,t and F SEi,tâˆ’h       at various lags   h.   The correlations are 4%, 1%, -0.5%, -2%, -2%, and 0.07%
for   h = 0, 3, 5, 10, 20, and 40.


                                                                     30
which   F SE    is measured. The dierence in performance reverts toward zero within 30 to 40 trading

days.



4.3.2 Regression Analysis
To better account for other factors that could lead to dierential return patterns for high and low

F SE    stocks, we turn to regression analysis. We estimate the following regression:




                               CARi,t+h = Î³h Â· F SEit + controlsit + si + Ï„t + Îµit ,                                           (8)




where    CARi,t+h      is the cumulative abnormal return (relative to the CAPM with beta estimated

using 2014 data) for stock          i   from day   t   to   t + h.   We control for stock and day xed eects. We also

control for each stock's return volatility and turnover over the past 60 trading days, market value

in   t âˆ’ 3,   and cumulative and daily returns over the past 10 trading days. If                        F SE   has a negative

short-run eect on stock returns that reverts in the long run, we expect                          Î³h < 0      for small   h   and

Î³h = 0   for large    h.
     Table 7 presents regression results for return windows                      h = 1, 3, 5, 10, 20,   and   40   trading days.

We nd that       F SE     measured at the start of trading day              t   leads to signicant price declines in the

rst 10 trading days after day              t,   but the price declines revert toward zero by approximately 40

trading days after day        t.   In Appendix Table B.5, we repeat this exercise, but calculate                     F SE     only

using accounts with         Z < 0,       i.e,.   accounts that are engaged in forced sales because control has

transferred to the lender. We continue to nd the same U-shaped pattern in which stocks with high

re sale exposure experience abnormal negative returns that reverse in the long run.



4.3.3 Regulatory Announcement Event Study
To better identify a causal eect of re sales, we conduct an event study examining how the relation

between       F SE   and stock returns changes after a regulatory tightening announcement. This event

study helps address the concern that an omitted factor, such as bad fundamentals, may spuriously

drive the negative relation between high                    F SE     and returns.   Recall that on June 12 (after hours

on a Friday), the CSRC released draft rules that would ban new shadow-nanced margin accounts.

As shown earlier in Section 4.1.4, the regulatory announcement led to a sharp increase in selling

intensity, especially by highly-leveraged shadow accounts. The regulatory tightening announcement

is unlikely to coincide exactly with negative stock fundamental shocks; rather the announcement




                                                                     31
likely changed investor expectations of future leverage constraints, which led to increased re sales

for high    F SE   stocks.

   In Table 8, we show the relation between       F SE    and returns separately for each of the two weeks

prior to the announcement as well as for the week immediately after the announcement. We nd

that the relation is insignicantly dierent from zero before the announcement and signicantly

negative immediately after the announcement. Further, the negative eect of         F SE   on returns right

after the announcement may be understated, because the daily            âˆ’10%   limit protected high   F SE
stocks from larger price declines.   In Columns 7-9, we regress an indicator for whether a stock's

âˆ’10%   price limit was triggered on the stock's re sale exposure. We nd a small relation between

the triggered price limit indicator and   F SE   prior to the regulatory announcement, and a very strong

positive relation immediately after.




4.4    Brokerage- vs. Shadow-Financed Margin Accounts

As explained in Section 2, two types of leveraged margin accounts were active during the Chinese

stock market crash of 2015. In short, brokerage-nanced margin accounts were managed by certied

brokerage rms, and were heavily regulated with lower maximum allowable leverage (lower Pingcang

Lines) and lower leverage on average. Meanwhile, shadow-nanced margin accounts that conducted

trading and borrowing on web-based platforms were free from regulation, and had much higher

Pingcang Lines and leverage.

   Since the onset of the stock market crash in early June 2015, practitioners, the media, and regu-

lators have alleged that shadow-nanced margin accounts were the driving force behind the market

collapse.    However, this accusation has largely been untested using concrete evidence.          Whether

shadow accounts were more to blame than brokerage accounts is also not obvious.                As we will

discuss in Section 4.4.2, many estimates suggest that total market assets held within the regula-

ted brokerage-nanced system greatly exceeded that in the unregulated shadow-nanced system.

Furthermore, because brokerage accounts have a lower (and uniformly imposed) Pingcang Line, bro-

kerage accounts may have been closer to their Pingcang Lines (and closer to leverage constraints),

despite their lower average levels of leverage.

   However, we show in Panel A of Table 1 that, in addition to having low absolute levels of

leverage, brokerage margin accounts also maintained lower leverage as a fraction of the Pingcang

Lines. Equivalently, shadow margin accounts have lower Distance-to-Margin-Calls, implying that

shadow accounts are more likely to become re sale accounts. With the aid of detailed account-level



                                                     32
data, we investigate dierences between shadow and brokerage margin accounts in detail in this

subsection. Our ndings shed light on the consequences of regulation (or lack thereof ).



4.4.1 Selling Intensities for Brokerage and Shadow Accounts
In Section 4.1.1, we showed that accounts tend to sell more of their stock holdings when they are

closer to their account-specic Pingcang Lines, and we classied re sale accounts as those with

DMC below the cuto of 3 (i.e.,          Zjt â‰¤ 3    as in Eq. (4)). We now repeat the exercise separately

for the brokerage- and shadow-nance margin account samples. The estimated selling intensities

(Î»k 's) for each account type are plotted in Figure 9 and the corresponding regression coecients

are presented in Table 2, Columns 2 and 3. We nd that the estimated selling intensities decrease

as DMC increases for both samples, consistent with the leverage-induced re sales mechanism.

    There are several features in Figure 9 worth discussing. First, for re sale accounts with DMC

below 3 but above zero, selling intensities conditional on a DMC bin are comparable across the

two types of accounts, with slightly larger magnitudes for the shadow margin sample. The simi-

larity in selling intensities within a DMC bin lends support to our DMC measure in Eq. (3) as a

comprehensive measure of account-level risk capturing leverage-induced re sales. We also observe

that the selling intensity of brokerage accounts relative to shadow accounts rises dramatically once

the accounts have reverted to creditor control (Z              < 0).    Although our data does not allow us to

investigate this issue fully, one plausible explanation is that some creditors of shadow accounts may

be wealthy individual investors who exercise discretionary selling once they gain control of defaulted

shadow accounts. In contrast, lenders of brokerage accounts are brokerage rms who may have more

stringent automated risk management systems.



4.4.2 Contribution of Brokerage and Shadow Accounts to Fire Sales
As discussed in Section 2, brokerage-nanced margin accounts dominate their shadow peers in terms

of asset size.     This point is vividly shown in Figure 10, which plots the asset holdings over time

for each account type. The relative asset sizes of the two account types shown in Panel A roughly

reect their relative asset holdings in the entire market.
                                                                   37


   37
        We estimate the total asset holdings of all brokerage-nanced margin accounts during the peak of our sample
period to be approximately RMB 8.76 trillion; this is the product of the total debt of brokerage accounts (2.26 trillion
published on stock exchanges) and the asset-to-debt ratio in brokerage account sample of about 3.87 in the week of
June 8-12, 2015. We estimate the total asset holdings of all shadow-nanced margin accounts during the peak of our
sample period to be approximately RMB 1.93 trillion, which is the product of the estimated total debt of shadow
accounts in Section 2.3 (about 1.2 trillion in its peak time) and the asset-to-debt ratio in the shadow account sample



                                                          33
    However, Panel A in Figure 10 oers a misleading picture of how these two types of accounts

relate to re sales. Relative to shadow accounts, brokerage accounts are, on average, less leveraged

and farther from their Pingcang Lines.         In Panel B, we instead plot total assets held in re sale

accounts, i.e., accounts with     Zjt â‰¤ 3.    These re sale accounts are much more likely to receive

margin calls and to exhibit greater selling intensity, as shown earlier in Figure 4.

    Once we focus on the asset holdings of re sale accounts in Panel B, we see a quite dierent

picture.   In general, shadow accounts have more total assets held in re sale accounts than do

brokerage accounts.      Before the week of June 24, 2015, the stock holdings in shadow re sale

accounts exceed assets in brokerage re sale accounts by more than 10 to 1.                 It is not until the

week of July 1, 2015, when the SSE index had dropped by about 30% from its peak, that the asset

holdings of brokerage re sale accounts increased to be approximately on par with those of shadow

re sale accounts.

    Next, we show that shadow accounts matter more for re sales and reversals, i.e., the U-shaped

pattern in cumulative abnormal returns for high             F SE   stocks relative to low   F SE   stocks.   We

develop a a measure of Fire Sale Exposure          F SE     in (6) using data for each of the brokerage and

shadow data samples separately.         The relation between returns and         F SE   measured within each

sample are reported in Panels B and C of Table 7.         F SE s from both brokerage and shadow accounts
cause prices of exposed stocks to decline and then revert within approximately 40 trading days.

However, the magnitude of the dip is more than twice as large for           F SE   based on shadow accounts.

Because the distribution of the     F SE   measure can dier across the brokerage and shadow samples,

we also present results with standardized coecients in Appendix Table B.6. We nd that a one

standard deviation change in      F SE   as measured in the shadow sample leads to a ve-times larger

dip in returns than a one standard deviation change in          F SE   as measured in the brokerage sample.

Overall, the dierences in magnitudes support the view that shadow trading played a relatively

more important role in driving re sales during the Chinese stock market crash in the summer of

2015.




5    Discussion, Extensions, and Robustness


In this section, we rst discuss how shadow-nanced margin system and re sales played a role in

the 2015 Chinese stock market crash. We then explore the interaction between leverage-induced re


of about 1.61 in the week of June 8-12, 2015. These two numbers imply that the asset holdings of shadow accounts
are approximately 22% that of brokerage accounts. In our sample, this ratio is about 19%.



                                                       34
sales and regulated price limits, which is an interesting institutional feature of the Chinese stock

market.     Finally, we show that our ndings are robust to alternative weighting schemes, cutos,

sample splits, and imputation procedures.




5.1      Discussion: The Role of the Shadow-Financed Margin System and Fire

         Sales

We have demonstrated that shadow-nanced margin accounts contributed more than brokerage

accounts to the Chinese stock market crash in 2015. Panel B of Figure 10 suggests the following

narrative for the evolution of the market crash. In the rst half of 2015, shadow accounts maintained

higher absolute leverage and higher leverage relative their Pingcang Lines. However, the potential

selling pressure from these re sale shadow accounts were absorbed by the continuous inow of retail

investors who opened new shadow accounts: in our data, the net inow of funding from shadow

accounts peaked at 8.7 trillion Yuan during the week of June 1, 2015.
                                                                                  38   The news about potential

regulatory tightening for shadow-nancing released on June 12, 2015 not only halted the inow of

new investors (the net inow of funding dropped to 4.6 trillion Yuan) but also increased the selling

by existing shadow accounts, causing the stock market index to fall. The market decline after June

17 triggered a leverage spiral, turning more and more shadow accounts into re sale accounts (as

shown in Panel B of Figure 10), whose selling further depressed stock prices.                 The beaten stock

prices in late June 2015 pushed the leverage of brokerage-nanced margin accounts closer to their

Pingcang Lines. As shown in Panel B of Figure 10, brokerage re sale account assets rose sharply

around July 1, and their re sales contributed to the continued market collapse in early July 2015.

The leverage-induced re sale spiral nally stemmed around July 6th, when the Chinese government

started to intervene using large-scale market purchases.

    By presenting a battery of empirical evidence, including analysis of account-level selling beha-

vior, reactions to regulatory shocks, and the reversal of high-F SE stocks, this paper shows the

existence of re sales during the 2015 Chinese market crash. However, we emphasize that our evi-

dence, which is primarily cross-sectional in nature coupled with event studies around regulatory

tightening announcements, does not imply that re sales caused the entire Chinese market crash in

2015. The existing literature suggests that the Chinese stock market was overvalued in mid-2015

due to unleashed margin credit starting in 2010 (Hansman et al., 2018). Presumably, the market in-



  38
       The net inow of funding is calculated as the asset holdings of newly opened shadow accounts minus the asset
holdings of closed shadow accounts over a given period.



                                                          35
dex would have reverted to its fundamental level even without leverage-induced re sales. Leverage

likely shortened the correction phase, causing a rapid crash in the days immediately following a

regulatory announcement aimed at curbing shadow-nanced margin trading. Our ndings parallel

the common narratives concerning the US 1929 stock market crash (Schwert, 1989). While delever-

aging is unlikely to be the ultimate cause of the large and persistent drop in the value of the US

stock market in the years following 1929, many scholars believe that deleveraging contributed to

the correction taking the form of dramatic and destabilizing single-day crashes.




5.2   Price Limits and Selling Intensity

During our sample period of May to July 2015, each individual stock was allowed to move a daily

maximum of 10 percent from the previous closing level in either direction, before triggering a price

limit, as explained in Section 2.4. These price limits were introduced with the goal of suppressing

excessive trading and controlling market volatility.     However, the price limits may have had the

unintended consequence of exacerbating re sales crashes in other stocks.       As shown in Table 2,

margin investors are signicantly more likely to sell assets when their account-level leverage nears

their Pingcang Line limits.      We hypothesize that an investor seeking to deleverage may further

intensify the selling of a particular stock if other stocks in her portfolio cannot be sold due to

stock-specic price limits.

   For each account-day, we dene price limit fraction as the fractional value of account   j 's assets
as of the start of day   t   that consist of stocks that hit price limits at some later point on day   t.
Price limit fraction measures the extent to which margin investors are constrained in their ability

to sell a subset of their holdings. We then regress net selling at the account-stock-day level on the

set of DMC bins dened earlier, the price limit fraction, and the interaction between the price limit

fraction and the DMC bins. We restrict the regression sample to stocks that do not face trading

suspensions or price limits on day t. The results for the full sample of brokerage and shadow margin

accounts are reported in Table 9 Column 1. As expected, we nd that accounts with lower DMC

are signicantly more likely to sell.     Moreover, the interaction between DMC and price limit is

signicant and positive for all DMC bins, with greater magnitudes for lower bins corresponding to

lower DMC. This is consistent with investors being more likely to sell any particular stock in their

portfolio if other holdings cannot be sold due to government-regulated price limits, with the eect

being larger for investors with stronger deleveraging motives (i.e., those with lower DMC).

   We also structured the analysis to account for a key alternative explanation. Accounts with a



                                                    36
higher level of price limit fraction are likely to be accounts that hold stocks that experience low

returns over the course of day     t.     Poor returns are correlated with the probability that stocks hit

price limits.    Poor portfolio returns may also directly increase the probability that investors sell

assets. To control for this alternative channel, all specications in Table 9 control for each account's

day   t   counterfactual returns assuming no stocks are bought or sold on day          t,   interacted with the

set of DMC bins. As in the previous regressions examining net selling, we also control for stock-day

and account xed eects. Thus, our estimated eects cannot be explained by high selling due to

poor portfolio returns or by mechanisms that vary only at the stock-day or account level. Instead,

we nd that deleveraging motives combined with price limits intensify the selling pressure for stocks

that are not yet protected by price limits.




5.3       Other Robustness Checks

Appendix Table B.4 shows that the results in Table 7 are robust to the choice of                Zjt â‰¤ 3   as the

cuto for margin accounts to be classied as re sale accounts. Instead of calculating each stock's

re sale exposure as the fraction of shares held by re sale accounts, we estimate re sale exposure

as the fraction of shares held in any margin account, with each account's holdings weighted by the

corresponding selling intensities       Î»k   associated with the account's DMC at the start of each day.

We nd that this alternative     Î»k -weighted     measure of re sale exposure predicts a similar U-shaped

return pattern. As another robustness check, we adopt a conservative treatment that only classies

account-date observations with     Z < 0 (these accounts have been taken over by creditors) as re sale
accounts; this amounts to setting         Î»Z<0 = 1   while all other   Î»k = 0.   The results are qualitatively

similar, as shown in Appendix Table B.5.

      Appendix Table B.6 presents standardized coecients, as discussed earlier in Section 4.4, which

allow for comparison of magnitudes across the brokerage and shadow samples. Finally, Appendix

Table B.7 shows that our results are unlikely to be driven by the imputation of stock returns.

Some stocks in our sample experienced trading suspensions for one or more trading days. In our

baseline analysis, we impute the returns for days in which trading was suspended using the most

recent traded prices before and after the suspension. In this robustness test, we exclude stock-day

observations from the regression sample if the stock ever experiences a full day of suspended trading

during the event period    [t, t + 40],   and nd a similar U-shaped pattern in returns.




                                                        37
6    Conclusion


Using unique account-level data for brokerage-nanced and shadow-nanced margin traders in the

Chinese stock market, we study the role of deleveraging and re sales in the Chinese stock market

crash in the summer of 2015, during which the SSE index fell by more than 30%.               As direct

evidence for leverage-induced re sales, we show that margin investors heavily sell their holdings

when their account-level leverage edges toward their maximum leverage limits (the Pingcang Line),

controlling for stock-date and account xed eects.      This selling pressure leads stocks that are

disproportionately held by investors who are close to receiving margin calls to be exposed to re

sale risk, especially during periods when the market is in rapid decline. Consistent with this view,

we show that stocks with greater re sale risk exposure experience larger abnormal price declines

and subsequent reversals, relative to stocks with lower re sale risk.

    We would like to highlight that the leveraged-induced 2015 Chinese stock market crash studied

in this paper closely resembles the US stock market crash of 1929. According to Galbraith (2009),

margin trading thrived in the period leading up to the 1929 crash, with outstanding margin credit

rising from about 1 billion dollars in the beginning of 1920s to 17 billion dollars in the summer of

1929. Moreover, the US margin trading system in 1929 was very similar to China's shadow-nanced

margin system in 2015, in that both systems lacked market-wide regulations of initial margins and

minimum margins (these regulations were later introduced by the Securities and Exchange Act of

1934 in the US). In response to the regulatory void, individual traders took on excessive leverage

both in the US in 1929 and in China in 2015, leading to re sale externalities (e.g., Lorenzoni (2008),

Stein (2012), He and Kondor (2016), and Davila and Korinek (2017)). This view is consistent with

another major nding of this paper: although regulated brokerage-nanced margin accounts held a

much larger fraction of market assets, unregulated shadow-nanced margin accounts played a more

signicant role in the 2015 Chinese market crash.




                                                  38
References

Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2013, Procyclical leverage and value-at-risk,     Review of Financial
  Studies 27, 373403.


Andrade, Sandrade, Jiangze Bian, and Timothy Burch, 2013, Analyst, coverage, information, and bubbles,
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 15731605.


Basak, Suleyman, and Domenico Cuoco, 1998, An equilibrium model with restricted stock market partici-
  pation, Review of Financial Studies 11, 309341.

Bernardo, Antonio E., and Ivo Welch, 2004, Liquidity and nancial market runs,   The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 119, 135158.


Bian, Jiangze, Zhi Da, Dong Lou, and Hao Zhou, 2018a, Leverage network and market contagion,      Working
  Paper .


Bian, Jiangze, Zhiguo He, Donghui Shi, and Haoxiang Zhu, 2018b, An anatomy of the chinese stock market
  intervention .

Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding liquidity, Review of Financial
  Studies 22, 22012238.


Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A macroeconomic model with a nancial sector,
  American Economic Review 104, 379421.


Campbell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak, 2011, Forced sales and house prices,        American
  Economic Review 101, 21082131.


Carpenter, Jennifer N, and Robert F Whitelaw, 2017, The development of china's stock market and stakes
  for the global economy .

Chen, Hui, Anton Petukhov, and Jiang Wang, 2018a, The dark side of circuit breakers, Technical report,
  Working Paper, MIT.

Chen, Jing, Ya Tang, and Jianguo Xu, 2017, Hasty deleverage and liquidity spiral: Evidence from margin
  trading of individual stocks, Technical report, Peking University.

Chen, Ting, Zhenyu Gao, Jibao He, Wenxi Jiang, and Wei Xiong, 2018b, Daily price limits and destructive
  market behavior, Technical report, Forthcoming Journal of Econometrics.

Comerton-Forde, Carole, Terrence Hendershott, Charles M. Jones, Pamela Moulton, and Mark S. Seaholes,
  2010, Time variation in liquidity: The role of market-maker inventories and revenues, Journal of Finance
  65, 295332.

Coval, Joshua, and Erik Staord, 2007, Asset re sales (and purchases) in equity markets,       Journal of
  Financial Economics 86, 479512.


Danielsson, Jon, Jean-Pierre Zigrand, and Hyun Song Shin, 2002, Asset price dynamics with value-at-risk
  constrained traders, Working Paper .

Davila, Eduardo, and Anton Korinek, 2017, Pecuniary externalities in economies with nancial frictions,
  Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming .


Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig, 1983, Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity,   Journal of
  Political Economy 91, 401419.


Dinc, Serdar, Isil Erel, and Rose Liao, 2017, Fire sale discount: Evidence from the sale of minority equity
  stakes, Journal of Financial Economics 125, 475  490.


                                                    39
Edmans, Alex, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2012, The real eects of nancial markets: The impact of
  prices on takeovers, The Journal of Finance 67, 933971.

Ellul, Andrew, Chotibhak Jotikasthira, and Christian T. Lundblad, 2011, Regulatory pressure and re sales
  in the corporate bond market, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 596620.

Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos, 2008, Leverage cycles and the anxious economy,           American Economic
  Review 98, 12111244.


Foucault, Thierry, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, 2011, Individual investors and volatility,        Journal of
  Finance 66, 13691406.


Galbraith, J. Kenneth, 2009,   The Great Crash 1929   (Houghton Miin, New York, NY).

Garleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Pedersen, 2011, Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from the law of one
  price, Review of Financial Studies 24, 19802022.

Geanakoplos, John, 2010, The leverage cycles,   NBER Macroeconomics Annual        24, 166.

Goldstein, Itay, and Ady Pauzner, 2005, Demand deposit contracts and the probability of bank runs,             The
  Journal of Finance 60, 12931327.


Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and welfare in markets with nancially constrained
  arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361407.

Hameed, Allaudeen, Wenjin Kang, and S. Viswanathan, 2010, Stock market declines and liquidity,           Journal
  of Finance 65, 257293.


Hansman, Christoper, Harrison Hong, Wenxi Jiang, Jane Liu, and Juanjuan Meng, 2018, Riding the credit
  boom, Technical report, Columbia University.

Hardouvelis, G. A., 1990, Margin requirements, volatility, and the transitory component of stock prices,
  American Economic Review 80, 736762.


Hardouvelis, Gikas A., and Panayiotis Theodossiou, 2002, The asymmetric relation between initial margin
  requirements and stock market volatility across bull and bear markets, Review of Financial Studies 15,
  15251559.

He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, 2017, Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from many asset
  classes, Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming .

He, Zhiguo, and Peter Kondor, 2016, Inecient investment waves,       Econometrica   84, 735780.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, Intermediary asset pricing,      American Economic Review          103,
  732770.

He, Zhiguo, and Wei Xiong, 2012, Dynamic debt runs,        The Review of Financial Studies    25, 17991843.

Huang, Jennifer, Donghui Shi, Zhongzhi Song, and Bin Zhao, 2018, Discretionary stock trading suspension .

Huang, Yi, Jianjun Miao, and Pengfei Wang, 2016, Saving china's stock market,        Working Paper   .

Kyle, Albert S, and Wei Xiong, 2001, Contagion as a wealth eect,      Journal of Finance    56, 14011440.

Liao, Jingchi, and Cameron Peng, 2017, Price and volume dynamics in a bubble: Theory and evidence,
  Technical report, Yale School of Managmenet.

Lorenzoni, Guido, 2008, Inecient credit booms,   Review of Economic Studies     75, 809833.



                                                      40
Merrill, Craig B., Taylor D. Nadauld, Rene M. Stulz, and Shane M. Sherlund, 2016, Were there re sales in
 the rmbs market?, Technical report, Ohio State University.

Merton, Robert, 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates,   The Journal of
 Finance 29, 449470.


Merton, Robert C, 1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model,         Journal of
 economic theory 3, 373413.


Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Su, 2013, Household balance sheets, consumption, and the economic
  slump, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 16871726.

Mitchell, Mark, Lasse Pedersen, and Todd Pulvino, 2007, Slow moving capital,    American Economic Review,
  Papers and Proceedings 97, 215220.


Pulvino, Todd, 1998, Do asset re sales exist? an empirical investigation of commercial aircraft transactions,
  Journal of Finance 53, 939978.


Schwert, G. William, 1989, Margin requirements and stock volatility, Journal   of Financial Services Research
  3, 153164.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: a market equilibrium
  approach, Journal of Finance 47, 13431366.

Stein, Jeremy C., 2012, Monetary policy as nancial-stability regulation,   Quarterly Journal of Economics
  127, 5795.

Tookes, Heather E., and Bige Kahraman, 2016, Trader leverage and liquidity, Journal of Finance, forthcoming
  .




                                                     41
                                                                    Figure 1
        Structure and Funding Sources of Margin Systems in the Chinese Stock Market
 Panel A depicts the funding sources for the brokerage- and shadow-nanced margin systems in the Chinese
 stock market. Panel B depicts the structure of the shadow-nanced margin system. Each mother account
 appears to the brokerage rm as a normal, unlevered, brokerage account with a large quantity of assets
 and high trading activity. In reality, the mother account is managed by a shadow nancing company and
 linked via FinTech software to multiple child accounts. Orders submitted by child accounts are automatically
 routed via the software system through the mother account to the brokerage rm in real time.
                                                    Panel A: Funding Sources

      Brokerage                 Credit from                   WMP from                        Trust and P2P                      Pledged
      Firms' own                  CSFC                        Commercial                       via Informal                       Stock
        Capital                                                 Banks                            Lending                         Rights




     Regulated Brokerage-Financed                                                       Unregulated Shadow-Financed
                System                                                                             System




                                 Connected to Broker Accounts to Trade Stocks



                          Panel B: Structure of Shadow-Financed Margin System
Figure 1. Structure and funding sources in Brokerage and Shadow-financed margin system in
                                            Access to Stock Exchanges
Chinese stock market.
                                                                   via Brokerage Firms



                                                                   Mother/Main Account,
                                                                   controlled by Financing
                                                                         Companies

                               Shadow Banking:             Debt                                                 Trading orders
                                                                                  Mezzanine
                               WMPs, Trust, etc.                                  Financing                     Flow of funds



            FinTech Software      Margin Credit              Margin Credit                   Margin Credit           FinTech Software



                   Child Account 1            Child Account 2                 Child Account 3     â€¦â€¦         Child Account ð‘µ


                                Equity                     Equity                       Equity                       Equity

                     Retail Trader                 Retail Trader                Retail Trader     â€¦â€¦          Retail Trader
                           1                             2                            3                             ð‘µ




                                                                         42
                                                 Figure 2
                       Leverage in Brokerage and Shadow Margin Accounts
Panel A depicts the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE) composite index (the dashed blue line), the average
leverage for shadow margin accounts (the solid red line), and the average leverage for brokerage margin
accounts (the dashed-dotted red line), weighted by the equity size of each account, at the start of each day
from May to July, 2015. To compute the average, we weight each account's leverage by the equity in each
account. Weighted in this manner, average leverage equals total debt scaled by total equity. Panel B presents
the asset-weighted average leverage for the combined sample of all brokerage and shadow margin accounts
(the solid red line), and the equity-weighted average leverage for all margin accounts (the dashed-dotted red
line), at the start of each day from May to July, 2015. To compute the averages, we weight each account's
leverage by the assets or equity in each account.
              Panel A: Equity-weighted Leverage, Brokerage vs. Shadow Samples




           Panel B: Asset-weighted vs. Equity-weighted Leverage, Combined Sample




                                                     43
                                                  Figure 3
                             Distance-to-Margin-Call (DMC) Dispersion
This gure depicts the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE) composite index (the dashed blue line) and various
percentiles of the log of the Distance-to-Margin-Call measure for each account at the start of each day. For
each account at the start of each day, let levjt = Ajt /Ejt . Let Ïƒjt
                                                                   A
                                                                      be the volatility of the assets currently
held in the account (calculated as the weighted average of the annualized return volatilities of the stocks
held in the account, measured using each asset's daily returns over the previous year 2014). We dene the
                                                              A
                                                    Ajt âˆ’Ajt Ïƒjt Z
Distance-to-Margin-Call as the value Z such that              A
                                                    Ejt âˆ’Ajt Ïƒjt Z
                                                                     = Lev j . In other words, Z equals the number
of standard deviations of downward movements in asset values necessary for the current level of leverage to
meet the Pingcang Line; when Z drops below zero, the investor loses control of the account to the creditor
because account level leverage has exceeded the account's Pingcang Line. We plot the 15th (solid red line),
20th (dashed-dotted red line), 50th (dashed red line), and 80th (dotted red line) percentiles of the full sample
including both brokerage- and shadow-nanced margin accounts, at the start of each day from May to July,
2015.




                                                       44
                                                      Figure 4
                       Distance-to-Margin-Call and Investor Selling Intensity
This gure plots the coecients Î»k from the regression:
                                              11
                                              X
                                       j                j
                                      Î´it =         Î»k Ik,tâˆ’1 + Î½it + Î±j + Îµjit ,
                                              k=1

        j
where Î´jt  is account j 's net selling volume of stock i on day t, normalized by account j 's initial holding of
                                                                                                           j
stock i at the beginning of day t. Î½it is the stock-date xed eect and Î±j is the account xed eect. Ik,tâˆ’1
represents 10 bins for each account's Distance-to-Margin-Call, with higher bins corresponding to accounts
that are closer to their leverage limit (the Pingcang Line). Accounts with leverage exceeding the Pingcang
Line are assigned to bin 11. Unleveraged accounts are the omitted category. The sample includes all
brokerage- and shadow-nanced margin accounts, as well as brokerage non-margin accounts which aid in the
estimation of the omitted category. The sample is restricted to stock-days in which a stock is not suspended
from trading at any point during day t, and is also restricted to stocks i held by account j as of the start of
day t. The time period is from May to July, 2015.




                                                           45
                                                Figure 5
            Distance-to-Margin-Call and Investor Selling Intensity: Market Returns
This gure plots the coecients Î»k from the regression dened in Figure 4, estimated separately for the
samples in which the market return on day t is positive and negative.




                                                Figure 6
                                        Regulatory Tightening
Regulatory tightening announcements occurred after hours on Friday May 22, 2015 and Friday June 12, 2015.
This gure plots the coecients Î»k from the regression dened in Figure 4, separately for the brokerage and
shadow samples for the ve trading days immediately before and after the announcements events. There are
very few brokerage observations corresponding to the far right bins representing DMC close to zero if the
left two panel; the Î»k 's for those bins are insignicantly dierent from zero.




                                                    46
                                                 Figure 7
                                  Net Selling by Fire Sale Accounts
This gure plots net selling of high re sale exposure stocks by re sale accounts as a percentage of total
volume traded. To compute the series, we rst restrict the sample to stocks in the top decile of re sale
exposure, calculated as of the start of each trading day. For each stock-day, we compute total net selling by
re sale accounts as a percentage of total trading volume for the same set of stocks on that day (in monetary
units), and aggregate at the weekly level.




                                                     47
                                                  Figure 8
                         Returns Following Fire Sales: Long-Short Portfolio
This gure plots the average long-short portfolio cumulative abnormal return after double sorts based on
each stock's previous period return and re sale exposure (FSE). On each day t, we sort all stocks held by
re sale accounts into four quartiles according to their return over the period [t âˆ’ 10, t âˆ’ 1]. Within each
quartile, we then sort stocks into 10 bins according to their FSE at the start of each day t. For each quartile
of previous period returns, we construct a long-short strategy that longs the bin with the highest FSE and
shorts the bin with the lowest FSE. The sample includes all stocks held by brokerage- and shadow-nanced
margin accounts. The time period is from May to July, 2015. The dotted lines represent 90% condence
intervals. Standard errors and condence bands are estimated from a stock by event-day level regression
using a sample restricted to the top and bottom deciles in terms of FSE at the start of day t and for the
relevant return quartile over the period [t âˆ’ 10, t âˆ’ 1]. We regress cumulative returns on indicators for event
dates t, t+1, ... , t+40 as well as the interaction between the event date indicators and an indicator for
whether the observation is in the top decile for FSE. The graph plots the coecients on the interaction
terms, which represent the dierence in average cumulative returns between the two decile portfolios for
each event date. Standard errors are allowed to be double-clustered by calendar day and stock. The sample
is restricted to stocks that do not experience suspended trading on day t.




                                                      48
                                              Figure 9
  Distance-to-Margin-Call and Investor Selling Intensity: Brokerage and Shadow Accounts
This gure plots the coecients Î»k from the regression dened in Figure 4, estimated separately for the
brokerage- and shadow-nanced margin account samples. The time period is from May to July, 2015.




                                                  49
                                                Figure 10
                    Market Capitalization of Brokerage and Shadow Accounts
Panel A shows the total market capitalization held in brokerage- and shadow-nanced margin accounts over
time. Panel B shows the total market capitalization held in re sale accounts, i.e., accounts with Z less than
3. The solid black line depicts the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE) composite index.
                                         Panel A: All Accounts




                                      Panel B: Fire Sale Accounts




                                                     50
                                                            Table 1
                                                      Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics for account activity and stocks characteristics from May to July
2015. Leverage is the ratio of assets to equity at the start of each account-day, where equity is equal to
assets minus debt. The Pingcang Line is the account-level maximum allowable level of leverage. Z is the
Distance-to-Margin-Call. An account is classied as a re sale account on day t if Z is less than or equal to
3. Net selling is account j 's net selling volume of stock i on day t, normalized by account j 's shares held of
stock i at the beginning of day t. Selling pressure is the total net selling volume of stock i on day t from
all re sale accounts that hold stock i at the start of day t, scaled by the number of outstanding shares of
stock i at the beginning of day t. Fire sale exposure is the ratio of the total shares of stock i held in re sale
accounts at the start of day t to the number of outstanding shares of stock i on day t. CAR is the cumulative
abnormal return estimated relative to the CAPM, with beta calculated for each stock using year 2014 data.
Return volatility is the standard deviation of returns during the prior 60 days. Log market value is the log
of the product of each stock's daily close price and total number of shares outstanding, measured in t âˆ’ 3.
Avg turnover is the average of the ratio of trading volume in shares to the total shares outstanding in the
prior 60 days.
                                               Panel A: Account-Day Level
                                             Mean
                                             Mean        S.D.
                                                         S.D.      Min
                                                                   Min           p25
                                                                                 p25      p50
                                                                                          p50        p75
                                                                                                     p75       Max
                                                                                                               Max        Obs
                                                                                                                          Obs
Leverage,
Leverage, full
           full sample
                sample                       1.1264
                                             1.1264     1.9923
                                                        1.9923            11        11      11         11       100
                                                                                                                100    114670045
                                                                                                                       114670045
Leverage,
Leverage, shadow
           shadow accounts
                      accounts               6.6019
                                             6.6019     12.757
                                                        12.757            11    3.0254
                                                                                3.0254   4.2867
                                                                                         4.2867     5.9794
                                                                                                    5.9794      100
                                                                                                                100     2308872
                                                                                                                        2308872
Leverage,
Leverage, brokerage accounts
           brokerage     accounts            1.4372
                                             1.4372     0.476
                                                         0.476           11         11   1.3636
                                                                                         1.3636     1.7042
                                                                                                    1.7042      100
                                                                                                                100     3108015
                                                                                                                        3108015
Leverage,
Leverage, non-margin
           non-margin accounts
                           accounts             11         00         11           11       11         11        11    109253158
                                                                                                                       109253158
Pingcang
Pingcang Line,
           Line, full
                  full sample
                       sample                1.303
                                              1.303     1.7409
                                                        1.7409         11           11      11         11       100
                                                                                                                100    114670045
                                                                                                                       114670045
Pingcang
Pingcang Line,
           Line, shadow
                  shadow accounts
                            accounts        11.4846
                                            11.4846     5.3237
                                                        5.3237          22        10
                                                                                  10        10
                                                                                           10      11.0011
                                                                                                   11.0011      100
                                                                                                                100     2308872
                                                                                                                        2308872
Pingcang
Pingcang Line,
           Line, brokerage
                  brokerage accounts
                               accounts        4.3
                                               4.3         00       4.3
                                                                    4.3           4.3
                                                                                  4.3      4.3
                                                                                           4.3        4.3
                                                                                                      4.3       4.3
                                                                                                                4.3     3108015
                                                                                                                        3108015
Pingcang
Pingcang Line, non-margin accounts
           Line, non-margin      accounts       11         00        11            11       11         11        11    109253158
                                                                                                                       109253158
Z,
Z, full
   full sample
        sample                              96.7684
                                            96.7684    16.2511
                                                       16.2511   -48.8201
                                                                 -48.8201         100
                                                                                  100      100
                                                                                           100        100
                                                                                                      100       100
                                                                                                                100     5416887
                                                                                                                        5416887
Z,
Z, shadow
   shadow accounts
            accounts                         11.508
                                             11.508    18.6731
                                                       18.6731   -48.8201
                                                                 -48.8201       3.4944
                                                                                3.4944   6.7863
                                                                                         6.7863    11.7619
                                                                                                   11.7619      100
                                                                                                                100     2308872
                                                                                                                        2308872
Z,
Z, brokerage
   brokerage accounts
               accounts                     46.9811
                                            46.9811    34.4584
                                                       34.4584   -13.7431
                                                                 -13.7431      21.0018
                                                                               21.0018   30.722
                                                                                         30.722       100
                                                                                                      100       100
                                                                                                                100     3108015
                                                                                                                        3108015
Z,
Z, non-margin
   non-margin accounts
                 accounts                      100
                                               100         00      100
                                                                   100            100
                                                                                 100       100
                                                                                           100        100
                                                                                                     100        100
                                                                                                                100    109253158
                                                                                                                       109253158
Account
Account assets, full
          assets,  full accounts
                        accounts            2848592
                                            2848592   24290699
                                                      24290699     0.02
                                                                   0.02        165112
                                                                               165112    581690
                                                                                         581690    1708483
                                                                                                   1708483   4.5E+09
                                                                                                             4.5E+09    5416887
                                                                                                                        5416887
Account
Account assets, shadow accounts
          assets,  shadow    accounts       1522783
                                            1522783    6233854
                                                       6233854     0.02
                                                                   0.02         58967
                                                                                58967    211190
                                                                                         211190     746180
                                                                                                    746180   5.1E+08
                                                                                                             5.1E+08    2308872
                                                                                                                        2308872
Account
Account assets,
          assets, brokerage
                   brokerage accounts
                                accounts    3862068
                                            3862068   31764740
                                                      31764740     3.85
                                                                   3.85        412780
                                                                               412780    955315
                                                                                         955315    2369806
                                                                                                   2369806   4.5E+09
                                                                                                             4.5E+09    3108015
                                                                                                                        3108015

                                            Panel B: Account-Stock-Day Level
                                            Mean
                                            Mean        S.D.
                                                        S.D.       Min
                                                                   Min          p25
                                                                                p25       p50
                                                                                          p50        p75
                                                                                                     p75      Max
                                                                                                              Max          Obs
                                                                                                                           Obs
Net
Net selling,
    selling, full
             full sample
                  sample                    0.0737
                                            0.0737     0.3145
                                                       0.3145      -1.2
                                                                   -1.2          00        00         00       11      300003600
                                                                                                                       300003600
Net
Net selling, shadow accounts
    selling, shadow  accounts               0.2184
                                            0.2184     0.4508
                                                       0.4508      -1.2
                                                                   -1.2          00        00       0.439
                                                                                                    0.439      11        5696005
                                                                                                                        5696005
Net
Net selling,
    selling, brokerage
             brokerage accounts
                        accounts            0.0849
                                            0.0849     0.3336
                                                       0.3336      -1.2
                                                                   -1.2          00        00         00       11       14465239
                                                                                                                       14465239
Net
Net selling,
    selling, non-margin
             non-margin accounts
                          accounts          0.0702
                                            0.0702     0.3094
                                                       0.3094      -1.2
                                                                   -1.2          00        00         00       11      279842356
                                                                                                                       279842356


                                           Mean
                                           Mean         S.D.
                                                        S.D.        Min
                                                                    Min          p25
                                                                                 p25       p50
                                                                                           p50       p75
                                                                                                     p75       Max
                                                                                                               Max       Obs
                                                                                                                         Obs
Selling
Selling pressure,
        pressure, all
                   all margin   accounts 0.000017
                       margin accounts   0.000017     0.000190
                                                      0.000190   -0.01685
                                                                 -0.01685      0.00000
                                                                               0.00000   0.00000
                                                                                         0.00000   0.00001
                                                                                                   0.00001   0.02112
                                                                                                             0.02112    116749
                                                                                                                        116749
Selling
Selling pressure,
        pressure, shadow
                   shadow accounts
                             accounts    0.000014
                                         0.000014     0.000170
                                                      0.000170   -0.01687
                                                                 -0.01687      0.00000
                                                                               0.00000   0.00000
                                                                                         0.00000   0.00001
                                                                                                   0.00001   0.02112
                                                                                                             0.02112    116749
                                                                                                                        116749
Selling pressure,  brokerage    accounts 0.000003
Selling pressure, brokerage accounts 0.000003         0.000083
                                                      0.000083   -0.00201
                                                                 -0.00201      0.00000
                                                                               0.00000   0.00000
                                                                                         0.00000   0.00000
                                                                                                   0.00000   0.01955
                                                                                                             0.01955    116749
                                                                                                                        116749
FSE,
FSE, all
      all margin
          margin accounts
                  accounts               0.000167
                                         0.000167     0.000624
                                                      0.000624    0.00000
                                                                  0.00000      0.00001
                                                                               0.00001   0.00003
                                                                                         0.00003   0.00012
                                                                                                   0.00012   0.04904
                                                                                                             0.04904    116749
                                                                                                                        116749
FSE,
FSE, shadow
      shadow accounts
                accounts                 0.000151
                                         0.000151     0.000569
                                                      0.000569    0.00000
                                                                  0.00000      0.00001
                                                                               0.00001   0.00003
                                                                                         0.00003   0.00011
                                                                                                   0.00011   0.04904
                                                                                                             0.04904    116749
                                                                                                                        116749
FSE,
FSE, brokerage
      brokerage accounts
                  accounts               0.000016
                                         0.000016     0.000243
                                                      0.000243    0.00000
                                                                  0.00000      0.00000
                                                                               0.00000   0.00000
                                                                                         0.00000   0.00000
                                                                                                   0.00000   0.04226
                                                                                                             0.04226    116749
                                                                                                                        116749
CAR   [t]
CAR [t]                                   -0.0003
                                          -0.0003      0.0417
                                                       0.0417     -0.1824
                                                                  -0.1824      -0.0270
                                                                               -0.0270   -0.0036
                                                                                         -0.0036    0.0245
                                                                                                   0.0245     0.2164
                                                                                                             0.2164     109675
                                                                                                                        109675
CAR   [t,t+3]
CAR [t,t+3]                               -0.0007
                                          -0.0007      0.0817
                                                       0.0817     -0.3971
                                                                  -0.3971      -0.0489
                                                                               -0.0489   -0.0034
                                                                                         -0.0034    0.0460
                                                                                                   0.0460     0.5344
                                                                                                             0.5344     109675
                                                                                                                        109675
CAR
CAR [t,t+5]
      [t,t+5]                             -0.0006
                                          -0.0006      0.1095
                                                       0.1095     -0.5303
                                                                  -0.5303      -0.0626
                                                                               -0.0626   -0.0005
                                                                                         -0.0005    0.0641
                                                                                                   0.0641     0.5425
                                                                                                             0.5425     109675
                                                                                                                        109675
CAR
CAR [t,t+10]
      [t,t+10]                            0.0034
                                           0.0034      0.1576
                                                       0.1576     -0.7929
                                                                  -0.7929
                                                                 51            -0.0827
                                                                               -0.0827    0.0107
                                                                                          0.0107    0.0985
                                                                                                   0.0985     0.7455
                                                                                                             0.7455     109675
                                                                                                                        109675
CAR
CAR [t,t+20]
      [t,t+20]                            0.0080
                                           0.0080      0.2048
                                                       0.2048     -1.0486
                                                                  -1.0486      -0.1159
                                                                               -0.1159    0.0186
                                                                                          0.0186    0.1374
                                                                                                   0.1374     1.1256
                                                                                                             1.1256     109675
                                                                                                                        109675
CAR   [t,t+40]
CAR [t,t+40]                              -0.0021
                                          -0.0021      0.2071
                                                       0.2071     -1.2508
                                                                  -1.2508      -0.1299
                                                                               -0.1299   -0.0033
                                                                                         -0.0033    0.1200
                                                                                                   0.1200     1.1301
                                                                                                             1.1301     109675
                                                                                                                        109675
Cumulative
Cumulative return
              return [t-10,t-1]
                      [t-10,t-1]          1.0312
                                           1.0312      0.2377
                                                       0.2377      0.3487
                                                                   0.3487       0.8962
                                                                                0.8962    1.0371
                                                                                          1.0371    1.1707
                                                                                                   1.1707     2.6017
                                                                                                             2.6017     116749
                                                                                                                        116749
                                         Mean        S.D.     Min         p25       p50        p75      Max         Obs
Net selling, full sample                 0.0737     0.3145    -1.2         0         0          0        1       300003600
Net selling, shadow accounts             0.2184     0.4508    -1.2         0         0        0.439      1        5696005
                                         0.0849     0.3336
Net selling, brokerage accounts
Net selling, non-margin accounts         0.0702     0.3094
                                                          Table-1.2
                                                              -1.2
                                                                  1        0
                                                                           0
                                                                                     0
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                 14465239
                                                                                                                 279842356
                                         Summary Statistics (Continued)
                                             Panel C: Stock-Day Level
                                          Mean       S.D.        Min       p25       p50       p75       Max       Obs
Selling pressure, all margin accounts   0.000017   0.000190   -0.01685   0.00000   0.00000   0.00001   0.02112    116749
Selling pressure, shadow accounts       0.000014   0.000170   -0.01687   0.00000   0.00000   0.00001   0.02112    116749
Selling pressure, brokerage accounts    0.000003   0.000083   -0.00201   0.00000   0.00000   0.00000   0.01955    116749
FSE, all margin accounts                0.000167   0.000624    0.00000   0.00001   0.00003   0.00012   0.04904    116749
FSE, shadow accounts                    0.000151   0.000569    0.00000   0.00001   0.00003   0.00011   0.04904    116749
FSE, brokerage accounts                 0.000016   0.000243    0.00000   0.00000   0.00000   0.00000   0.04226    116749
CAR [t]                                  -0.0003    0.0417     -0.1824   -0.0270   -0.0036   0.0245    0.2164     109675
CAR [t,t+3]                              -0.0007    0.0817     -0.3971   -0.0489   -0.0034   0.0460    0.5344     109675
CAR [t,t+5]                              -0.0006    0.1095     -0.5303   -0.0626   -0.0005   0.0641    0.5425     109675
CAR [t,t+10]                             0.0034     0.1576     -0.7929   -0.0827    0.0107   0.0985    0.7455     109675
CAR [t,t+20]                             0.0080     0.2048     -1.0486   -0.1159    0.0186   0.1374    1.1256     109675
CAR [t,t+40]                             -0.0021    0.2071     -1.2508   -0.1299   -0.0033   0.1200    1.1301     109675
Cumulative return [t-10,t-1]             1.0312     0.2377      0.3487    0.8962    1.0371   1.1707    2.6017     116749
Return volatility [t-60,t-1]             0.0442     0.0128      0.0000    0.0344    0.0425   0.0532    0.1016     116749
Log market value [t-3]                     9.47       0.98       7.36      8.79      9.29      9.97     14.78     116749
Average turnover [t-60,t-1]              0.0494     0.0257      0.0002    0.0314    0.0449   0.0624    0.2446     116749




                                                              52
                                                         Table 2
                       Distance-to-Margin-Call and Investor Selling Intensity
This table shows the coecients Î»k of the regression:
                                                11
                                                X
                                         j                j
                                        Î´it =         Î»k Ik,tâˆ’1 + Î½it + Î±j + Îµjit ,
                                                k=1

         j
where Î´jt  is account j 's net selling volume of stock i on day t, normalized by account j 's initial holding of
                                                                                                           j
stock i at the beginning of day t. Î½it is the stock-date xed eect and Î±j is the account xed eect. Ik,tâˆ’1
represents 10 bins for each account's Distance-to-Margin-Call, with higher bins corresponding to accounts
that are closer to their leverage limit (the Pingcang Line). Accounts with leverage exceeding the Pingcang
Line are assigned to bin 11. Unleveraged accounts are the omitted category. The sample includes brokerage-
and shadow-nanced margin accounts, as well as brokerage non-margin accounts which comprise the omitted
category. The sample is restricted to stock-days in which a stock is not suspended from trading at any point
during day t, and is also restricted to stocks i held by account j as of the start of day t. The time period
isBaseline
   from May to July, 2015. Standard errors are allowed to be clustered at the account-date level. ***, **, *
correspond to statistical signicance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

 Net selling                                                          Full              Broker       Shadow
                                                                      (1)                 (2)          (3)

 Distance to Margin Call Z > 20                                   0.000804***         0.000594**    0.00773***
                                                                   (0.000279)         (0.000282)      (0.0029)
 Distance to Margin Call Z in (15,20]                              0.00428***         0.00485***       0.0031
                                                                   (0.000443)         (0.000465)       (0.003)
 Distance to Margin Call Z in (10,15]                              0.00430***         0.00484***      0.00252
                                                                   (0.000539)         (0.000598)     (0.00297)
 Distance to Margin Call Z in (7.5,10]                             0.00435***         0.00838***      0.00116
                                                                   (0.000763)          (0.00121)     (0.00299)
 Distance to Margin Call Z in (5,7.5]                              0.00377***          0.0167***    -6.28E-05
                                                                   (0.000828)          (0.00175)     (0.00299)
 Distance to Margin Call Z in (4,5]                                0.0122***           0.0311***    0.00846***
                                                                     (0.0011)          (0.00299)     (0.00307)
 Distance to Margin Call Z in (3,4]                                0.0310***           0.0414***    0.0279***
                                                                    (0.00118)          (0.00316)      (0.0031)
 Distance to Margin Call Z in (2,3]                                0.0644***           0.0601***    0.0621***
                                                                    (0.00134)          (0.00436)     (0.00316)
 Distance to Margin Call Z in (1,2]                                 0.111***           0.0801***     0.110***
                                                                    (0.00155)          (0.00607)     (0.00325)
 Distance to Margin Call Z in (0,1]                                 0.169***            0.100***     0.170***
                                                                    (0.00187)          (0.00628)     (0.00343)
 Distance to Margin Call Z <= 0                                     0.186***            0.217***     0.183***
                                                                     (0.0016)           (0.0106)     (0.00326)

 Account FE                                                           Yes                 Yes           Yes
 Stock-Date FE                                                        Yes                 Yes           Yes
 R-squared                                                           0.136               0.131         0.137
 Observations, margin accounts                                    20,161,244          14,465,239     5,696,005
 Observations, total                                              299,988,054         294,297,933   285,522,202
                                                             53
                                                           Table 3
                              Leverage-to-Pingcang and Leverage Interactions
This table examines how leverage levels and the Leverage-to-Pingcang ratio impact net selling. The sample
is restricted to shadow-nanced margin accounts, for which we can separately identify leverage and Leverage-
to-Pingcang, due to variation in Pingcang Lines across accounts. Other sample restrictions are the same
as in Table 2. Column 1 replicates Column 3 of Table 2, substituting DMC with ten equally spaced bins
for Leverage-to-Pingcang. Column 2 adds controls for ve bins representing leverage at the start of of each
account-day and the interaction between the leverage bins and an indicator for whether the account has
a Leverage-to-Pingcang below 4. The leverage bins are spaced so that the number of observations in the
Leverage-to-Pingcang bins b and b + 1 are equal to the number of observations in leverage bin b/2, for
b = 2, 4, ..., 10. Standard errors are allowed to be clustered at the account-date level. ***, **, * correspond
to statistical signicance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
              Net selling                                                (1)             (2)
              Leverage to Pingcang in (0.9, 1)                        0.00403       0.00672**
                                                                     (0.00292)      (0.00293)
              Leverage to Pingcang in (0.8, 0.9]                      0.00188         0.00252
                                                                     (0.00298)      (0.00330)
              Leverage to Pingcang in (0.7, 0.8]                      0.00280         0.00167
                                                                     (0.00300)      (0.00338)
              Leverage to Pingcang in (0.6. 0.7]                     0.00538*         0.00319
                                                                     (0.00302)      (0.00350)
              Leverage to Pingcang in (0.5, 0.6]                     0.0157***      0.00909**
                                                                     (0.00305)      (0.00360)
              Leverage to Pingcang in (0.4, 0.5]                     0.0460***      0.0269***
                                                                     (0.00312)      (0.00378)
              Leverage to Pingcang in (0.3, 0.4]                     0.0866***        0.00579
                                                                     (0.00323)       (0.0175)
              Leverage to Pingcang in (0.2, 0.3]                      0.129***        0.0292*
                                                                     (0.00341)       (0.0176)
              Leverage to Pingcang in (0.1, 0.2]                      0.167***      0.0493***
                                                                     (0.00369)       (0.0177)
              Leverage to Pingcang in (0, 0.1]                        0.197***      0.0647***
                                                                     (0.00401)       (0.0179)
              Leverage to Pingcang <= 0                               0.195***        0.0340*
                                                                     (0.00328)       (0.0179)
              Lev Bin 1                                                               0.00111
                                                                                    (0.00188)
              Lev Bin 2                                                              -0.00339
                                                                                    (0.00218)
              Lev Bin 3                                                             0.0157***
                                                                                    (0.00260)
              Lev Bin 4                                                             0.0641***
                                                                                    (0.00377)
              Lev Bin 5                                                             0.0870***
                                                                                    (0.00559)
              Lev Bin 1 * 1{Leverage to Pingcang <= 0.4}                              0.0326*
                                                                                     (0.0177)
              Lev Bin 2 * 1{Leverage to Pingcang <= 0.4}                            0.0348**
                                                                                     (0.0174)
              Lev Bin 3 * 1{Leverage to Pingcang <= 0.4}                            0.0540***
                                                                                     (0.0173)
              Lev Bin 4 * 1{Leverage to Pingcang <= 0.4}                            0.0482***
                                                                                     (0.0175)
              Lev Bin 5 * 1{Leverage to Pingcang <= 0.4}                            0.0735***
                                                                                     (0.0181)
              Account FE                                                 Yes            Yes
              Stock-Date FE                                              Yes            Yes
              R-squared                                                 0.137          0.137
              Observations, margin accounts                           5,696,005     5,696,005
              Observations, total                                    285,522,202   285,522,202
                                                             54
                                                           Table 4
                                Leverage-toPredicted -Pingcang and Leverage
This table examines how leverage levels and the Leverage-to-Predicted-Pingcang ratio impact net selling.
The sample is restricted to shadow-nanced margin accounts. Predicted Pingcang is calculated as the average
Pingcang Line across all shadow accounts opened on the same day as the account in question. Other sample
restrictions are the same as in Table 2. The leverage bins are spaced so that the number of observations in
each Leverage-to-Predicted-Pingcang bins equals that number of observations in the corresponding leverage
bin. Standard errors are allowed to be clustered at the account-date level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical
signicance predicted pingcang,
             at the 1%,   5%, no  interactions
                                and  10% levels, respectively.
            Net selling                                                                   (1)
            Leverage to predicted Pingcang in (0.9, 1)                               0.00638**
                                                                                     (0.00292)
            Leverage to predicted Pingcang in (0.8, 0.9]                             -0.000617
                                                                                     (0.00384)
            Leverage to predicted Pingcang in (0.7, 0.8]                             -0.000800
                                                                                     (0.00413)
            Leverage to predicted Pingcang in (0.6. 0.7]                              -0.00532
                                                                                     (0.00435)
            Leverage to predicted Pingcang in (0.5, 0.6]                              -0.00677
                                                                                     (0.00462)
            Leverage to predicted Pingcang in (0.4, 0.5]                               0.00507
                                                                                     (0.00500)
            Leverage to predicted Pingcang in (0.3, 0.4]                             0.0271***
                                                                                     (0.00554)
            Leverage to predicted Pingcang in (0.2, 0.3]                             0.0479***
                                                                                     (0.00626)
            Leverage to predicted Pingcang in (0.1, 0.2]                             0.0688***
                                                                                     (0.00714)
            Leverage to predicted Pingcang in (0, 0.1]                               0.0841***
                                                                                     (0.00817)
            Leverage to predicted Pingcang <= 0                                      0.0986***
                                                                                     (0.00913)
            Lev Bin 1                                                                0.00589**
                                                                                     (0.00268)
            Lev Bin 2                                                                 0.00551*
                                                                                     (0.00311)
            Lev Bin 3                                                               0.00899***
                                                                                     (0.00339)
            Lev Bin 4                                                                0.0224***
                                                                                     (0.00372)
            Lev Bin 5                                                                0.0469***
                                                                                     (0.00418)
            Lev Bin 6                                                                0.0695***
                                                                                     (0.00482)
            Lev Bin 7                                                                0.0936***
                                                                                     (0.00562)
            Lev Bin 8                                                                 0.110***
                                                                                     (0.00657)
            Lev Bin 9                                                                 0.118***
                                                                                     (0.00765)
            Lev Bin 10                                                               0.0995***
                                                                                     (0.00866)
            Account FE                                                                   Yes
            Stock-Date FE                                                                Yes
            R-squared                                                                   0.137
            Observations, margin accounts                                            5,696,005
            Observations, total                                                     285,522,202

                                                             55
                                                      Table 5
                            Stock-Level Fire Sale Exposure and Selling Pressure
This table presents the regression Î´it = Î² Â· F SEit + controlsit + si + Ï„t + Îµit . Î´it measures stock-level selling
pressure from re sale accounts. F SEit is the re sale exposure for stock i on day t. Î´it and F SEit are
calculated using the combined brokerage and shadow account samples. The sample is restricted to stocks
that did not face any trading suspensions on day t. All variables are as dened in Table 1. Standard errors
       Baseline
are allowed to be clustered at the date level.
                                                                        Selling pressure
                                                      (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)

      Fire sale exposure                           0.104***       0.0935***         0.0927***      0.0913***
                                                   (0.0111)       (0.00862)         (0.00859)      (0.00858)
      Return volatility [t-60, t-1]                                                 -0.000120      -5.25e-05
                                                                                    (8.41e-05)    (9.05e-05)
      Log market value [t-3]                                                       1.48e-05***     6.30e-06*
                                                                                    (3.61e-06)    (3.65e-06)
      Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]                                                     0.000158**     0.000176**
                                                                                    (6.75e-05)    (6.76e-05)
      Cumulative return [t-10, t-1]                                               -1.16e-05***      2.03e-05
                                                                                    (2.61e-06)    (1.51e-05)

      Stock FE                                       No              Yes              Yes             Yes
      Date FE                                        No              Yes              Yes             Yes
      Past 10-day daily returns                      No              No               No              Yes
      R-squared                                     0.149           0.231            0.232           0.235
      Observations                                 115,168         115,167          115,167         115,167


      Broker                                          Table 6
                                  Fire Sale Exposure and Stock Characteristics
Column 1 shows a regression of re sale exposure (multiplied bySelling         pressure
                                                                          100 for ease of exposition) on stock-level
                                                   (1)                (2)
characteristics. Column 2 adds controls for stock and date xed eects, so the reported (3)               (4) represent
                                                                                                   coecients
within-stock and date relations. Standard errors are allowed to be clustered at the stock level.
      Fire sale exposure                       0.0711***           0.0621***       0.0621***          0.0621***
      Fire sale exposure                       (0.00881) (1) (0.00835)             (0.00833) (2) (0.00827)
      Return volatility [t-60, t-1]                                                 -3.18e-06         -2.28e-06
      Return volatility [t-60, t-1]                       0.173***                 (5.72e-06)0.112**(8.51e-06)
      Log market value [t-3]                               (0.0483)                -3.11e-07(0.0464)-3.75e-07
      Log market value [t-3]                            -0.00376***                (2.09e-07) 0.0146***
                                                                                                      (2.55e-07)
      Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]                           (0.000469)                 2.47e-08(0.00336)3.97e-08
      Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]                           0.0824***                 (3.63e-06) 0.0426(3.52e-06)
      Cumulative return [t-10, t-1]                        (0.0143)                 2.31e-07 (0.0292)5.08e-07
      Cumulative return [t-10, t-1]                    -0.000442***                (1.77e-07)         (1.81e-06)
                                                                                            -0.000182***
                                                          (0.00548)                           (0.00259)
      Stock FE                                    No                  Yes              Yes                Yes
      Date  FE
      Stock FE                                    No          No      Yes              Yes       Yes      Yes
      Past 10-day
      Date  FE daily returns                      No          No      No               No        Yes      Yes
      R-squared
      Observations                               0.195     109,675   0.237            0.237    109,675   0.237
      Observations                              115,262             115,262          115,262           115,262
      R-squared                                              0.048                              0.272




                                                            56
                                                  Table 7
                                          Fire Sales and Reversals
The table presents the regression

                             CARi,t+h = Î³h Â· F SEit + controlsit + si + Ï„t + Îµit .

All variables are as dened in Table 1. F SEit is calculated using the combined brokerage and shadow account
samples in Panel A, the brokerage account sample in Panel B, and the shadow account sample in Panel C.
Standard errors are allowed to be clustered at the date level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical signicance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
 Full
                        Panel A: FSE Calculated Using All Margin Accounts
 CAR:                               [t]       [t, t+3]         [t, t+5]   [t, t+10]   [t, t+20]    [t, t+40]
                                    (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)

 Fire sale exposure             -1.830***    -4.527***        -7.075***   -9.005***     -2.875*       0.778
                                  (0.499)      (0.985)          (1.372)     (1.907)      (1.5)       (0.992)
 Return volatility [t-60, t-1]     -0.246      -0.423            -0.44      -0.204       0.531         0.23
                                  (0.164)      (0.352)          (0.457)     (0.575)     (0.646)      (0.409)
 Log market value [t-3]        -0.0661***    -0.203***        -0.322***   -0.564***   -0.820***    -0.741***
                                (0.00766)     (0.0147)         (0.0198)     (0.028)    (0.0305)     (0.0202)
 Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]        -0.0928      -0.303**        -0.497***   -0.959***   -2.169***    -1.151***
                                 (0.0679)      (0.128)          (0.161)     (0.171)     (0.176)      (0.173)
 Cumulative return [t-10, t-1] -0.0552**      -0.0913*         -0.0748      0.0428     -0.0982      0.167***
                                 (0.0236)     (0.0523)         (0.0704)    (0.0836)    (0.0778)     (0.0491)

 Date FE                          Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 Stock FE                         Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 Past 10-day daily return         Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 R-squared                       0.255         0.335           0.391       0.512       0.627        0.705
 Observations                   109,675       109,675         109,675     109,675     109,675      109,675




 Brokerage

 CAR:                               [t]       [t, t+3]         [t, t+5]   [t, t+10]   [t, t+20]    [t, t+40]
                                    (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)

 Fire sale exposure              -0.753**    -1.775***        -3.155***   -4.249***   -4.754***       1.313
                                  (0.346)      (0.567)          (0.916)      (0.85)     (1.363)      (1.864)
 Return volatility [t-60, t-1]     -0.25       -0.432           -0.454      -0.222        0.53        0.231
                                  (0.165)      (0.353)          (0.458)     (0.578)     (0.647)       (0.41)
 Log market value [t-3]        -0.0664***    -0.203***        -0.323***   -0.566***   -0.820***    -0.741***
                                (0.00769)     (0.0148)         (0.0199)    (0.0282)    (0.0303)     (0.0202)
 Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]         -0.0942     -0.306**        -0.502***   -0.965***   -2.170***    -1.151***
                                  (0.068)      (0.129)          (0.162)     (0.171)     (0.176)      (0.173)
 Cumulative return [t-10, t-1] -0.0561**      -0.0936*         -0.0784      0.0384     -0.0984      0.167***
                                 (0.0237)     (0.0527)         (0.0707)     (0.084)     (0.078)     (0.0491)
                                                         57

 Date FE                            Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 Stock FE                           Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Past 10-day daily return         Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
R-squared                       0.255       0.335            0.391       0.512       0.627       0.705
Observations                   109,675     109,675          109,675     109,675     109,675     109,675


                                                Table 7
                               Fire Sales and Reversals (Continued)
Brokerage
                     Panel B: FSE Calculated Using Brokerage Margin Accounts
CAR:                             [t]        [t, t+3]         [t, t+5]   [t, t+10]   [t, t+20]   [t, t+40]
                                 (1)           (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

Fire sale exposure              -0.753**   -1.775***        -3.155***   -4.249***   -4.754***      1.313
                                 (0.346)     (0.567)          (0.916)      (0.85)     (1.363)     (1.864)
Return volatility [t-60, t-1]     -0.25      -0.432           -0.454      -0.222        0.53       0.231
                                 (0.165)     (0.353)          (0.458)     (0.578)     (0.647)      (0.41)
Log market value [t-3]        -0.0664***   -0.203***        -0.323***   -0.566***   -0.820***   -0.741***
                               (0.00769)    (0.0148)         (0.0199)    (0.0282)    (0.0303)    (0.0202)
Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]         -0.0942    -0.306**        -0.502***   -0.965***   -2.170***   -1.151***
                                 (0.068)     (0.129)          (0.162)     (0.171)     (0.176)     (0.173)
Cumulative return [t-10, t-1] -0.0561**     -0.0936*         -0.0784      0.0384     -0.0984     0.167***
                                (0.0237)    (0.0527)         (0.0707)     (0.084)     (0.078)    (0.0491)

Date FE                          Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Stock FE                         Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Past 10-day daily return         Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
R-squared                       0.255       0.334             0.39       0.512       0.627       0.705
Observations                   109,675     109,675          109,675     109,675     109,675     109,675
Shadow
                      Panel C: FSE Calculated Using Shadow Margin Accounts
CAR:                             [t]        [t, t+3]         [t, t+5]   [t, t+10]   [t, t+20]   [t, t+40]
                                 (1)           (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

Fire sale exposure             -2.170***   -5.397***        -8.313***   -10.50***     -2.256       0.602
                                 (0.618)     (1.309)          (1.758)     (2.425)     (1.985)       (0.9)
Return volatility [t-60, t-1]     -0.248     -0.428           -0.448      -0.215       0.527       0.232
                                 (0.164)     (0.352)          (0.457)     (0.576)     (0.647)      (0.41)
Log market value [t-3]        -0.0660***   -0.203***        -0.322***   -0.564***   -0.820***   -0.741***
                               (0.00765)    (0.0147)         (0.0197)     (0.028)    (0.0306)    (0.0202)
Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]        -0.0927     -0.302**        -0.496***   -0.958***   -2.169***   -1.151***
                                (0.0678)     (0.128)          (0.161)     (0.171)     (0.176)     (0.173)
Cumulative return [t-10, t-1] -0.0558**     -0.0927*         -0.0771      0.0399     -0.0995     0.167***
                                (0.0236)    (0.0524)         (0.0705)    (0.0836)    (0.0779)    (0.0494)

Date FE                          Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Stock FE                         Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Past 10-day daily return         Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
R-squared                       0.255       0.335            0.391       0.513       0.627       0.705
Observations                   109,675     109,675          109,675     109,675     109,675     109,675




Full, Lambda weighted
                                                       58

CAR:                             [t]        [t, t+3]         [t, t+5]   [t, t+10]   [t, t+20]   [t, t+40]
                                 (1)           (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                        Table 8
                           Fire Sales: Regulatory Announcement Event Study
This table shows the relation between FSE and returns separately for each of the two weeks prior to the June
12, 2015 regulatory tightening announcement as well as for the week immediately after the announcement.
In Columns 7-9, we regress an indicator for whether a stock's -10% price limit was triggered on the stock's
re sale exposure. Standard errors are allowed to be clustered at the date level. ***, **, * correspond to
statistical signicance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                (1)        (2)    (3)              (4)       (5)      (6)     (7)      (8)        (9)
                                         CAR [t]                         CAR [t,t+10]          Triggered price limit
Week:                         June 1     June 8 June 15           June 1   June 8 June 15   June 1 June 8 June 15

Fire sale exposure              4.281     -0.248    -3.446** -1.747      1.317 -13.91**     -6.173     -2.153    34.42**
                               (2.076)    (1.620)    (0.761)  (2.362)   (1.727) (4.432)     (9.509)    (9.586)    (10.66)
Return volatility [t-60, t-1]  -0.0292     2.356      2.164    -0.180    -1.278   3.709*    -8.009    -34.44**    -22.87
                               (0.996)    (1.587)    (1.375)  (0.672)   (1.092) (1.521)     (6.685)    (7.754)    (11.79)
Log market value [t-3]        -0.623**   -0.309**   -0.154** -1.117*** -0.624*** -0.331**    1.247    0.646***   0.675**
                               (0.181)   (0.0893)   (0.0469) (0.0450) (0.130) (0.102)       (0.986)   (0.0712)    (0.180)
Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]        0.936    -2.468**   -3.017** -1.494** -0.811 -4.088**        1.536    8.719**      4.247
                               (1.504)    (0.841)    (1.033)  (0.440)   (0.668) (1.426)     (3.017)    (2.752)    (2.470)
Cumulative return [t-10, t-1] -0.00625     0.187    0.451*** -0.103       0.138 1.004**     -0.196     0.0333    -2.202**
                              (0.0934)    (0.164)   (0.0216) (0.0572) (0.259) (0.316)       (0.613)    (0.220)    (0.756)

Date FE                         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes
Stock FE                        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes
Past 10-day daily return        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes
R-squared                      9,452      9,329      9,266        9,452    9,329   9,266    9,452      9,329      9,266
Observations                   0.447      0.532      0.460        0.924    0.916   0.919    0.393      0.348      0.501




                                                             59
                                                                         Table 9
                                                                    Price Limits
This table tests whether an investor is more likely to sell a stock if other stocks in her portfolio cannot be
sold due to stock-specic price limits that limit trading if a stock's within-day absolute return exceeds 10%.
Price limit fraction equals the fractional value of account j 's total stock holdings as of the start of day t
that consist of stocks that hit price oors at some later point on day t or experienced suspended trading for
any reason on day t. All specications control for each account's day t counterfactual returns assuming no
stocks are bought or sold on day t, interacted with the set of bins for Distance-to-Margin-Call. All other
variables are as dened in Table 2. The sample is restricted to stocks that do not face trading restrictions
or price limits on day t. The sample includes brokerage- and shadow-nanced margin accounts, as well as
brokerage non-margin accounts which comprise the omitted category. Standard errors are allowed to be
clustered at the stock-date level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical signicance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.
                 Net selling                                                              Full        Broker      Shadow
                                                                                           (1)           (2)          (3)
                 Distance to margin call Z > 20                                      0.00817***    0.00782***   0.0154***
                                                                                      (0.000676)   (0.000693)    (0.00299)
                 Distance to margin call Z in (15,20]                                0.00646***    0.00919***   0.0131***
                                                                                      (0.000802)   (0.000837)    (0.00311)
                 Distance to margin call Z in (10,15]                                   0.00113    0.00666***   0.00841***
                                                                                      (0.000906)    (0.00101)    (0.00307)
                 Distance to margin call Z in (7.5,10]                               -0.00480***   0.00496***      0.00254
                                                                                       (0.00109)    (0.00174)     (0.0031)
                 Distance to margin call Z in (5,7.5]                                -0.00990***    0.0113***     -0.00324
                                                                                       (0.00115)    (0.00266)     (0.0031)
                 Distance to margin call Z in (4,5]                                  -0.00865***    0.0194***     -0.00237
                                                                                       (0.00139)     (0.0042)     (0.0032)
                 Distance to margin call Z in (3,4]                                    0.000193     0.0381***    0.00581*
                                                                                       (0.00148)    (0.00499)    (0.00323)
                 Distance to margin call Z in (2,3]                                   0.0240***     0.0408***    0.0293***
                                                                                       (0.00163)    (0.00662)     (0.0033)
                 Distance to margin call Z in (1,2]                                   0.0638***     0.0803***    0.0679***
                                                                                       (0.00189)    (0.00929)    (0.00342)
                 Distance to margin call Z in (0,1]                                    0.117***      0.132***     0.119***
                                                                                       (0.00225)      (0.011)    (0.00364)
                 Distance to margin call Z <= 0                                        0.129***      0.274***     0.130***
                                                                                       (0.00205)     (0.0183)     (0.0035)
                 Price limit fraction                                                 0.0104***     0.0222***   0.00432***
                                                                                      (0.000933)   (0.000939)    (0.00104)
                 Price limit fraction * distance to margin call Z > 20                0.0143***     0.0131***    0.0632***
                                                                                       (0.00171)    (0.00175)    (0.00638)
                 Price limit fraction * distance to margin call Z in (15,20]          0.0174***     0.0124***    0.0326***
                                                                                       (0.00258)    (0.00279)    (0.00629)
                 Price limit fraction * distance to margin call Z in (10,15]          0.0297***    0.00882**     0.0528***
                                                                                       (0.00283)    (0.00343)    (0.00464)
                 Price limit fraction * distance to margin call Z in (7.5,10]         0.0589***     0.0250***    0.0704***
                                                                                       (0.00411)    (0.00711)    (0.00503)
                 Price limit fraction * distance to margin call Z in (5,7.5]          0.0799***     0.0348***    0.0843***
                                                                                       (0.00406)    (0.00852)    (0.00461)
                 Price limit fraction * distance to margin call Z in (4,5]             0.109***     0.0518***     0.114***
                                                                                       (0.00649)     (0.0166)    (0.00708)
                 Price limit fraction * distance to margin call Z in (3,4]             0.168***     0.0404**      0.180***
                                                                                       (0.00677)     (0.0188)    (0.00726)
                 Price limit fraction * distance to margin call Z in (2,3]             0.172***     0.0732***     0.184***
                                                                                       (0.00729)     (0.0234)    (0.00767)
                 Price limit fraction * distance to margin call Z in (1,2]             0.132***       -0.0225     0.157***
                                                                                        (0.0105)     (0.0287)    (0.00818)
                 Price limit fraction * distance to margin call Z in (0,1]            0.0862***     -0.0782**     0.108***
                                                                                       (0.00987)     (0.0305)    (0.00956)
                 Price limit fraction * distance to margin call Z <= 0                0.0743***       -0.137*    0.0798***
                                                                                        (0.0073)     (0.0792)    (0.00665)
                 Counterfactual portfolio returns x distance to margin call bins          Yes           Yes          Yes
                 Account FE                                                               Yes           Yes          Yes
                 Stock-date FE                                                            Yes           Yes          Yes
                 R-squared                                                               0.176         0.148        0.194
                 Observations, margin accounts                                        14,902,413    9,873,701    5,028,712
                 Observations, total                                                  25,305,234   20,283,178   15,431,383


                                                                                60
A     Internet Data Appendix

The shadow-nanced margin account data is organized in a umbrella-style structure.           There are
153,331 child accounts, each of which is connected to a mother accounts maintained by the trading
platform. For each child account, we observe the initial lending ratio of the borrower, dened as
the amount of borrowing divided by the investor's margin deposit (equity). We also observe the
minimum coverage ratio, the ratio of remaining assets to debt, that will trigger a margin call.


A.1     Data Filter
We adopt the following procedure to clean our data.


    1. We eliminate accounts with invalid initial margin and maintenance margin information. We
      require the initial lending ratio to be less than 100. There are some accounts with extremely
      high initial lending ratios.   They are usually used as a bonus to investors with much lower
      lending ratios and typically carry very little assets. On the other hand, we require the minimum
      coverage ratio to be above 1, i.e, investors will receive the margin calls before outstanding debt
      exceeds the current asset wealth. Agent accounts with margin information outside these ranges
      might be maintained by non-margin accounts.


    2. We require the rst record in the margin accounts to be a cash ow from the mother account,
      before the account starts any trading activities. These cash ows usually occur right after the
      account opens, and includes the loans from the lenders together with the deposited margins
      from the borrowers. We eliminate observations from accounts that either never have any cash
      ows from mother accounts, or the rst cash ows are from the child accounts to the mother
      accounts.


    3. We compare the size of initial cash ows and the initial debt information provided by the
      trading platform, and further eliminate observations from accounts for which the size of the
      initial cash ow deviates signicantly from the initial debt reported by the online trading
      system.



A.2     Construction of daily debt level
The shadow accounts data includes all variables in the brokerage account data, except for the
end-of-day leverage numbers. Instead, the trading platform provides detailed information on the
initial debt, subsequent cash ows between the mother account (controlled by the lender) and child
accounts (controlled by the borrowers), and all trades by the child accounts. We can thus manually
calculate the end-of-day asset and debt value for each child account.
    To construct daily outstanding debt for each margin child account in our dataset, we rely on
the cash ow information between the mother and child accounts, as well as transaction remarks,
both provided by the trading platform. For about two-thirds of the accounts, the platform provides
detailed remarks for each cash ow (whether it is an issued loan or loan repayment), which helps us
calculate the exact daily outstanding debt levels. For the remaining accounts without transaction
remarks, we assume that cash ows to (from) the mother account exceeding 20% of the margin debt
in the child account reects a payment of existing debt (additional borrowing). This 20% cuto
rule is suggested by practitioners in the trading platform.




                                                  61
B     Internet Appendix: Figures and Tables


                                                Table B.1
                 Investor Selling Intensity Conditional on Day t Market Returns
This table presents the regression counterpart to Figure 5. Panels A and B present the same regression as in
Table 2, with the sample restricted to days in which the market return was positive or negative, respectively.
Distance-to-Margin-Call is dened as of the start of each trading day. The sample includes brokerage- and
shadow-nanced margin accounts, as well as brokerage non-margin accounts which comprise the omitted
category. Standard errors are allowed to be clustered at the account-date level. ***, **, * correspond to
statistical signicance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
Market Up Ex Post
                                 Panel A: Positive Market Return Day
Net selling                                             Full         Broker                     Shadow
                                                        (1)            (2)                        (3)

Distance to Margin Call Z > 20                              -0.000324       -0.000604          0.0239***
                                                           (0.000375)       (0.000379)         (0.00375)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (15,20]                      -0.00168***      -0.00219***         0.0223***
                                                           (0.000578)       (0.000603)         (0.00389)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (10,15]                      -0.00327***      -0.00402***         0.0183***
                                                            (0.00071)       (0.000794)         (0.00384)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (7.5,10]                     -0.00657***      -0.00502***         0.0132***
                                                           (0.000997)         (0.0016)         (0.00388)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (5,7.5]                       -0.0106***        -0.00109          0.00803**
                                                            (0.00107)        (0.00211)         (0.00388)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (4,5]                        -0.00830***       0.00798**          0.0100**
                                                            (0.00144)        (0.00407)         (0.00399)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (3,4]                        -0.00417***       0.0133***          0.0142***
                                                            (0.00152)        (0.00406)         (0.00402)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (2,3]                         0.0153***        0.0220***          0.0342***
                                                            (0.00172)         (0.0057)         (0.00409)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (1,2]                         0.0416***        0.0376***          0.0610***
                                                            (0.00198)        (0.00722)         (0.00421)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (0,1]                         0.0789***        0.0493***          0.0996***
                                                            (0.00242)        (0.00755)         (0.00446)
Distance to Margin Call Z <= 0                               0.110***        0.199***           0.126***
                                                            (0.00214)         (0.0139)         (0.00426)

Account FE                                                    Yes              Yes                Yes
Stock-Date FE                                                 Yes              Yes                Yes
R-squared                                                    0.154            0.149              0.155
Observations, margin accounts                             10,522,531        7,517,467          3,005,064
Observations, total                                       155,281,448      152,284,817        147,763,127




                                                     62
                                        Table B.1
       Investor Selling Intensity Conditional on Day t Market Returns (Continued)
Market Down Ex Post
                           Panel B: Negative Market Return Day
Net selling                                        Full         Broker       Shadow
                                                   (1)            (2)          (3)

Distance to Margin Call Z > 20                  0.00240***    0.00229***    -0.00860**
                                                (0.000376)    (0.000378)     (0.00434)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (15,20]            0.0107***     0.0125***     -0.0171***
                                                 (0.00061)    (0.000635)     (0.00449)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (10,15]            0.0132***     0.0146***     -0.0118***
                                                (0.000752)    (0.000821)     (0.00445)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (7.5,10]           0.0174***     0.0224***      -0.00863*
                                                  (0.0011)     (0.00169)     (0.00448)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (5,7.5]            0.0212***     0.0374***       -0.00536
                                                  (0.0012)      (0.0025)     (0.00447)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (4,5]              0.0370***     0.0562***       0.0110**
                                                  (0.0016)     (0.00417)     (0.00459)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (3,4]              0.0688***     0.0704***      0.0441***
                                                 (0.00175)     (0.00457)     (0.00464)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (2,3]               0.114***     0.0978***      0.0906***
                                                 (0.00194)     (0.00625)     (0.00471)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (1,2]               0.178***      0.124***       0.156***
                                                 (0.00226)     (0.00989)     (0.00483)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (0,1]               0.248***      0.154***       0.228***
                                                 (0.00264)     (0.00928)     (0.00505)
Distance to Margin Call Z <= 0                   0.253***      0.235***       0.230***
                                                 (0.00223)      (0.0128)     (0.00481)

Account FE                                          Yes           Yes           Yes
Stock-Date FE                                       Yes           Yes           Yes
R-squared                                          0.148         0.141         0.149
Observations, margin accounts                    9,638,713     6,947,772     2,690,941
Observations, total                             144,673,651   141,988,849   137,725,171




                                           63
                                                            Table B.2
                                                       Regulatory Tightening
This table presents the regression counterpart to Figure 6. Regulatory tightening announcements occurred
after hours on Friday May 22, 2015 and Friday June 12, 2015. This table shows the coecients Î»k from the
regression dened in Table 2, estimated separately for the brokerage- and shadow-nanced margin account
samples on the ve trading days immediately before and after the regulatory tightening events. The sample
includes brokerage- and shadow-nanced margin accounts, as well as brokerage non-margin accounts which
comprise the omitted category. Missing coecients in Columns 1 and 3 result from insucient observations
in the corresponding Distance-to-Margin-Call bin. Standard errors are allowed to be clustered at the account-
date level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical signicance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
        Net selling                                                   May 22 event            June 12 event
                                                                 Broker        Shadow     Broker        Shadow
                                                                   (1)            (2)       (3)           (4)

        Distance to Margin Call Z > 20                         0.00600***    0.0389***    -0.00157*   0.0394***
                                                               (0.000824)     (0.0118)   (0.000807)    (0.0102)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (15,20]                      0.00183    0.0376***      0.00184   0.0339***
                                                                (0.00167)     (0.0121)    (0.00184)    (0.0105)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (10,15]                     -0.00123      0.0211*     -0.00238   0.0220**
                                                                (0.00262)     (0.0122)    (0.00300)    (0.0106)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (7.5,10]                    -0.00874     -0.00303     -0.00322    0.00324
                                                                (0.00742)     (0.0123)     (0.0115)    (0.0107)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (5,7.5]                      -0.0171    -0.0316**       0.0148     -0.0100
                                                                 (0.0125)     (0.0123)     (0.0199)    (0.0107)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (4,5]                        -0.0522   -0.0474***      -0.0176     -0.0175
                                                                 (0.0384)     (0.0125)     (0.0436)    (0.0110)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (3,4]                        -0.0715   -0.0649***      -0.0150    -0.0210*
                                                                 (0.0494)     (0.0126)     (0.0518)    (0.0112)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (2,3]                        -0.0241   -0.0764***      -0.0318   -0.0259**
                                                                 (0.0736)     (0.0127)     (0.0517)    (0.0115)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (1,2]                      -0.186***   -0.0685***       -0.219    -0.0207*
                                                                 (0.0438)     (0.0131)      (0.274)    (0.0120)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (0,1]                       -0.270**   -0.0669***      -0.0298     0.0133
                                                                  (0.112)     (0.0138)     (0.0459)    (0.0133)
        Distance to Margin Call Z <= 0                           0.490***   -0.0417***      0.195**    0.00561
                                                                 (0.0755)     (0.0143)     (0.0987)    (0.0124)
        Distance to Margin Call Z > 20 * after                 -0.00147**    0.0170***   0.0123***    0.0311***
                                                               (0.000715)    (0.00353)   (0.000747)   (0.00245)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (15,20] * after              0.00106     0.00658*   0.0172***    0.0200***
                                                                (0.00192)    (0.00387)    (0.00184)   (0.00251)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (10,15] * after             -0.00377     0.00441*   0.0172***    0.0198***
                                                                (0.00318)    (0.00243)    (0.00289)   (0.00180)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (7.5,10] * after           0.000113     -0.000581       0.0167   0.0236***
                                                                 (0.0104)    (0.00261)     (0.0126)   (0.00220)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (5,7.5] * after               0.0222   0.00657**        0.0195   0.0283***
                                                                 (0.0210)    (0.00259)     (0.0187)   (0.00220)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (4,5] * after                 0.0119    0.000657        0.0340   0.0398***
                                                                 (0.0525)    (0.00433)     (0.0510)   (0.00378)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (3,4] * after                 0.0315    0.0206***       0.0684   0.0628***
                                                                 (0.0601)    (0.00489)     (0.0790)   (0.00439)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (2,3] * after                 -0.164    0.0612***       0.0322    0.105***
                                                                  (0.152)    (0.00623)     (0.0698)   (0.00549)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (1,2] * after                 -0.396    0.0962***        0.239    0.160***
                                                                  (0.307)    (0.00840)      (0.276)   (0.00699)
        Distance to Margin Call Z in (0,1] * after             -0.00574**     0.171***                 0.186***
                                                                (0.00236)     (0.0111)                (0.00986)
        Distance to Margin Call Z <= 0 * after                                0.115***                 0.158***
                                                                             (0.00987)                (0.00773)

        Stock-Date FE                                             Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
        R-squared                                                0.183        0.189        0.173         0.18
        Observations, margin accounts                          2,128,407    1,008,044    2,240,158    1,255,170
        Observations, total                                    42,017,612   40,892,886   44,574,230   43,585,977



                                                                64
                                                 Table B.3
Distance-to-Margin-Call and Investor Selling Intensity, Controlling for Past Account Returns
This table presents the same regression as in Table 2, with the addition of a control variable for the account's
return over the past ten days. Standard errors are allowed to be clustered at the account-date level. ***,
 Control for Account Returns
**, * correspond to statistical signicance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Net selling                                                   Full             Broker             Shadow
                                                              (1)                (2)                (3)

Distance to Margin Call Z > 20                             0.000736***       0.000510*          0.00753***
                                                            (0.000279)       (0.000282)           (0.0029)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (15,20]                        0.00419***       0.00475***           0.00295
                                                            (0.000443)       (0.000465)            (0.003)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (10,15]                        0.00427***       0.00478***            0.0025
                                                             (0.00054)       (0.000598)          (0.00297)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (7.5,10]                       0.00439***       0.00842***           0.00124
                                                            (0.000763)        (0.00121)          (0.00299)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (5,7.5]                        0.00387***       0.0169***           9.45E-05
                                                            (0.000829)        (0.00175)          (0.00299)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (4,5]                          0.0124***        0.0314***          0.00868***
                                                              (0.0011)        (0.00299)          (0.00307)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (3,4]                          0.0312***        0.0417***          0.0281***
                                                             (0.00118)        (0.00316)           (0.0031)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (2,3]                          0.0647***        0.0606***          0.0624***
                                                             (0.00134)        (0.00436)          (0.00316)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (1,2]                           0.112***        0.0807***           0.110***
                                                             (0.00155)        (0.00606)          (0.00325)
Distance to Margin Call Z in (0,1]                           0.170***         0.101***           0.170***
                                                             (0.00187)        (0.00629)          (0.00343)
Distance to Margin Call Z <= 0                               0.187***         0.217***           0.184***
                                                              (0.0016)         (0.0106)          (0.00326)
Account return [t-10, t-1]                                  0.00439***       0.00493***         0.00566***
                                                            (0.000239)        (0.00024)         (0.000229)

Account FE                                                     Yes               Yes                Yes
Stock-Date FE                                                  Yes               Yes                Yes
R-squared                                                     0.136             0.131              0.137
Observations, margin accounts                              20,161,244        14,465,239          5,696,005
Observations, total                                        299,988,054       294,297,933        285,522,202




                                                      65
                                 (0.0236)     (0.0524)         (0.0705)    (0.0836)    (0.0779)     (0.0494)

 Date FE                           Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes              Yes          Yes
 Stock FE                          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes              Yes          Yes
 Past 10-day daily return          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes              Yes          Yes
 R-squared                        0.255          Table B.40.391
                                               0.335                   0.513            0.627        0.705
 Observations                     Fire
                                 109,675Sales and  Reversals,
                                              109,675    109,675
                                                              Î» -weighted
                                                                      109,675          109,675      109,675
This table presents the same regression as in Table 7 Panel A, with the following modications. Instead of
constructing re sale exposure as the fraction of shares held in re sale accounts, re sale exposure equals the
fraction of shares held in all margin accounts, with each account weighted by its corresponding Î»k . Standard
errors are allowed to be clustered at the date level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical signicance at the
 Full, Lambda weighted
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

 CAR:                              [t]         [t, t+3]         [t, t+5]   [t, t+10]   [t, t+20]    [t, t+40]
                                   (1)            (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)

 Fire sale exposure             -12.64***    -31.02***         -45.86***   -58.27***    -22.23**      1.422
                                  (3.309)      (6.597)           (9.125)     (12.34)     (9.183)     (6.097)
 Return volatility [t-60, t-1]     -0.245      -0.421            -0.438      -0.202       0.534       0.232
                                  (0.164)      (0.352)           (0.456)     (0.575)     (0.646)     (0.409)
 Log market value [t-3]        -0.0661***    -0.203***         -0.322***   -0.564***   -0.820***   -0.741***
                                (0.00766)     (0.0147)          (0.0198)     (0.028)    (0.0305)    (0.0202)
 Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]        -0.0924      -0.302**         -0.496***   -0.957***   -2.168***   -1.151***
                                 (0.0679)      (0.128)           (0.161)     (0.171)     (0.176)     (0.173)
 Cumulative return [t-10, t-1] -0.0550**      -0.0909*          -0.0746      0.0431      -0.0977    0.167***
                                 (0.0236)     (0.0523)          (0.0704)    (0.0837)    (0.0777)    (0.0491)

 Date FE                           Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Stock FE                          Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Past 10-day daily return          Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 R-squared                        0.255        0.335            0.391       0.512       0.627        0.705
 Observations                    109,675      109,675          109,675     109,675     109,675      109,675




                                                          66
                                                Table B.5
                  Fire Sales and Reversals, FSE calculated using Z < 0 accounts
This table presents the same regressions as in Table 7 Panel A, with the following modications. Fire sale
exposure equals the fraction of shares held in all margin accounts with Z < 0, i.e., accounts in which control
has transferred from the borrower to the lender. Standard errors are allowed to be clustered at the date
 Restricted to negative Z
level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical signicance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

CAR:                               [t]        [t, t+3]     [t, t+5]     [t, t+10]    [t, t+20]    [t, t+40]
                                   (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)

Fire sale exposure             -2.600***     -6.361***    -8.419***    -9.471***      -1.322       -0.0597
                                 (0.661)       (1.531)      (2.058)      (2.692)      (1.783)       (1.529)
Return volatility [t-60, t-1]     -0.246       -0.423       -0.443       -0.211        0.526         0.233
                                 (0.164)       (0.352)      (0.457)      (0.576)      (0.646)       (0.409)
Log market value [t-3]        -0.0662***     -0.203***    -0.322***    -0.565***    -0.820***     -0.741***
                               (0.00767)      (0.0147)     (0.0198)     (0.0281)     (0.0304)      (0.0202)
Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]        -0.0928       -0.303**    -0.497***    -0.960***    -2.170***     -1.150***
                                (0.0679)       (0.129)      (0.161)      (0.171)      (0.176)       (0.173)
Cumulative return [t-10, t-1] -0.0551**       -0.0911*     -0.0753       0.0415      -0.0995       0.167***
                                (0.0236)      (0.0524)     (0.0706)     (0.0837)     (0.0776)      (0.0491)

Date FE                           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Stock FE                          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Past 10-day daily return          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
R-squared                        0.255        0.335         0.391        0.512        0.627         0.705
Observations                    109,675      109,675       109,675      109,675      109,675       109,675


Before July 6

CAR:                               [t]        [t, t+3]     [t, t+5]     [t, t+10]    [t, t+20]    [t, t+40]
                                   (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)

Fire sale exposure             -2.373***     -6.129***    -9.436***    -11.96***     0.00528        2.531*
                                 (0.472)       (1.139)      (1.609)      (2.316)      (2.491)       (1.309)
Return volatility [t-60, t-1]   -0.587**      -1.189**     -1.520**      -0.958       -0.573      -1.208***
                                 (0.269)       (0.533)      (0.650)      (0.645)      (0.412)       (0.233)
Log market value [t-3]        -0.0870***     -0.276***    -0.439***    -0.766***    -1.019***     -0.717***
                               (0.00895)      (0.0192)     (0.0251)     (0.0360)     (0.0518)      (0.0237)
Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]         -0.0572       -0.301*    -0.605***    -1.455***    -3.038***       -0.347
                                (0.0940)       (0.174)      (0.224)      (0.237)      (0.285)       (0.251)
Cumulative return [t-10, t-1] -0.110***      -0.286***    -0.391***    -0.336***    -0.328***      0.258***
                                (0.0393)      (0.0632)     (0.0753)      (0.101)     (0.0884)      (0.0540)

Date FE                           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Stock FE                          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Past 10-day daily return          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
R-squared                        0.255        0.335        0.391         0.512        0.627        0.705
Observations                     85,868       85,868 67    85,868        85,868       85,868       85,868
Date FE                          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
Stock FE                         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
Past 10-day daily return         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
R-squared                       0.251      0.348       0.403       0.513        0.637         0.734
Observations                    68,063       Table B.668,063
                                          68,063                   68,063       68,063        68,063
R-squared                Fire Sales and Reversals,
                                0.252      0.348 Standardized
                                                       0.404      Coecients
                                                                   0.514        0.637         0.734
Observations
This                            68,063 as in
     table presents the same regressions  68,063       68,063
                                             Table 7, but          68,063
                                                          measures re          68,063as a standardized
                                                                       sale exposure          68,063
variable. The coecient for re sale exposure represents the expected change in abnormal returns for a
one standard deviation change in each independent variable. Standard deviations are measured within the
relevant regression sample. Standard errors are allowed to be clustered at the date level. ***, **, * correspond
to statistical signicance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
Full, standardized coefficients
                        Panel A: FSE Calculated Using All Margin Accounts
CAR:                             [t]     [t, t+3]   [t, t+5]  [t, t+10] [t, t+20]                   [t, t+40]
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)                         (6)

Fire sale exposure            -0.00103*** -0.00255*** -0.00398*** -0.00506*** -0.00162*             0.000438
                                (0.00028) (0.000554) (0.000772) (0.00107) (0.000844)               (0.000558)
Return volatility [t-60, t-1]    -0.00315   -0.00541    -0.00562    -0.00261    0.0068               0.00295
                                 (0.0021)   (0.0045)   (0.00584)   (0.00736)  (0.00827)             (0.00524)
Log market value [t-3]         -0.0653*** -0.200***    -0.318***   -0.557***  -0.809***             -0.732***
                                (0.00756)   (0.0145)    (0.0195)    (0.0277)   (0.0301)              (0.0199)
Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]        -0.00237 -0.00774** -0.0127*** -0.0245*** -0.0554***               -0.0294***
                                (0.00174)  (0.00328)   (0.00411)   (0.00436)   (0.0045)             (0.00443)
Cumulative return [t-10, t-1] -0.0131**     -0.0217*     -0.0178     0.0102    -0.0233             0.0396***
                                (0.00561)   (0.0124)    (0.0167)    (0.0199)   (0.0185)              (0.0117)

Date FE                             Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
Stock FE                            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
Past 10-day daily return            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
R-squared                          0.255       0.335          0.391       0.512         0.627        0.705
Observations                      109,675     109,675        109,675     109,675       109,675      109,675




                                                        68
Stock FE                         Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Past 10-day daily return         Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
R-squared                       0.255       0.335          0.391        0.513       0.627        0.705
Observations                   109,675     109,675        109,675      109,675     109,675      109,675

                                               Table B.6
                Fire Sales and Reversals, Standardized Coecients (Continued)
Brokerage, standardized coefficients
                  Panel B: FSE Calculated Using Brokerage Margin Accounts
CAR:                              [t]   [t, t+3]   [t, t+5] [t, t+10]  [t, t+20]                [t, t+40]
                                  (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)                      (6)

Fire sale exposure            -0.000187** -0.000441*** -0.000784***   -0.00106*** -0.00118*** 0.000326
                              (0.0000861) (0.000141) (0.000228)        (0.000211) (0.000339) (0.000463)
Return volatility [t-60, t-1]    -0.00319   -0.00553      -0.0058        -0.00284   0.00678    0.00295
                                 (0.0021)   (0.00451)    (0.00586)      (0.00739)  (0.00828)  (0.00524)
Log market value [t-3]         -0.0655*** -0.201***      -0.319***      -0.558***  -0.810***  -0.732***
                                (0.00759)    (0.0146)     (0.0197)       (0.0278)    (0.03)     (0.02)
Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]        -0.00241 -0.00782** -0.0128***         -0.0247*** -0.0555*** -0.0294***
                                (0.00174)    (0.0033)    (0.00413)      (0.00437)  (0.00449)  (0.00444)
Cumulative return [t-10, t-1] -0.0133**      -0.0222*     -0.0186        0.00912    -0.0234   0.0396***
                                (0.00562)    (0.0125)     (0.0168)         (0.02)   (0.0185)   (0.0117)

Date FE                           Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Stock FE                          Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Past 10-day daily return          Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
R-squared                       0.255       0.334           0.39        0.512       0.627        0.705
Observations                   109,675     109,675        109,675      109,675     109,675      109,675
Shadow, standardized coefficients
                     Panel C: FSE Calculated Using Shadow Margin Accounts
CAR:                              [t]       [t, t+3]      [t, t+5]     [t, t+10]   [t, t+20]    [t, t+40]
                                  (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)

Fire sale exposure            -0.00108*** -0.00269*** -0.00414*** -0.00523*** -0.00112            0.0003
                               (0.000308) (0.000652) (0.000875) (0.00121) (0.000988)           (0.000448)
Return volatility [t-60, t-1]    -0.00317   -0.00547    -0.00572    -0.00275   0.00674           0.00296
                                 (0.0021)   (0.0045)   (0.00585)   (0.00736)  (0.00828)         (0.00524)
Log market value [t-3]         -0.0652*** -0.200***    -0.318***   -0.557***  -0.809***         -0.732***
                                (0.00756)   (0.0145)    (0.0195)    (0.0276)   (0.0302)          (0.0199)
Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]        -0.00237 -0.00773** -0.0127*** -0.0245*** -0.0555***           -0.0294***
                                (0.00173)  (0.00328)   (0.00411)   (0.00436)   (0.0045)         (0.00443)
Cumulative return [t-10, t-1] -0.0132**     -0.0220*     -0.0183    0.00947    -0.0236         0.0397***
                                (0.00562)   (0.0125)    (0.0168)    (0.0199)   (0.0185)          (0.0117)

Date FE                          Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Stock FE                         Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Past 10-day daily return         Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
R-squared                       0.255       0.335          0.391        0.513       0.627        0.705
Observations                   109,675     109,675        109,675      109,675     109,675      109,675


Brokerage, standardized coefficients

CAR:                              [t]       [t, t+3] 69   [t, t+5]     [t, t+10]   [t, t+20]    [t, t+40]
                                  (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                 Table B.7
                           Fire Sales and Reversals, Excluding Imputed Prices
This table presents the same regressions as in Table 7, but exclude stocks that ever experienced a full day
of suspended trading during the event period [t, t + 40]. In our baseline analysis, we impute stock prices
and returns for trading days in which a particularly stock did not trade. The imputation procedure uses
information on the most recent traded prices before and after the trading suspension. Standard errors are
allowed
 Full, noto be clustered at the date level. ***, **, * correspond to statistical signicance at the 1%, 5%, and
          imputation
10% levels, respectively.

CAR:                               [t]        [t, t+3]         [t, t+5]   [t, t+10]   [t, t+20]    [t, t+40]
                                   (1)           (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)

Fire sale exposure             -1.858***     -4.762***        -7.988***   -9.802***    -4.283**      -1.442
                                 (0.678)       (1.465)           (2.24)     (2.583)     (1.842)      (1.127)
Return volatility [t-60, t-1]     -0.215        -0.456          -0.449       -0.13       0.595      1.049**
                                 (0.186)        (0.38)          (0.474)     (0.617)     (0.665)      (0.437)
Log market value [t-3]        -0.0625***     -0.189***        -0.304***   -0.544***   -0.814***    -0.715***
                               (0.00898)      (0.0164)         (0.0241)    (0.0382)    (0.0389)     (0.0203)
Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]         -0.108       -0.302**        -0.548***   -1.061***   -2.223***    -1.689***
                                (0.0674)       (0.118)          (0.138)     (0.156)     (0.181)      (0.155)
Cumulative return [t-10, t-1] -0.0640**        -0.0763        0.000787      0.178*      -0.045      0.122**
                                (0.0271)      (0.0668)         (0.0837)    (0.0912)    (0.0821)     (0.0594)

Date FE                            Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Stock FE                           Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Past 10-day daily return           Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
R-squared                         0.252       0.348            0.404       0.514       0.637        0.734
Observations                      68,063      68,063           68,063      68,063      68,063       68,063




Brokerage, no imputation

CAR:                               [t]        [t, t+3]         [t, t+5]   [t, t+10]   [t, t+20]    [t, t+40]
                                   (1)           (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)

Fire sale exposure               -1.311       -3.483**          -4.643      -4.659*   -11.45***    -13.45***
                                  (1.09)         (1.4)          (2.988)     (2.394)      (3.37)       (2.14)
Return volatility [t-60, t-1]     -0.22         -0.469           -0.47       -0.157       0.59      1.055**
                                 (0.186)       (0.381)          (0.477)     (0.619)     (0.667)      (0.437)
Log market value [t-3]        -0.0628***     -0.190***        -0.305***   -0.545***   -0.815***    -0.715***
                               (0.00902)      (0.0166)         (0.0244)    (0.0385)    (0.0387)     (0.0202)
Avg turnover [t-60, t-1]         -0.109       -0.305**        -0.553***   -1.067***   -2.226***    -1.691***
                                (0.0676)       (0.119)          (0.139)     (0.157)     (0.181)      (0.155)
Cumulative return [t-10, t-1] -0.0648**        -0.0782         -0.0028       0.173*    -0.0437      0.126**
                                (0.0271)      (0.0671)          (0.084)    (0.0917)    (0.0827)     (0.0595)

Date FE                            Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
Stock FE                           Yes          Yes      70     Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
Past 10-day daily return           Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
R-squared                         0.251        0.348           0.403       0.513       0.637         0.734
