                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    HOW DOES FOR-PROFIT COLLEGE ATTENDANCE AFFECT STUDENT LOANS,
               DEFAULTS AND LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES?

                                        Luis Armona
                                    Rajashri Chakrabarti
                                    Michael F. Lovenheim

                                     Working Paper 25042
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25042


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




We thank Eric Bettinger, Julie Cullen, Stephanie Cellini, Giacomo De Giorgi, Enrico Moretti,
Richard Mansfield, Arnaud Maurel, Matthew Notowidigdo, Jonah Rockoff, Caroline Hoxby,
Lesley Turner, Sarah Turner, Seth Zimmerman and seminar participants at the American
Economic Association conference, NBER Economics of Education Program Meeting, Columbia
University, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Louisiana State University, University of
Illinois-Chicago, University of Texas at Austin, University of Utah, University of Connecticut,
CESifo Conference on the Economics of Education, and the AEFP and APPAM Annual Meeting
for valuable comments. John Grigsby, Michelle Jiang and Michael Stewart provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Luis Armona, Rajashri Chakrabarti, and Michael F. Lovenheim. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Does For-profit College Attendance Affect Student Loans, Defaults and Labor Market
Outcomes?
Luis Armona, Rajashri Chakrabarti, and Michael F. Lovenheim
NBER Working Paper No. 25042
September 2018
JEL No. I23,I26,J24

                                           ABSTRACT

For-profit providers are becoming an increasingly important fixture of US higher education
markets. Students who attend for-profit institutions take on more educational debt, have worse
labor market outcomes, and are more likely to default than students attending similarly-selective
public schools. Because for-profits tend to serve students from more disadvantaged backgrounds,
it is important to isolate the causal effect of for-profit enrollment on educational and labor market
outcomes. We approach this problem using a novel instrument combined with more
comprehensive data on student outcomes than has been employed in prior research. Our
instrument leverages the interaction between changes in the demand for college due to labor
demand shocks and the local supply of for-profit schools. We compare enrollment and
postsecondary outcome changes across areas that experience similar labor demand shocks but
that have different latent supply of for-profit institutions. The first-stage estimates show that
students are much more likely to enroll in a for-profit institution for a given labor demand change
when there is a higher supply of such schools in the base period. Among four-year students, for-
profit enrollment leads to more loans, higher loan amounts, an increased likelihood of borrowing,
an increased risk of default and worse labor market outcomes. Two-year for-profit students also
take out more loans, have higher default rates and lower earnings. But, they are more likely to
graduate and to earn over $25,000 per year (the median earnings of high school graduates).
Finally, we show that for-profit entry and exit decisions are at most weakly responsive to labor
demand shocks. Our results point to low returns to for-profit enrollment that have important
implications for public investments in higher education as well as how students make
postsecondary choices.

Luis Armona                                       Michael F. Lovenheim
Stanford University                               Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Palo Alto, CA 94305                               ILR School, and Department of Economics
larmona@stanford.edu                              Cornell University
                                                  264 Ives Hall
Rajashri Chakrabarti                              Ithaca, NY 14853
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                  and NBER
33 Liberty St                                     mfl55@cornell.edu
New York, NY 10045
Rajashri.Chakrabarti@ny.frb.org
1      Introduction

One of the most dominant trends in the US postsecondary market over the past several decades
has been the rise in for-profit institutions and enrollments. As of 2000, 450,000 students were
enrolled in the for-profit postsecondary sector, which represented 2.9% of all higher education
enrollment. By 2015, over 1.3 million students, or 6.7% of all enrollments, were in a for-profit
institution. The rise of for-profit enrollment over this period has been driven in part by a 60%
increase in the number of for-profit schools, from 789 to 1262.1 Over 223,000 AA or BA degrees
were conferred by for-profit colleges and universities in 2016, which is 7.6% of all such degrees
awarded in that year.
     With the precipitous rise in the for-profit postsecondary sector has come a growing concern
that students are not well-served by attending these schools. They often charge higher tuition
than their public counterparts of similar quality, and students have lower completion rates
and longer time-to-degree than other similarly-selective institutions. Students also tend to
have much lower earnings post-attendance at a for-profit college relative to their non-profit
and public counterparts. This pattern is associated with high student loan default rates of for-
profit students: 39% percent of those who defaulted on their federal loans in the 2012 repayment
cohort had attended for-profit colleges, while only 11.5% of students were enrolled at for-profit
schools in the 2010-11 academic year (Chakrabarti, Lovenheim and Morris 2016a). Concerns
about predatory behavior among for-profit postsecondary institutions led to heightened student
loan regulations during the Obama administration, but the Trump administration has rolled
back many of these rules (Stratford 2017). These policy changes underscore the importance of
more fully understanding how for-profit enrollment affects student outcomes.
     For-profit schools are much more likely to cater to students from lower-income backgrounds,
first generation college attendees and under-represented minority students than are public and
not-for-profit institutions (Chakrabarti, Lovenheim and Morris 2016b; Deming, Goldin and
Katz 2012). Because they serve a larger proportion of students from disadvantaged back-
grounds, the worse postsecondary and labor market outcomes associated with for-profit en-
rollment are not necessarily indicative of a causal effect of these institutions. Identifying the
causal effect of for-profit enrollment is of high importance for two reasons. First, the federal
government spends a large amount on financial aid for students attending for-profit colleges.
About 17% of Pell grants and Stafford loans go to for-profit undergraduate students, totalling
    1 These   tabulations come from the 2017 Digest of Education Statistics.




                                                                  1
over $17 billion (Trends in Student Aid 2017).2 Second, the return to enrolling in a particular
postsecondary institution is a core component of the human capital investment decision (Becker
1962). With substantial information asymmetries in the higher education market, especially
for students from low-income and minority backgrounds (Hoxby and Avery 2013; Hoxby and
Turner 2013; Arcidiacono and Lovenheim 2016b), there is scope for students to enroll in col-
leges that ultimately do not benefit them because they do not know it is a bad investment at
the time of enrollment. For-profit colleges typically do not practice selective admissions, and
there usually are local, lower-priced nonselective public colleges or universities that students
could attend instead (Deming, Goldin and Katz 2013). Whether students and taxpayers would
be better served by shifting attendance from for-profits to these other similarly-selective local
options currently is poorly understood.
    In this paper, we estimate the effect of attending a for-profit college relative to a local public
college or university on financial aid, student debt, educational, and labor market outcomes us-
ing a novel identification strategy based on local labor demand shocks combined with the latent
supply of postsecondary schools in a local area. Employing administrative institution-level data
on enrollment, graduation, financial aid, student debt, default, and subsequent employment and
earnings, we leverage the fact that higher education enrollment tends to increase when there is
an adverse local labor demand shock and vice versa (Betts and McFarland 1995; Christian 2007;
Clark 2011; Hershbein 2012; Aguiar, Hurst and Karabarbounis 2013; Long 2014; Chakrabarti,
Lovenheim and Morris 2016). This is because negative labor demand shocks lower the opportu-
nity cost of college for both recent high school graduates and recently unemployed workers who
are seeking to increase their skill levels. With positive labor demand shocks the opportunity
cost of college increases and these groups find it more remunerative be in the labor force.
    We construct 3-year rolling labor demand shocks from 2000-2014 at the Core Based Statisti-
cal Area (CBSA) level using the shift-share labor demand instrument first introduced by Bartik
(1991). The approach entails interacting baseline employment share of an industry in a local
area with national trends in that industry’s employment shares. We use industries defined by
2-digit NAICS codes as well as national trends outside of each CBSA to measure local labor
demand conditions. Our main innovation comes from interacting this labor demand measure
with for-profit penetration in the base year (2000)3 in the CBSA. We thus leverage the intuition
(that we later test in the paper) that enrollment in for-profits should be higher in areas that
   2 This understates federal expenditures on for-profit students because it ignores veteran benefits provided by the post-9/11 GI

Bill (Barr 2015).
   3 In this paper, we refer to academic years by the calendar year of the spring semester. Thus, 2000 refers to the 1999-2000

academic year.


                                                                2
have a higher baseline supply of such schools for a given labor demand shock. Critically, we are
not identified off of baseline higher education supply conditions4 or off of differences across cities
in the size of a labor demand shock. Rather, the instrument we use exploits the interaction of
these two forces: we compare changes in outcomes among two otherwise similar CBSAs that
experience similar labor demand shocks at the same time but that have different baseline post-
secondary supply conditions. The main identification assumption we invoke is that there are
no contemporaneous shocks or trends in our outcomes of interest that are correlated with the
timing, magnitude, and sign of the local labor demand shocks as well as with the initial supply
of for-profit schools. That we have positive and negative labor demand shocks is a particular
strength of our approach because it insulates us from biases associated with any uni-directional
secular trends in outcomes that are correlated with for-profit supply. Furthermore, we demon-
strate that baseline for-profit supply and labor demand changes are only weakly correlated with
each other and are uncorrelated with pre-2000 trends in the outcomes we study, which makes
it unlikely unobserved factors bias our estimates.
    We measure for-profit supply by the percentage of for-profit schools in each CBSA of each
level (two- or four-year) in 2000.5 We find that the interaction of the percentage of four-year (or
two-year) for-profit schools at the CBSA level in the 1999-2000 academic year interacted with
the predicted labor demand measure is a strong instrument for four-year (two-year) for-profit
enrollment.6 For a 1 percentage point negative labor demand shock, enrollment at 4-year for-
profit schools increases by 230 students when the for-profit share in 2000 is 1 percentage point
higher. Among two-year schools, the effect is 105 students. Both estimates are statistically
different from zero at the 1% level. These findings are of interest in their own right, as they
demonstrate the importance of local postsecondary supply conditions in determining enrollment
patterns following a recession, and they suggest that for-profit schools played a significant role in
many areas in worker training during the great recession. To our knowledge, these patterns have
not been shown previously, and they further underscore the policy importance of understanding
how for-profit enrollment affects student outcomes.
    In the second stage, our results point consistently to worse outcomes among for-profit stu-
dents relative to public students. Among four-year students, there is a negative effect of at-
tending a for-profit school for each outcome we consider. Relative to public school students,
   4 Prior research beginning with the seminal work of Card (1995) has used cross-sectional variation in postsecondary supply

conditions as an instrument for college-going. Another strand of research uses changes in the supply of postsecondary institutions
as an instrument (Currie and Moretti 2003). Our approach relaxes the often strong assumptions underlying cross-sectional estimators
and allows us to use more recent data from a time period in which there was little postsecondary entry or exit.
   5 Two-year institutions include less-than-two-year schools as well. We call this group “two-year schools” throughout the paper.
   6 In this paper, sector refers to for-profit or public schools while “institution type” or “level” refers to two- or four-year schools.




                                                                    3
for-profit students take out one additional federal loan on average and originate over $3,300
more in loan debt. This increased loan debt reflects a higher likelihood of taking out both
subsidized and unsubsidized loans, and we show it is driven in part by higher tuition levels
faced by for-profit students. In addition to taking on more debt, for-profit students may be
more likely to default and to face worse labor market outcomes. This is indeed what we find:
for-profit students are 11 percentage points less likely to be employed and have lower earnings
than their public school counterparts. They also are less likely to obtain a BA, although we
note that the earnings and graduation estimates are noisy and are not statistically different
from zero at conventional levels. Taken together, the labor market estimates indicate that
four-year for-profit students experience lower returns to their postsecondary investment than
public four-year students.
   In two-year colleges, we find that for-profit students take out more loans, originate higher
loan amounts, and are more likely to default. While two-year for-profit students are more likely
than their public counterparts to obtain a degree, they are less likely to be employed after six
years and have lower earnings. However, they are more more likely to earn over $25,000 per
year – the median earnings for a high school graduate – suggesting that these students may
be better off than not having enrolled in college. Though many of these estimates are not
precisely estimated, they suggest that for-profit two-year enrollment leads students to take on
more debt without enhanced labor market outcomes relative to community college enrollment.
As discussed below, our results accord with much of the burgeoning literature on the for-profit
sector, with the distinction that our identification strategy is better able to account for selection
across institution types than is possible in much of the extant research.
   We also examine how for-profit as well as public college entry/exit responds to labor demand
shocks. For-profits are slightly more likely to enter when there is a negative labor demand shock,
suggesting these institutions are somewhat responsive to increases in student demand. No such
entry/exit effects are apparent for public colleges and universities. We also show that entry/exit
effects are not occurring differently across the pre-existing supply distribution in the four-year
sector, though we do find that two-year for-profits are slightly more likely to enter in areas
where they were more prevalent in 2000 when there is a negative labor demand shock. The
entry patterns are both too small and occur in the wrong time period to drive our results.
   This analysis relates most closely to the body of research that examines the return to for-
profit enrollment. There is growing evidence that students at for-profit schools take on more
debt and have worse labor market outcomes than their counterparts in non-for-profit colleges

                                                 4
and universities (Looney and Yannelis 2015; Cellini and Darolia 2016; Chakrabarti, Loven-
heim and Morris 2016a; Scott Clayton 2018). This work is largely descriptive and shows that
student loan levels have risen dramatically in the for-profit sectors and that the lower labor
market prospects for these students are associated with higher loan default levels. Of concern
in interpreting these patterns as causal is that for-profit institutions typically serve a more
disadvantaged population; this selection mechanism could drive much of the adverse outcomes
associated with for-profit enrollment.
   Prior research has sought to overcome this selection bias in various ways. The most com-
mon approach is to employ selection-on-observables methods using datasets with rich student
background characteristics (Deming, Goldin and Katz 2012; Liu and Belfield 2014a; Denice
2015; Lang and Weinstein 2012, 2013). Deming, Goldin and Katz (2012) is the first and most
prominent paper to use this method, employing data from the Beginning Postsecondary Stu-
dents (BPS) dataset. They compare for-profit students to observationally-similar non-for-profit
students and find large negative effects of the for-profits on employment outcomes. These re-
sults are broadly representative of the findings from other research using this method, though
Lang and Weinstein (2012, 2013) find more muted effects when comparing associates degree
and certificate recipients at for profit versus other postsecondary sectors. While an important
advance in the literature, the identification assumption that even a rich set of observables can
account for baseline productivity differences across students is strong.
   Another set of studies employs individual fixed effects to identify the returns to for-profit
enrollment, which controls more directly for selection-on-unobservables. However, this method
can be biased by selection into for-profit schools based on unobserved shocks or trends. In
addition, the use of student fixed effects requires one to focus on older students who have
sufficient pre-enrollment earnings. Cellini and Chaudhary (2008) are the first to use this method
to examine the returns to for-profit enrollment. They estimate how earnings of those enrolling
in for-profit two-year degree programs change relative to the change in earnings among high
school graduates who do not enroll. The comparison group in this study therefore is non-
attendees rather than those who attend a local public college as in our application. While both
comparisons are of interest, understanding how the decision to enroll in a for-profit versus a
non-for-profit affects outcomes is a core policy parameter that their analysis cannot inform.
Cellini and Chaudhary find a post-enrollment increase in earnings of about 10% among for-
profit attendees. Using a similar individual fixed effects strategy with US tax data, Turner
(2011) and Cellini and Turner (2016) find that students enrolling in for-profits experience much

                                                5
less growth in earnings than those enrolling in public institutions. The latter analysis shows
that for-profit students experience a decline in earnings relative to their pre-enrollment levels.7
    The papers that most credibly overcome the selection biases associated with identifying the
causal effect of for-profit enrollment are two randomized audit studies (Darolia et al. 2015;
Deming et al. 2016). These studies sent resumes to potential employers and randomly included
a for-profit or a non-for-profit school as the education credential. Deming et al. (2016) find
that listing a business or health degree from an online college (almost all of which are for-profit)
significantly reduces the likelihood of callback relative to a nonselective public school. Darolia
et al. (2016) find no adverse consequences of listing a for-profit degree. However, they focus
only on sub-baccalaureate training in contrast to Deming et al. (2016). The differences in
findings across these studies suggests it is important to consider four-year and two-year degrees
separately, which we do in our analysis.
    The prior for-profit research is consistent with a negative effect relative to enrolling in another
type of non-selective institution. However, the evidence based on secondary data either is
descriptive in nature or relies on strong identifying assumptions. While the audit studies provide
important insight into employer perceptions, one cannot necessarily translate these findings to
labor market outcomes (Heckman 1998). They also only examine the effect of for-profit degrees
rather than enrollment, which is an important distinction given the low completion rates that
prevail among non-selective postsecondary institutions (Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner 2010).
Furthermore, it is important to examine a broader set of outcomes to try to understand the
myriad ways in which the decision to enroll in a for-profit college affects students in the long
run.
    We make several contributions to the literature. First, we propose a new method for identi-
fying the effect of for-profit (relative to public) enrollment on student outcomes that we argue
more plausibly accounts for selection bias than prior work using secondary data. Second, we
examine a wide array of outcomes relative to the studies that employ more credible identifica-
tion strategies, which allows us to paint a more complete picture of how for-profit enrollment
affects students. Third, the variation we use is of independent interest given the high policy
concern surrounding worker training. We provide new evidence on how the local supply of
postsecondary institutions affects enrollment decisions in an economic downturn, which in turn
impacts returns to postsecondary investments. Our results thus inform worker training policies,
   7 Liu and Belfield (2014b) use individual fixed effects to show that students who transfer from a community college to a for-profit

experience lower wage growth than community college students who do not transfer. Jepsen, Mueser and Jeon (2016) find large
returns to for-profit enrollment in Missouri using student fixed effects, but they do not compare those returns to those from other
postsecondary sectors.


                                                                  6
and they have implications for the dynamics of how localities recover from recessions. While
our estimates are local to students who enroll in college because of labor demand variation, this
is clearly a group of immense importance. We are the first to analyze the returns to for-profit
enrollment decisions among such students.8 Our approach also is of interest because it provides
a new strategy for using supply variation to identify postsecondary enrollment effects with more
recent data and without the strong assumptions used by prior research. Fourth, we examine
both four-year and two-year enrollment and outcomes. Fifth, we are the first to examine how
for-profit entry and exit respond to local labor demand changes and, in addition, how entry/exit
responds to postsecondary supply given local labor demand conditions.9 Taken together, our
results provide important new insight into the role played by local labor demand and higher ed-
ucation supply conditions in postsecondary enrollment and subsequent labor market and credit
outcomes.


2     Data

The data we use in this analysis come from five sources: Quarterly Census of Employment and
Wages (QCEW), Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), National Student
Loan Data System (NSLDS), College Scorecard data (CSD), and the US Census. We discuss
each of these datasets in turn.


2.1     Measuring Labor Demand Shocks

We measure labor demand shocks using the shift-share approach pioneered by Bartik (1991).
This entails combining baseline industry employment shares in a local area with changes in
national employment shares in that industry outside of the local area. We use QCEW data
from 1997-2014 that contain administrative employment information taken from establishments
that report to state unemployment insurance systems. The QCEW covers about 97% of civilian
workers across the US. Our main sample uses 2-digit North American Industry Classification
System (NAICS) industry codes at the CBSA level to measure employment shares. We use
    8 Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (2005) show that community college enrollment increases future earnings among displaced

workers. Jepsen, Troske and Coomes (2014) also find large but heterogeneous returns to community college degrees. They focus
on somewhat older students who have pre-collegiate earnings, many of whom are likely to be displaced workers. Neither study
examines the differential returns to for-profit versus community colleges, which is the parameter of interest in our analysis.
    9 Gilpin, Saunders and Stoddard (2015) show that for-profit enrollment and completions among two-year students are responsive

to local labor market conditions: increased labor demand in certain occupations leads to increased enrollment and completion in
for-profits but not publics. They do not examine four-year institutions, which we show to be empirically important, nor do they
account for the potential endogeneity of labor demand. They also do not exploit the interaction of postsecondary supply and labor
demand in local labor markets, and they do not examine the breadth of outcomes we consider. However, our first-stage estimates
align qualitatively with theirs in showing that the for-profit sector is more demand elastic than the public sector.



                                                               7
2-digit NAICS codes because the less-aggregated 3- and 4-digit codes have a high prevalence
of missing values driven by nondisclosure and introduce much more error into the measure.
Our labor demand measure is not terribly sensitive to using 3-digit or 4-digit NAICS codes,
however.
    Using the QCEW data, we construct predicted rolling 3-year labor demand shocks (η̂)10 for
CBSA (c) in year (t) and state (s):11

                                                         K
                                                         X
                                                η̂ct =         γkc,t−3 ηk6ct ,                                               (1)
                                                         k=1


where γ is the employment share of industry k in baseline year t − 3 and CBSA (c) and η
is the percentage change in employment share of industry k between t − 3 and t outside of
CBSA c. Thus, we use national employment share changes outside of the CBSA in order to
guard against the possibility that national changes are influenced by endogenous labor demand
shifts within the CBSA. Note that rather than fix the employment share in a common year,
the employment share changes across baseline years. This creates a stronger measure of actual
labor demand changes over our long panel but is potentially concerning if changes in the base
employment share are endogenous. We underscore that our focus is on the interaction of labor
demand changes and a baseline higher education supply measure that does not change over
time. A strength of our model is that we control for η̂ct directly, which accounts for unobserved
heterogeneity that could be correlated with industrial share changes, baseline for-profit supply,
and our outcomes of interest. Furthermore, in results available upon request, we find that our
estimates are robust to using CBSA employment shares in 2000 rather than varying baseline
shares.12
    Figure 1 shows the geographic variation in labor demand changes across CBSAs from 1997-
2000. Just in this one year (2000), there is a large amount of variation: some areas experience
modest positive labor demand increases while others experience sizable contractions. There
also is little spatial correlation among these changes that is evident from Figure 1. Within
relatively concentrated geographic areas, one can find cities that are experiencing reductions
and increases in labor demand. The sign and magnitude of these changes varies considerably
  10 We have estimated our models using 1-year rolling labor demand shocks and find very similar results. These estimates are

available from the authors upon request.
  11 Our notation follows Autor and Duggan (2003), who construct similar 3-year rolling labor demand averages at the state rather

than at the CBSA level.
  12 Specifically, we calculate an alternative labor demand measure η̂
                                                                           PK
                                                                      ct =  k=1 γkc,2000 ηk6ct . The labor demand changes measured
in this way represent cumulative shocks relative to the 2000 baseline. That the cumulative and rolling shock measures yield almost
identical estimates suggests allowing the baseline share to update does not meaningfully affect our results and conclusions.




                                                                 8
within CBSA over time as well, which is shown in Figure 2. The figure shows the size of labor
demand changes by quartile. While 50% of the distribution experiences small positive and
negative shocks, the prevalence of quite large labor demand changes varies considerably. The
recessions of the early 2000s and 2008 are clearly evident. There also are many areas in each
year that experience positive and negative shocks as well as areas that experience little change
in labor demand. Our identification strategy rests heavily on this large amount of variation in
sign and magnitude of labor demand changes.


2.2     Measuring For-profit Supply, Student Outcomes and Demographic Charac-
        teristics

Our measure of for-profit supply is the proportion of postsecondary institutions in 2000 in each
CBSA that are for-profit.13 This is measured using 2000 IPEDS data. Census crosswalks locate
public and for-profit institutions in CBSAs, and we construct a separate measure for two-year
and four-year institutions. Throughout, we exclude all not-for-profit institutions because the
composition of the for-profit market is much more similar to the public market than to the not-
for-profit market. Eighty-two percent of for-profit institutions are less than four-year, while
68% of public institutions are less than four-year. However, only 17% of private, not-for-profit
colleges and universities are at the two- or less-than-two year level. Sixty-seven percent of
degrees conferred by private, not-for-profit schools are graduate degrees and 28% are BAs. In
the public sector, these percentages are 38 and 32, respectively, while in the for-profit sector they
are 12 and 5%, respectively. These tabulations suggest that the private, for-profit sector is very
different from the not-for-profit sector in ways that makes it unlikely students will be deciding
between attending a for-profit versus a not-for profit institution. Rather, the decision set of
most students considering a for-profit probably consists of public and for-profit institutions.14
    Figures 3 and 4 show the proportion of two-year and four-year institutions that are for-
profit by CBSA in 2000. There is much heterogeneity across space. While there are many more
CBSAs without a for-profit four-year school than without a two-year school, for-profit schools
are not clustered in any particular part of the country, and their prevalence varies even across
  13 A strong argument can be made for using for-profit enrollment percentage as our measure of for-profit supply instead. The

goal of our supply measure is to capture the ability of the for-profit sector to absorb increases in student demand that are driven by
labor demand shocks. First-stage estimates using the proportion of enrollment in for-profit institutions in 2000 are shown in Online
Appendix Table A-7. The instrument is weak, though the point estimates are in the same general direction as those that use the
percentage of for-profit institutions (Table 3). Thus, we find empirically that the percentage of for-profit institutions better captures
how the elasticity of enrollment with respect to labor demand shocks changes as a function of local postsecondary supply conditions
than does the proportion of students enrolled in for-profit institutions. We therefore focus on this supply measure throughout the
paper.
  14 In results not reported, we show our estimates are robust to including not-for-profit institutions.




                                                                   9
nearby CBSAs. This suggests that there is much idiosyncratic variation in for-profit penetration
that we can use for identification. Examining the distribution of for-profit supply shows there
is heaping at 100% among two-year schools. Sixty-five CBSAs have only for-profit two-year
institutions; we exclude these CBSAs from the analysis because students in these areas do not
have a public option and these CBSAs are unlikely to be similar to areas with both public and
for-profit schools.
    Enrollment data come from IPEDS. We focus on total 12-month enrollment, but we show be-
low that our results and conclusions are robust to using 12-month undergraduate enrollment and
various fall enrollment measures such as total enrollment, undergraduate enrollment, full-time
equivalent enrollment, and full-time enrollment.15 For graduation, we exploit data on degree
recipients within 150% time (3 years for 2-year graduates and 6 years for 4-year graduates) at
the institution-entering cohort level. That is, we measure the number of graduates in each year
from cohorts 3 or 6 years ago. To construct this measure, we multiply the 150% graduation
rate by the enrollment size of the cohort 3 or 6 years ago. The result is a cohort-based number
of graduates.16
    One complication with using IPEDS data is that while participation in IPEDS surveys is
mandatory for institutions that disburse federal financial aid (Title IV institutions), it is volun-
tary for non-Title IV institutions. Consequently, non-Title IV schools are not well represented
in the data. Many for-profit institutions are not Title IV institutions (Cellini and Goldin 2014),
which leads us to under-count for-profit colleges. Much of the previous literature using IPEDS
data to study for-profit institutions also faces this limitation (Deming, Goldin and Katz 2012;
Darolia 2013). This essentially creates measurement error in our instrument. As long as the
measurement error is uncorrelated with local labor demand shocks, it should attenuate the first
stage but not bias our estimates. We know of no reason to suspect that the under-counting of
for-profits in IPEDS is systematically related to local labor demand shocks or to trends in our
outcomes of interest, which suggests that it mainly serves to reduce our statistical power.17
    Data on financial aid at the institution-year level comes from the National Student Loan
Data System (NSLDS). The NSLDS data are comprised of administrative information on all
  15 Twelve month enrollment measures include all students enrolled during the 12-month reporting period (July 1 - June 30) for

credit. Fall enrollment measures only include students enrolled for credit as of the institution’s fall reporting date (or October 15)
of the corresponding academic year. Since our outcome measures relate to students enrolled during the 12-month period (not just
fall), the 12-month enrollment measure is the most relevant.
  16 We focus on 150% completion rate because 100% and 200% completion rates are only available for a small subset of our time

period, while 150% graduation rate spans the entirety of our analysis period.
  17 As discussed below, another complication with IPEDS data is that four-year institutions are defined as any school that awards

at least one Bachelors degree. We use this definition as our baseline but show extensive evidence that our results are robust to
different definitions of four-year institutions in Section 4.3.




                                                                 10
Title IV federal student loan originations. For each institution and year, we exploit the total
number of loans originated as well as originations by four loan types: direct unsubsidized loans,
direct subsidized loans, subsidized loans under the Federal Family Education Loan (FFEL)
Program, and unsubsidized FFEL loans. In addition to the number of originations, the data
contain the value of all loans originated both overall and by type. These data are aggregated
to the institution-year level, so while we have detailed financial aid outcomes for each college
and university we cannot link them to specific students.
    We supplement these data with information on two-year cohort default rates by institution
and year from the US Department of Education. Cohorts in the default data are assigned based
on when students first enter repayment, which typically occurs upon graduation or dropout.18
The two-year cohort default rate is defined as the proportion of students entering repayment
in a fiscal year who default by the end of the subsequent fiscal year.
    The final dataset we use to measure student outcomes is the College Scorecard, which con-
tains earnings and employment post-enrollment for all students who received Title IV federal
aid while in college. The fact that the data only include students who receive federal aid creates
a potential endogeneity concern if our identifying variation affects aid receipt. We show below
that our instrument is unrelated to the share of students receiving Pell grants or federal loans
(see Table 2), which suggests that our labor market estimates are not biased by endogenous
selection into the College Scorecard sample.19 The College Scorecard data come from US tax
records and record earnings for each incoming cohort of students from each institution between
6 and 10 years after first enrolling. We observe the number of students from each institution
and cohort who are employed and not employed (including unemployed). The CS data also
contain mean earnings by cohort and institution, excluding those who are not employed and
those who are enrolled in any postsecondary institution, including graduate school. We mea-
sure total earnings of each cohort (y) from each institution (j) by calculating the following:
W̄yj ∗ %empyj ∗ Eyj , where W̄ is mean earnings, %emp is the cohort-institution employment
rate, and E is the number enrolled in the cohort at the given institution. Finally, we calculate
the number of students earning over $25,000 per year in 2014 dollars as the fraction earning
over $25,000 multiplied by the enrollment level of the cohort.
    Because our education data come at the institution level and because the labor demand
  18 If
      a student attends graduate school or enters a profession that qualifies for delayed loan repayment, she will not enter repayment
upon leaving college.
  19 The College Scorecard data do not account for differences in the program mix across colleges. However, we show in Table 2

that our instrument is uncorrelated with the type of degree students attain. This findings indicates that variation in program mix
across colleges is unlikely to confound our estimates.




                                                                 11
shocks occur at the CBSA level, throughout the analysis we aggregate data to the CBSA-
sector-year level, separately for four-year and two-year institutions. Institutional sectors are
either for-profit or public. Thus, separately for two- and four-year institutions, for each CBSA
and year there are two observations for each variable: one observation that aggregates all
for-profit institutions and one that aggregates all public institutions.
   To match labor demand shocks to enrollment, we assume that enrollment responds to an
observed labor demand change. We therefore match 3-year rolling labor demand shocks to next
year’s enrollment (i.e., a one-year lead of enrollment).20 For example, we link the labor demand
shock from 2001-2004 (where 2001 is the base year, 2004 the end year) to enrollment in the
2005-06 academic year.21 Most of the outcomes we examine are linked directly to incoming
cohorts. Loan default rates are more complicated to merge with our analysis dataset because
they are observed with a lead. Our data on default correspond to cohorts in the “repayment”
year, which is the year in which a student exits postsecondary enrollment because of graduation
or dropout without a delayed payment exemption (such as public service or graduate school
enrollment). To link default data to our incoming cohorts, we need to make assumptions about
the length of time students spend in college. We assume students spend 100% of the statutory
degree time in college, which means four-year students would be enrolled for 4 years and two-
year students would be enrolled for 2-years. Our results are robust to assuming 150% time as
well. The measurement error induced by our timing assumption is potentially problematic, but
we believe it is most likely to bias our estimates towards zero to the extent we mismeasure the
relationship between labor demand-induced entry and subsequent default outcomes. To create
a serious bias in our results, it also would have to be the case that such measurement error
is differential across the higher education sectors we consider. While possible, we know of no
reason to believe this to be the case.
   The final dataset we employ is from the US Census and contains year-by-CBSA demographic
information. We obtain county-level estimates from the Census and use a county-CBSA cross-
walk (also from the US Census) to aggregate up to the CBSA-year level. We construct measures
of percent female, the racial composition of the CBSA (percent white, black, Hispanic, Amer-
ican Indian, Asian, and two or more races), the age distribution of the CBSA (percent 0-19,
20-29, 30-39, and 40 or over), the poverty rate, and total population.
   Table 1 contains descriptive statistics of our main analysis variables, overall and by insti-
 20 Online   Appendix Table A-21 shows year ranges for all outcome variables we use in this study.
 21 Our   QCEW data pertain to calendar years, while our education data pertain to academic years. So we assume that the shock
in a calendar year (for example a shock that has 2004 as the end year) affects enrollment in the academic year starting the next
fall (that is, the 2005-06 academic year).


                                                              12
tutional level and control.22 In both the four-year and two-year sectors, for-profit schools are
much smaller than their public counterparts. Consistent with Figure 2, the mean labor demand
change is about -1%, but there is much heterogeneity as illustrated by the relatively large stan-
dard deviation. As expected, for-profit students are much more likely to take out loans and to
default once one scales the number of borrowers and defaulters by enrollment. Earnings among
two-year attendees are much lower than among four-year attendees, but the difference between
for-profit and public attendees is larger in two-year than in four-year institutions.


3     Empirical Approach

3.1     Methodology

The core identification concern with estimating the returns to investing in different postsec-
ondary options is omitted variable bias: students likely sort into different colleges and univer-
sities based on skills and preferences that are difficult to observe and that correlate with labor
market outcomes. This problem has been the core focus of the returns to college quality litera-
ture (Brewer, Eide and Ehrenberg 1999; Black and Smith 2004, 2006; Dale and Krueger 2002;
Hoekstra 2009; Andrews, Li and Lovenheim 2016). The majority of this research has exam-
ined highly- or moderately-selective schools where selection on unobserved dimensions of skill
is likely to be a first-order concern. Selective postsecondary markets are highly geographically
integrated (Hoxby 2009, 2014), which means that the decision to enroll in a given institution
is not strongly linked to where students live. In contrast, most enrollment in postsecondary
institutions is local: the vast majority of students usually attend the local community college,
for-profit school or non-selective four-year institution. This feature of the US higher education
system has two implications. First, it creates market power among institutions in local markets
in which the supply of colleges is low. Second, it creates considerable variation across local
markets in the types of postsecondary institutions to which students have access. If a student
is in an area with many local options that include public and for-profit schools at the two-year
and four-year levels, they can exercise much more control over their postsecondary investment
than a student who lives in an area with more limited options.
    That the variation in supply of postsecondary institutions across areas can plausibly affect
how students sort into different types of schools depending on where they live has been a
 22 Online Appendix Table A-1 contains descriptive statistics separately for the periods 2000-2006 and 2008-2014 and Table A-3
shows tabulations for CBSA-level observables.




                                                             13
focus of prior research. Previous studies attempting to use geographic variation in supply
conditions either used cross-sectional variation in supply (Card 1995) or exploited changes
in college openings over time (Currie and Moretti 2003). The former approach embeds the
strong assumption that institutional location is exogenous, while the latter relies on there being
sufficient variation in school openings (as well as the exogeneity of their locations). In recent
years, there have not been large changes in the supply of postsecondary institutions outside of
the for-profit sector, and the location of for-profit openings and closings is likely endogenously
related both to the demand for these institutions and to existing supply conditions.
    We augment these prior approaches by using the interaction of demand shocks for college
with pre-existing postsecondary supply conditions in cities. This allows us to employ cross-city
variation in postsecondary supply conditions without having to rely solely on this variation for
identification. Thus, our method provides a way to use variation in higher education supply
to identify the returns to postsecondary investment decisions using more recent college-going
cohorts and in a manner that does not rely on the strong cross-sectional assumptions invoked
in prior work. Specifically, we exploit the fact that people are more likely to enroll in college
when labor demand is low because of the reduced opportunity cost of enrollment in terms of
foregone earnings.23 Resulting changes in the demand for college then interact with baseline
postsecondary supply conditions to generate variation in where students enroll. The thought
experiment underlying our method is to consider two cities that experience identical labor
demand shocks (say, negative) in a given year but that have a different pre-existing supply of
for-profit colleges. The negative labor demand shock increases the demand for college enrollment
in both cities, but enrollment in for-profits should increase more in the city with a higher supply
of for-profit institutions when this common demand shock occurs.
    To fix ideas, consider a sector-specific IV model24 in which we estimate how outcomes change
in each sector (j ∈ {for-profit,public}) when enrollment changes as a function of the interac-
tion of pre-existing postsecondary supply and labor demand shocks. We consider this model
separately for two-year and four-year institutions:

           j
          Ecst = α0j + α1j η̂c,t−1 + α2j (η̂c,t−1 ∗ Supplyc ) + α3j Lc,t−4 + λj Xct + δcj + ψst
                                                                                             j
                                                                                                + µjcst                            (2)
            j
          Ycst = β0j + β1j η̂c,t−1 + β2j Êcst
                                           j                                  j
                                               + β3j Lc,t−4 + κj Xct + φjc + θst + jcst ,                                         (3)
  23 It is not obvious that enrollment will increase when labor demand declines, because low labor demand can cause credit

constraints to bind. Consistent with the prior literature (e.g., Christian (2007) and Hershbein (2012)), we show that any credit
constraint effects are swamped by opportunity cost effects. As a result, enrollment in local postsecondary institutions increases
when labor demand declines.
  24 Recall that throughout the analysis, sector distinguishes between for-profit and public schools while “institution type” or “level”

refers to two-year or four-year school types.



                                                                  14
where Y is our outcomes of interest in institution sector j in CBSA c in state s and year t
and E is total 12-month enrollment in the CBSA-sector-year. The variable η̂ is calculated
using the formula shown in equation (1) and measures the labor demand change between time
period t − 4 and t − 1 that we then link to enrollment for the cohort entering college in time
t. Supply is the proportion of postsecondary institutions in 2000 that are for-profit among all
for-profit and public institutions (estimated separately by institution level).25 The model also
includes CBSA (φc , δc ) and state-by-year (θst , ψst ) fixed effects. We include a set of controls
(X) that account for changes in the composition of CBSAs over time: percent female, the racial
composition of the CBSA (percent black, Hispanic, American Indian, Asian, and two or more
races), the age distribution of the CBSA (percent 20-29, 30-39, and 40 or over), the poverty
rate, and total population. Finally, we control for base period (t − 4) total employment (L)
that helps account for any changes in the size of the workforce that could be correlated with
labor demand changes.
   Equation (2) shows the first stage and equation (3) shows the second stage of the IV model.
The coefficients of interest are β2F P and β2public , which identify how aggregate outcomes in the
CBSA-sector-year change when enrollment changes by one student in the CBSA-sector-year.
The variation in enrollment is driven by the interaction of labor demand shocks between periods
t−4 and t−1 and the baseline prevalence of for-profit institutions relative to public institutions
in an area. Estimating this model separately by sector is akin to a difference-in-difference model
where the treatment intensity and sign varies over time. When there is a negative labor demand
shock, we expect more students to attend college and to attend for-profits in higher numbers
when there are more such institutions.
   Estimating this model separately by sector is feasible, but interpreting the estimates is
made difficult by the lack of a clear comparison group. The sector-specific instrumental vari-
ables model shows how aggregate outcomes change when enrollment grows by one student in
for-profits or publics due to variation in the instrument. What remains unclear is how any
effect among for-profits compares to effects among public institutions. Specifically, we want
to estimate the returns to enrollment in a for-profit relative to a public institution, as this is
the margin of choice for most students. This amounts to a comparison of β2F P with β2public in
equation (3). Additionally, the sector-specific regressions are highly demanding of the data
due to the need to estimate separate sector-specific coefficients for each CBSA, state-year and
  25 Another way to proceed would be to control separately for number of for-profits and number of publics in the baseline year

(2000). Combining these two supply measures into a single share variable simplifies the model without altering the underlying
supply variation being used.



                                                              15
control variable. To increase statistical power and to facilitate comparisons across sectors, we
stack the CBSA-sector-year level data together and estimate an interacted model:

Ejcst = α0 + α1 η̂c,t−1 + α2 (η̂c,t−1 ∗ Supplyc ) + α3 F Pjct + α4 (η̂c,t−1 ∗ F Pjct ) + α5 (Supplyc ∗ F Pjct )

             +α6 (η̂c,t−1 ∗ Supplyc ∗ F Pjct ) + α7 Lc,t−4 + λXct + δc + ψst + υsj + ζtj + µjcst                                  (4)


Yjcst = β0 + β1 η̂c,t−1 + β2 F Pjct + β3 (η̂c,t−1 ∗ F Pjct ) + β4 (Supplyc ∗ F Pjct )                                             (5)

             +β5 Êjcst + β6 Êjcst ∗ F Pjct + β7 Lc,t−4 + κXct + φc + θst + ωsj + τtj + jcst .

The variable F P is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the observation is for the for-profit sector.
Thus, equations (4) and (5) are akin to a fully-interacted version of equations (2) and (3) subject
to constraining the CBSA and state-year fixed effects as well as the effect of the CBSA-year
composition controls and base period employment to be the same across for-profits and publics.
Instead, we include state-by-for-profit, year-by-for-profit and supply-by-for-profit fixed effects to
conserve power (details below). The instruments in the first stage are the interaction between η̂
and Supply as well as the interaction between η̂, Supply and F P . The former shows how public
enrollment increases for a given labor demand change as a function of the for-profit supply in
2000. The latter shows how a labor demand shock affects enrollment in for-profits relative
to publics when the baseline share of for-profits is larger. The two endogenous independent
variables in equation (5), Êjcst and Êjcst ∗ F Pjct , are instrumented with these variables.26 The
main coefficient of interest in equation (4) is α6 , because it shows how a given labor demand
shock and pre-existing for-profit supply translate into for-profit enrollment. We focus on this
parameter when presenting our first stage results.
   In addition to the CBSA fixed effects (δ,φ) and state-by-year fixed effects (θ,ψ), equations (4)
and (5) include state-by-for-profit fixed effects (υ,ω), year-by-for-profit fixed effects (ζ,τ ), and
lower order interactions among η̂, Supply and F P . The state-by-year fixed effects account for
any state-level economic shocks or policies that could be correlated with postsecondary choices
or outcomes (such as higher education funding). State-by-for-profit and year-by-for-profit fixed
effects control for the changing nature of for-profit institutions over time and across states.
These controls help relax the assumption that the state-year fixed effects are common across
sectors while being less computationally demanding than a fully interacted set of controls. It
  26 There are two first-stage equations, with E
                                                jcst and Ejcst ∗ F Pjct as the dependent variables. We focus on the first-stage
estimates with Ejcst as the outcome variable below because it is more straightforward to interpret. First stage estimates for
Ejcst ∗ F Pjct are more mechanical and are available upon request from the authors.



                                                              16
could be the case that certain states have more or less productive for-profit institutions or that
unobserved dimensions of for-profit productivity are changing over time, both of which will be
accounted for by these fixed effects.
    We estimate equations (4) and (5) separately for four-year institutions and two- and less-
than-two-year institutions;27 Supply is calculated separately for each level. Because there is
likely to be serial correlation in the errors within CBSAs over time, we cluster all standard
errors at the CBSA level.28
    The coefficients of interest in the second stage are β5 and β6 . Importantly, all lower-level
interactions between η̂, Supply and F P are included in the second stage, except for η̂ ∗ Supply,
which is another excluded instrument. These controls allow us to account for independent effects
of labor demand changes as well as for changes in the industrial share over time within CBSAs
(β1 ),29 fixed differences between for-profit and public institutions (β2 ), differential effects of
labor demand shocks on for-profit versus public institutions (β3 ), and differential changes in
the for-profit sector as a function of 2000 supply (β4 ). The Supplyc ∗ F Pjct variable is unique
to equations (4)-(5) and is not found in the sector-specific models. This is because Supply is
fixed within CBSA (and thus is collinear with the CBSA fixed effects) and F P does not vary
within sector. Hence, we can interpret α5 and β4 as parameterized versions of CBSA-by-sector
fixed effects that show how for-profits differ systematically across CBSAs that have different
baseline supply conditions.
    Conditional on these controls, the main identifying variation comes from enrollment changes
in each sector that are driven by the interaction of labor demand shocks and baseline supply.
For a given labor demand shock, our model estimates how enrollment changes in each sector
based on the prevalence of for profit versus public institutions. We then relate those changes
in enrollment to changes in aggregate outcomes at the CBSA-year-sector level. Thus, β6 shows
how adding an additional student to the for-profit sector affects outcomes relative to adding
an additional student to the public sector. As we discuss below, the enrollment changes in the
first stage could come either from students who switch institution types due to the instrument
  27 About 5% of institutions switch from 2-year to 4-year over our sample period. Online Appendix Table A-18 shows results fixing

the institutional categorization in the base year. Results are very similar to our preferred results shown below that allow schools
to switch 2-year/4-year status.
  28 The four-year estimates include selective and nonselective schools. This is potentially problematic if selective institutions are

not substitutes for for-profit schools or if selective universities have geographically dispersed enrollment that comes from outside the
local area. In Appendix Tables A-8 through A-11, we show estimates that exclude institutions that have an admissions selectivity
rating of Highly Competitive or higher in the 2001 Barrons rankings. The first-stage and second-stage estimates are very similar
in magnitude and statistical significance to baseline.
  29 Because we use rolling labor demand changes, the baseline industrial share changes in each year. Without controlling for these

shares, some of the identifying variation comes from changes in the industrial composition within CBSAs over time. This variation
is accounted for by controlling for η̂, which includes the rolling baseline industrial employment share. We also have estimated
models in which we fix the baseline share at 2000 levels. These estimates are very similar to baseline and are available upon request.



                                                                  17
(the switchers) or from students who otherwise would not have enrolled (the extensive margin).
While we compare outcomes of marginal for-profit to marginal public students in the second
stage, the estimates are not identified only off of those who switch across those sectors, but
from both groups: the switchers and the extensive margin. Additionally, our estimates reflect a
local average treatment effect that is driven in part by labor demand-induced college enrollment
changes. This is an incredibly important source of variation to study as very little is known
about the role of for-profits in worker training during economic downturns. Our estimates speak
directly to this question.


3.2   Validity of the Identifying Assumptions

The main exclusion restriction underlying our approach is that the only reason that predicted
labor demand shocks affect outcomes differently across the for-profit supply distribution is be-
cause of differential enrollment in for-profits. There are two sources of bias that could confound
our estimates. The first is differential trends or shocks that are correlated with the timing,
magnitude and sign of the predicted labor demand changes that differentially impact for-profit
schools in places where the pre-existing supply of for-profits is higher. That is, a main threat
to identification comes from unobserved factors that mimic the timing, sign, magnitude and
geographic location of local labor demand changes and that also are correlated with Supplyc . A
particular strength of our empirical design is that our estimates are much less sensitive to bias
from secular trends than is the case in a typical panel data analysis because our labor demand
measure varies in sign within a CBSA across time. Fifty-nine percent of CBSAs in our data
experience both a positive and negative 3-year labor demand change between 2000 and 2014.
Among the areas that have a negative labor demand shock in 2000, 46% have a positive shock
at some point in the future. Among CBSAs with a positive shock in 2000, 13% experience a
negative shock in our sample. Thus, secular trends in outcomes should not impact our results
unless they switch signs with the labor demand changes.
   Predicted labor demand shocks are likely to be serially correlated across years both because
of persistence of labor demand shocks within an area and because we use a three-year rolling
measure. Any serial correlation could be related to secular trends in outcomes within a CBSA.
To account for this concern, we show below that our results are robust to controlling for several
leads of predicted labor demand shocks.
   Bartik-style instruments are identified predominantly off of cross-sectional variation in base-
line industrial shares (Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin and Swift 2018). However, as previously

                                               18
discussed, we are identified off of the interaction between predicted labor demand and 2000
for-profit supply, not predicted labor demand per se. The validity of our approach therefore is
bolstered by the weak correlation between predicted labor demand changes and 2000 for-profit
supply: the correlation is only 0.17 in our sample. Figures 5 and 6 provide graphical evidence
of this result. Figure 5 shows the correlation between 2000 for-profit share and CBSA-year
labor demand changes that are residual to the CBSA-specific mean. Both in the four-year and
two-year markets, there is no evidence that labor demand changes are related to the relative
size of the for-profit market in CBSAs.30 Figure 6 presents trends of CBSA-demeaned labor
demand shocks by for-profit supply. The top panel shows trends among four-year institutions
and the bottom panel shows trends among two-year colleges. We present trends in predicted
labor demand among those CBSAs with no for-profits and then with above and below median
for-profit supply among areas with any for-profits. It is clear that the three groups exhibit near
identical trends in labor demand changes over time. In Online Appendix Figure A-1, we show
that the trends aggregated across school types also are similar. Taken together, these figures
strongly suggest that labor demand changes within CBSAs are at most weakly correlated with
2000 for-profit supply heterogeneity. It therefore is very unlikely there are unobserved shocks
that are correlated with both variables, which supports our identification strategy.
    Further evidence that our estimates are not biased by secular variation related to industrial
shares or for-profit supply comes from comparisons of pre-2000 trends in outcomes across the
distributions of for-profit supply and predicted labor demand changes. Figure 7 presents trends
in enrollment and outcome variables from 1996-1998 for CBSAs that are above and below the
median interaction of 2000 supply and η̂.31 The panels of the figures thus test whether the
value of the instrument in 2000 is correlated with pre-2000 outcome trends. The patterns are
virtually identical across CBSAs with different instrument values in 2000, suggesting we are
not picking up differential secular trends in our estimates. Online Appendix Figures A-2 and
A-3 show similar trends by for-profit supply. There is no evidence that outcomes in areas
with different for-profit penetration are changing differently prior to 2000. Importantly, pre-
2000 trends in predicted labor demand changes are also similar across the for-profit supply
distribution. Figures A-4 and A-5 additionally show that pre-2000 outcome trends are similar
across CBSAs with above and below median labor demand shocks in 2000 as well as for those
  30 As discussed in the previous section, we exclude CBSAs that only have for-profit two-year schools. We leave them in Figure 5

in order to show the full for-profit supply distribution.
  31 We are unable to examine pre-2000 trends for the number and volume of loans as the NSLDS data only are available beginning

in 2000. However, we are able to include all other outcome variables in this analysis including student loan defaults (a loan outcome
variable).




                                                                 19
with positive versus negative labor demand shocks in 2000. Finally, Appendix Figure A-6
presents pre-2000 trends by whether CBSAs had a positive or negative value of the interaction
between Supply and η̂ in 2000. These results again show no evidence of differential trends. The
lack of pre-2000 trends in outcomes as a function of for-profit supply and labor demand changes
provides much support for our identification strategy, as any secular variation in outcomes needs
to be correlated with both η̂ and for-profit supply to cause a bias in our estimation of β5 and
β6 .
       The second identification assumption is that the instrument variation does not generate a
change in the composition of students at each institution type or lead to changes in institutional
quality. If labor demand shocks generate changes in the types of students who attend each
institution type (or lead to quality changes in institutions) differently across the postsecondary
supply distribution, our estimates will confound such compositional changes with treatment
effects.32 For example, if labor demand declines cause more disadvantaged students to enroll in
for-profit institutions when there is higher for-profit supply, our estimates may be picking up
this compositional shift rather than the effect of for-profit enrollment on student outcomes. This
is an important concern because, as we show below, total enrollment (for-profit plus public)
increases due to a given negative labor demand shock when the proportion of for-profits rises.
This is consistent with for-profits alleviating capacity constraints, and it increases the scope for
bias from changes in the composition of students.
       In order to determine the extent to which such factors change endogenously in a manner
that may affect our results, we estimate a version of equation (4) in which the dependent
variables are aggregate characteristics of students in each sector as well as institutional-level
spending (a proxy for college quality). The resulting estimates, presented in Table 2, show how
student characteristics and institutional spending in for-profits change relative to publics across
the distribution of for-profit supply when there is a labor demand shock. We examine a wide
range of outcomes: student racial/ethnic backgrounds, age, financial aid receipt, the number
of colleges to which students sent a FAFSA, parental education, parental income, the academic
achievement of the student body, the composition and types of degrees awarded,33 and shares
and per pupil spending in various spending categories. Only two of the 64 estimates in the table
is statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level and two more are significant at
the 10% level. These proportions of significant coefficients are what one would expect from
  32 Note that in such a case our estimates still would identify the effect of labor demand shocks on CBSA-level outcomes as a

function of for-profit supply, but they no longer would reflect the causal effect of an individual attending a for-profit institution.
The latter parameter is the focus of this study.
  33 Descriptive statistics of these variables are shown in Online Appendix Table A-2.




                                                                 20
random error if all effects were zero. Furthermore, the estimates are small in magnitude with
inconsistent signs, suggesting that our instrument does not generate systematic relative shifts
in the composition of students or spending across institution types in a manner that would
bias our estimates. Our results are consistent with students sorting into different institutions in
the same way where for-profit supply is high versus low, given a labor demand shock. That is,
students do not sort differently into for-profit institutions when there is a negative labor demand
shock in areas that have a higher pre-existing supply of for-profits. The results in Table 2 from
the extensive set of observed characteristics in our data make it unlikely that our results are
being driven by compositional shifts of students or spending shifts across institutions.
   The null effects for changes in the types of degrees and majors in Table 2 are particularly
important for interpreting our results below. For-profit and public postsecondary institutions
can offer different degrees and can have different academic foci. This is not necessarily a problem
for identification insofar as part of the causal effect of attending a given school is to obtain
training in an area in which the school specializes. Table 2 shows that the marginal for-profit
student faces the same degree and major composition as the marginal public student, which
would not be the case if our instrument generated changes in the types of degrees and majors
awarded. That we do not see changes in broad categories of majors or degree types suggests
our results are not being driven by changes in the types of academic credentials students earn.
Rather, we argue they reflect differences in the return to enrolling in a for-profit versus a public
institution, holding fixed the type of academic credential being earned. As discussed above, the
College Scorecard data are potentially problematic because they condition on receiving federal
aid and do not account for differences in degree types across institutions. The results in Table
2 indicate that our estimates are unlikely to be affected by these data features, as the likelihood
of receiving aid and the types of degrees students earn are not systematically related to our
instrument.
   The enrollment variation that identifies our estimates comes from two sources: students who
otherwise would not have enrolled and students who otherwise would have enrolled in another
sector. That is, our estimates reflect both changes in where students enroll (public vs. for-
profit) and whether students enroll in a postsecondary institution. Our data do not allow us
to analyze what proportion of affected students come from each group. The results in Table 2,
however, suggest the relative magnitudes of these groups are not shifting due to variation in the
instrument. These results indicate that our identifying variation is not altering the composition
of students in a manner that would bias the comparison of marginal enrollment effects in the

                                                21
for-profit versus the public sector. The parameter β6 in equation (5) shows how adding an
additional student to the for-profit sector affects outcomes relative to adding an additional
student to the public sector. As long as the relative composition of marginal students nor
relative institutional quality change due to variation in the instrument, our model identifies
the marginal effect of attending a for-profit relative to a public institution. This parameter
is of much interest because most public colleges we examine are relatively open access. Thus,
students typically have the option of attending either a for-profit or a public college. The
question of how for-profit attendance affects outcomes relative to non-attendance also is of
interest, but our design does not lend itself to answering this question and thus we leave it for
future study.


4     Results

4.1    First Stage Estimates

First-stage estimates for four-year and two-year institutions are shown in Table 3. In the interest
of space, we show only the coefficients on the instruments: α6 , which corresponds to the variable
η̂ ∗ Supply ∗ F P and α2 , which corresponds to the variable η̂ ∗ Supply. Odd columns contain
results that include year fixed effects, and even columns include state-by-year fixed effects.34
Panels A and B show results for four year institutions and are distinguished by the inclusion of
state-by-for-profit and year-by-for-profit fixed effects in Panel B.
    Focusing on the estimate on η̂ ∗ Supply ∗ F P in the 2000-2014 period, which is the main
coefficient of interest, a 1 percentage point decline in labor demand increases enrollment in for-
profits by 229.7 students when the proportion of enrollment in for-profits is 1 percentage point
higher in 2000. The results change little when state-year, state-for-profit and year-for-profit
fixed effects are added to the regression. Estimates in all columns are significant at the 1%
level, and the P-value of the test that the coefficients on the instruments are zero are shown at
the bottom of each panel. In all columns and panels, the null is rejected at very high levels of
significance, indicating that our instruments are sufficiently strong.
    These results are interesting in their own right because they suggest both that postsecondary
enrollment is strongly related to local labor demand changes and that the types of institutions
in which students enroll because of reduced labor demand is influenced by the latent supply
 34 Recall   that all estimates include CBSA fixed effects, which subsume state fixed effects in the odd columns.




                                                                 22
of schools.35 When there are more for-profit institutions, students are more likely to sort into
those schools when a recession hits the local area. The estimates in Table 3 underscore the
importance of for-profit institutions in worker training during recessions. To the extent that
there are causal effects of college choice on student outcomes, it suggests that latent supply of
postsecondary institutions can affect the dynamics of how local areas recover from recessions.
    In the subsequent columns of Table 3, we examine estimates from 2000-2006 and from 2008-
2014. The first time period corresponds to relatively strong labor demand, while the later period
contains the great recession. The effect is larger in the 2008-2014 time period, but enrollment
responsiveness to labor demand shocks as a function of for-profit supply is economically and
statistically significant prior to the great recession as well.
    Panels C and D of Table 3 present similar estimates for two-year and less-than-two-year
institutions. Although the levels differ from the four-year estimates because four-year institu-
tions are larger, the patterns are almost identical. In the 2000-14 period, a 1 percentage point
reduction in labor demand increases enrollment by 104.5 students in the for-profit sector for
every 1 percentage point increase in baseline for-profit supply. These estimates change little
with the inclusion of state-by-year, state-by-for-profit and year-by-for-profit fixed effects, and
the instruments are sufficiently powered. Unlike in four-year institutions, the effect is larger in
the 2000-2006 period than in the 2008-2014 period. This difference may be driven in part by the
relatively large growth in four-year for-profits during the later period. The estimates indicate
that students are highly responsive to labor demand changes and to higher education supply
in their postsecondary enrollment choices in both periods and in both types of institutions
(four-year and two-year).
    Also of interest in Table 3 is the coefficient on η̂ ∗ Supply, corresponding to α2 in equation
(4). These estimates show that public enrollment declines for a given labor demand shock
when the for-profit share is higher, although the effect is much weaker among 4-year schools.
This occurs because students are more likely to sort into for-profit schools in these areas due
to the labor demand decline. Across columns in Table 3, all estimates are positive and are
statistically significant at the 1% level in the two-year sector results. We consistently find that
|α2 | < |α6 |, which implies that overall postsecondary enrollment grows when there is a negative
demand shock in areas that have higher baseline for-profit supply. This result is consistent
   35 These results are consistent with prior research showing that students are very willing to substitute across the public and for-

profit sectors. Goodman and Henriques (2016) demonstrate that reductions in state appropriations induce students to substitute
from the public to the for-profit sector. Cellini, Darolia and Turner (2016) find that when for-profits lost the ability to disperse Title
IV financial aid, students substituted to the public sector such that overall enrollment rates did not decline. The results in Table
3 also indicate that there is a good deal of substitution across the public and for-profit sectors and that the degree of substitution
is related to the higher education supply conditions.



                                                                   23
with for-profits reducing capacity constraints in local postsecondary markets. That higher for-
profit supply leads to higher overall enrollment when there is a negative labor demand shock
underscores concerns that the composition of students also is changing. However, in Table 2 we
show this is not the case: students sort in the same manner into for-profit and public institutions
due to demand shocks across the distribution of 2000 for-profit supply. Thus, changes to the
composition of students are unlikely to bias our estimates of the relative effects of an enrollment
increase in the for-profit versus the public sector.
   One objection to the four-year estimates in Table 3 is the inclusion of selective colleges and
universities. These institutions do not take most of their enrollments from local areas, and
they do not face much (or any) competition from the for-profit sector. In Appendix Table
A-8, we show first-stage estimates that exclude any colleges and universities that have a rating
of “Highly Competitive” or higher in the 2001 Barrons rankings. We perform this robustness
check only among four-year schools as two-year institutions do not practice selective admissions.
The estimates are extremely similar to those in Table 3 and in some cases are more precisely
estimated. Thus, inclusion of selective schools does not drive our enrollment results.
   Our baseline estimates in Table 3 use total 12-month enrollment. There are several enroll-
ment measures we could use instead, including 12 month undergraduate enrollment and various
fall enrollment measures such as undergraduate enrollment, full-time enrollment and first-time
enrollment. Figure 8 shows first-stage estimates of α6 from equation (4) using different enroll-
ment measures. Although the estimates differ somewhat in magnitude due to different baseline
levels, all estimates are economically meaningful in magnitude and are statistically significant
at the 1% level both among four-year and two-year institutions. Figure 8 demonstrates that
our results are not sensitive to the specific way in which we measure student enrollment.36


4.2    Second Stage Estimates

Tables 4-7 present second-stage estimates of β5 and β6 from equation (5) for our outcomes of
interest. These estimates show the effect of adding an additional student to the public sector
(β5 ) and the incremental effect of adding an additional student to the for-profit sector relative
to the public sector (β6 ). Thus, they can be interpreted as the marginal effect of an additional
enrollment in either sector. In Tables 4-6, we present results separately including year (columns
1-2 and 5-6) and state-by-year (columns 3-4 and 7-8) fixed effects. Even columns include state-
by-for-profit and year-by-for-profit fixed effects. Estimates are shown separately for four-year
 36 Estimates   of equation (4) using these various enrollment measures are available from the authors upon request.



                                                                24
(columns 1-4) and two-year (columns 5-8) schools. In Table 7, to conserve space we only present
results that include state-by-year fixed effects. Even columns continue to include state-by-for-
profit and year-by-for-profit fixed effects. Estimates for four-year schools are in columns 1-2
while those for two-year schools are in columns 3-4.
   Table 4 presents our main second stage results on borrowing and default. Panel A shows
estimates for total number of loans originated. Among four-year students, there is a consistent
positive effect for β6 across columns that is significant at the 1% level. While a marginal public
student originates 0.4-0.5 loans, a marginal for-profit enrollee originates 1.1 more loans than
her counterpart in a public college or university. Estimates for β6 among two-year students
are similar in magnitude though less precise. Relative to the number of loans taken out by
the marginal public student, these increases for the marginal for-profit student are substantial.
It could be the case that these results reflect students taking out a larger number of smaller
loans, and so in Panel B we present estimates of total loan origination amount. The results
demonstrate that for-profit enrollment in both the four-year and two-year sectors leads students
to take on more loan debt. A marginal four-year for-profit student originates $3,356 more in
student loans than her public sector counterpart, and a marginal two-year student originates
$6,428 more in student loans than a comparable student in the public sector. Thus, not only
are for-profit students taking on a larger number of loans, they are taking on a larger volume
of student debt. These estimates are consistent with prior results showing higher loan volumes
among for-profit students (e.g., Deming, Goldin and Katz 2012; Liu and Belfield 2014a; Scott-
Clayton 2018; Cellini and Darolia 2016), though as previously discussed they are based on an
identification strategy that we argue more credibly addresses selection on unobservables.
   In Table 5, we unpack the loan estimates further by examining the effect of for-profit en-
rollment on the number of loan recipients by student loan type. Unlike the estimates for total
number of loans (Table 4 Panel A), these results show how for-profit enrollment affects the
propensity to originate each type of loan. In particular, the extent to which students are taking
out subsidized versus unsubsidized loans is important for understanding both the private and
social cost of different enrollment choices. Four-year for-profit enrollment leads to a markedly
higher likelihood of originating each type of student loan. Panel A shows that a marginal
for-profit enrollee is 61-69 percentage points more likely to take out a direct subsidized loan
than her public counterpart. Panels B, C, and D show that for-profit enrollment in four-year
schools increases the propensity of originating a direct unsubsidized loan, a FFEL subsidized
loan and FFEL unsubsidized loan by 61, 48, and 42 percentage points, respectively. Examining

                                               25
results across columns shows the estimates are robust to the addition of various fixed effects
we include in the regressions. Estimates for two-year students are economically smaller and are
less precise. Overall, Tables 4 and 5 show that four-year for-profit students rely much more
heavily on federal loans (including subsidized loans) relative to public students: a marginal
four-year for-profit enrollee has more than a 95% probability of originating a direct subsidized
loan, whereas her public counterpart has only a 33-35% probability of originating such a loan.
   Does this added debt burden increase the likelihood of default? Panel C of Table 4 shows
effects on student loan defaults. Among four-year students, the results indicate that for-profit
enrollment increases the likelihood of default by about 11 percentage points. These estimates
are statistically different from zero at the 1 percent level and indicate that the increased loan
burden associated with for-profit schools leads to a substantially higher risk of default. In
the two-year schools, the estimates are even larger, at 21 percentage points. The effects are
significant at the 10% level when only using year fixed effects but become imprecise when state-
year fixed effects are included in the model. However, these estimates are suggestive of much
higher default among marginal two-year for-profit students.
   There are two non-mutually-exclusive reasons why for-profit enrollment increases the likeli-
hood of loan default. The first is that for-profit institutions have higher tuition, which leads
to higher debt burdens. Panel A of Table 6 shows how total tuition dollars paid by in-state
students increase when enrollment in each sector increases by one student, which is effectively
the average in-state tuition price paid by the marginal student. Tuition paid by marginal
for-profit students is $6,000-$7,500 higher among four-year entrants and is over $9,000 higher
among marginal two-year college students relative to their public counterparts. These higher
tuition prices are consistent with (and are likely a driver of) the higher loan originations by
both four-year and two-year for-profit students seen in Table 4. Indeed, the larger for-profit
tuition effect among two-year students is reflected in a larger two-year loan origination effect
($6428 for two-year versus $3356 for four-year for-profit students). Our results thus suggest
that students attending for-profits take on more loan debt because they face higher statutory
tuition levels. That tuition prices paid by the marginal for-profit student is much higher than
the price paid by the marginal public student has been well documented in the popular press
and in prior research (Deming, Goldin and Katz 2012), but this is the first evidence showing
that these tuition differences lead to higher loan originations (and defaults).
   The higher tuition levels faced by for-profit students are not driven by changes in tuition
from the enrollment demand shocks that form the basis of our identifying variation. Panel

                                               26
B of Table 6 examines how average tuition payments vary with additional enrollment in each
sector. We see no evidence that attending a for-profit college is associated with higher average
tuition. This implies that the enrollment demand increases stemming from our instrument do
not generate changes in tuition prices. While prior work has shown that for-profit colleges set
tuition in response to federal aid levels (Cellini and Goldin 2014), Table 6 shows they do not do
so in response to increases in enrollment demand when there are negative labor market shocks.
   The second reason loan default rates are higher among for-profit students is that they may
be less likely to graduate and have worse labor market outcomes. Table 7 reports results for
these outcomes; for brevity we only show estimates that include state-by-year fixed effects.
In Panel A, we show that four-year for-profit students are somewhat less likely to graduate
than their public counterparts, although the estimates are not statistically different from zero
at conventional levels. Among two-year students, there is evidence that for-profit schools are
more adept at graduating students: an additional enrollment is associated with 0.28 additional
students graduating. While not statistically significant, these results suggest that enrolling in
a two-year for-profit institution increases the likelihood of degree receipt substantially.37
   Looking past postsecondary outcomes, the remaining panels of Table 7 examine the labor
market returns to for-profit enrollment relative to public enrollment. Recall from Section 2.2
that the labor market outcomes are only for those who received federal financial aid. In Table 2,
we do not find an economically (or statistically) significant relationship between the instrument
and the percentage receiving federal aid. This suggests there is no differential selection in our
labor market sample by federal financial aid receipt that would bias our estimates. Nonetheless,
it is important to highlight that the labor market results hold only for federal aid recipients.
   Panel B of Table 7 shows that four-year for-profit enrollment reduces the likelihood of em-
ployment by 11 percentage points while two-year for-profit enrollment reduces the likelihood
of employment by 36 percentage points. However, the two-year estimates are not statistically
significant. Panel C shows that earnings are lower for both four-year and two-year for-profit
students relative to their public counterparts, but the estimates are imprecise. A marginal
four-year for-profit student earns about $6,000 less than her public counterpart six years after
enrolling. For two-year students, the earnings penalty for for-profit enrollment is about $9,000.
In both sectors, earnings reductions are large relative to the Enroll estimates, which can be
interpreted as the earnings of a marginal public postsecondary student.
  37 Deming, Goldin and Katz (2012) and Liu and Belfield (2014a) also find evidence that for-profit students are more likely to

graduate than their public counterparts.




                                                              27
   Estimates in Panel D show less consistent results across sectors for the likelihood of earning
more than $25,000 per year. The threshold of $25,000 is of interest as it corresponds approxi-
mately to the median wage of workers aged 25 to 34 with only a high-school degree. Examining
this outcome helps gauge whether students are better off from having decided to enroll in a
for-profit (or public) college rather than not invest in a postsecondary degree. The likelihood a
marginal four-year public college student earns over $25,000 is 71 percent. Four-year for-profit
students are about 8 percentage points (or 11%) less likely than their public counterparts to
earn over this amount, but the estimates are not precise. Among two-year students, the re-
sults indicate an increased likelihood of earning over $25,000, but they also are imprecise. In
both the two-year and four-year sectors, marginal students are substantially more likely to earn
over $25,000 per year, which suggests a positive gross return to investing in a postsecondary
education (both for-profit and public).
   Taken together, the results in Tables 4-7 indicate that four-year for-profit enrollment leads to
higher likelihood of borrowing, larger debt originations, higher default, and worse labor market
outcomes. The results among two-year students are less clear, but we do find evidence that
these students are more likely to graduate, take on more debt, and are more likely to default.
Despite their higher debt and the higher likelihood of degree receipt, our estimates suggest these
students have worse labor market outcomes than community college students. The evidence
thus indicates the return to these degrees is rather low. Among four-year institutions, our results
strongly suggest the return to for-profit enrollment relative to public four-year enrollment is
negative. Students could earn more, take on less debt, default at lower rates, and be more likely
to graduate if they attended a public four-year institution.
   How do the IV estimates relate to those from OLS models that control for the same fixed
effects and observed characteristics? Online Appendix Tables A-4 through A-6 present OLS
results for our outcomes of interest. The estimates are qualitatively similar to those in Tables
4, 5 and 7, but as expected they are more precise. The two-year OLS results generally paint
a more negative picture of for-profit attendance on both labor market and loan outcomes,
potentially because of negative selection into these for-profit schools. The four-year for-profit
OLS estimates also are qualitatively similar to the IV results but tend to indicate less of an
adverse effect on student outcomes. The differences in magnitudes between the OLS and IV
estimates may be due to a variety of factors, such as differences in student selection across
schools, differences in local labor markets, differences in school locations, and funding, as well
as any interactions between these factors. Importantly, our IV estimates also capture a local

                                                28
average treatment effect driven in part by labor-demand induced changes in enrollment. OLS
estimates, in addition to not being causal, incorporate all enrollment variation.


4.3     Robustness Checks

In this section, we present a series of robustness checks that probe the sensitivity of our find-
ings.38 A core identification concern in our analysis relates to serial correlation in the labor
demand shock. We control for η̂t−1 directly in our regressions, but if any serial correlation in
predicted labor demand is correlated with for-profit supply heterogeneity, then it could cause
a bias in our estimates if it also is correlated with secular trends in our outcomes of interest.
We perform robustness checks in which we control for leads of labor demand shocks to provide
evidence that this source of bias is not present in our setting. In Table 8, we show results for
our main outcomes of interest in which we control for η̂t and η̂t+1 . Results are very similar to
baseline. In results not reported here to save space (but available on request), we find that
results also remain very similar if we control for one lead of our labor demand shock (η̂t ). These
estimates indicate that serial correlation in the instrument is not biasing our results.
    IPEDS (the source of our institutional classification data) defines four-year institutions as
institutions that grant at least one Bachelor’s degree. Many universities have a mix of two-
and four-year degree programs, and as shown in Table A-2, the proportion of Bachelors degrees
in for-profit four-years is lower than among public four-years. Table 9 explores the sensitivity
of our results to different degree compositions of public and for-profit four-year institutions.
Specifically, we investigate whether our results remain similar when we restrict our sample to
public and for-profit institutions that have similar degree compositions. The first four columns
show estimates in which we classify four-year schools as those with at least 25% of their degrees
as Bachelors in 2000. In columns (5)-(8), we define schools above the 25th percentile of the
Bachelors degree distribution in 2000 as four-year schools. Note that the number of observations
changes little because the observation counts are at the sector-CBSA-year level rather than at
the institutional level. The estimates in Table 9 are very similar to those shown previously,
with two minor differences. First, the loan origination estimates are somewhat smaller and are
not statistically significant in columns (1)-(2). But, they are qualitatively similar. Estimates
in columns (5)-(8) match those in Table 4 quite closely in terms of magnitude and statistical
significance. Second, the employment estimates are larger in absolute value, indicating that the
  38 For sake of brevity we do not report first stage estimates for most robustness checks. In no case does the first stage estimates

change substantively; these estimates are available from the authors upon request.




                                                                 29
for-profit enrollee is between 13-14% less likely to be employed than her public counterpart six
years after enrollment.
   One might be concerned that 25% of Bachelors degrees is too low a place in the distribution
to cut the sample. In Online Appendix Table A-15 columns (1)-(4) and (5)-(8) respectively,
we define four-year institutions as institutions where (a) 25-50% of the degrees awarded were
Bachelors Degrees in 2000 and (b) at least 75% of the degrees awarded were Bachelors. The
results for the 25-50% group are very similar to the results in Table 9. The estimates are slightly
smaller (in absolute value) among the 75%+ Bachelors institutions for the number of loans and
loan origination amounts. But, they are larger (in absolute value) for the percent employed,
indicating that the marginal for-profit enrollee is between 18-21% less likely to be employed
than the public enrollee. In all cases the estimates using state-year fixed effects are within the
95% confidence intervals of the baseline results. Overall, we find little evidence of heterogeneity
as the percent of Bachelors Degrees awarded increases among four-year institutions.
   Rather than splitting the sample by the percentage of Bachelors degrees awarded, we can
instead directly control for degree composition of schools. Since degree composition can po-
tentially be endogenous, we instead control for interactions between baseline (2000) degree
composition and year fixed effects. Online Appendix Tables A-12 through A-14 include con-
trols for percent certificates awarded in 2000 interacted with year indicators for the two-year
sample and percent Bachelor’s degrees awarded in 2000 interacted with year indicators for the
four-year sample. The results accord very closely with those shown in Tables 4, 5 and 7 in sign,
magnitude and statistical significance. These results, combined with those in Table 2, Table 9
and Table A-15, suggest that we are not simply picking up a mechanical effect of different degree
types across institutions. We find no evidence of a change in the mix of degrees awarded (Table
2), little heterogeneity in effects when we restrict the sample to compare between institutions
awarding like degrees in the four-year sector, and directly controlling for degree composition of
the college leaves results virtually unchanged.
   Although we do not find that our instruments generate changes in the composition of stu-
dents along observed dimensions, there is a potential concern about switching across the two-
year/four-year margin given that our models are level-specific. In Online Appendix Table A-16,
we show estimates that include opposite-level supply controls interacted with the for-profit in-
dicator and labor demand shocks. That is, in the four-year sector estimates we control for
two-year baseline supply fully interacted with F P and η̂ (and vice versa). These controls are
not used as additional instruments but rather to account for the fact that the instruments are

                                                  30
likely to be highly correlated across institutional levels so that not controlling for the other
level may introduce an omitted variable bias driven by cross-level switching. The estimates are
very similar to baseline in magnitude, sign, and statistical significance, with the exception of
the employment estimates that are no longer statistically significant in the four-year results.
However, they are qualitatively similar. These results suggest that the level-specific approach
we take does not drive our results.
    As discussed previously, some of the enrollment variation that identifies our estimates comes
from students who otherwise would not have enrolled. If entry of for-profits is larger in areas
with more postsecondary demand and if trends in the size of the college-age population drive
both for-profit entry and relative enrollment, it could introduce a bias in our estimates. In
Online Appendix Table A-17, we show results from a model that includes a quadratic in the
size of the college-age population in each year and CBSA. In effect, this model accounts for
any bias driven by the correlation of our instrument with underlying changes in the demand for
college-going that are induced by population changes rather than labor market shocks.39 The
results align closely with our baseline estimates.
    An additional concern is that our instrument may be correlated with changes in state ap-
propriations, which form a large component of total resources for most public universities. In
results available upon request, we controlled for state appropriations per student and the results
and conclusions are unchanged.
    Our identification strategy relies on local postsecondary enrollment, which means online
options can generate bias if the online enrollment is coming differentially from areas with
higher for-profit supply, given labor demand. We exclude online colleges and universities from
our analysis in Online Appendix Table A-19.40 Despite the substantial growth in the online
postsecondary sector during this period, the point estimates change little from baseline. The one
exception is that the employment estimates in the four-year results are larger in absolute value
indicating larger negative effect of for-profit attendance, but they also are imprecise such that
the 95% confidence interval includes the preferred estimate. As previously discussed, we also
exclude selective institutions that have an admissions selectivity rating of Highly Competitive
  39 Bound and Turner (2007) and Bound, Lovenheim and Turner (2010) show that the size of the college-age population has large

effects on enrollment in less-selective institutions.
  40 We use the IPEDS definition of a fully online institution (where all programs are offered via distance education), which it began

reporting in 2011. We exclude from the entire analysis sample the 60 institutions that were listed as fully online between 2011
and 2014. Using the method in Deming, Goldin and Katz (2012) that employs a threshold for out-of-state enrollment share yields
similar results. IPEDS also reports an alternative measure that identifies schools that offer only some programs or courses (but
not all) via distance education. We do not use this measure as a large part of the enrollment of these “some online” schools comes
from local enrollment. Excluding these schools would lead us to exclude much of our relevant local enrollment variation. The local
average treatment effects we estimate are driven by the local students whose enrollment decisions are influenced by exposure to
local labor demand shocks and postsecondary supply conditions.



                                                                 31
or higher in the 2001 Barrons rankings. The first-stage and second-stage estimates shown in
Appendix Tables A-8 through A-11 are very similar to those shown above. Taken together,
these results all indicate that our main estimates are robust to the specific modeling and data
assumptions we make.


4.4   For-Profit Entry and Exit

One of the mechanisms underlying our results could be entry or exit of for-profit (or public)
schools in response to changes in labor demand, especially if such entry/exit is differentially
responsive in areas with higher for-profit supply. To the extent that new for-profit entrants are
less productive, this could drive some of the worse outcomes we find among for-profit students.
In Table 10, we examine how for-profit and public entry respond to labor demand changes.
Panel A shows there is at most a small relationship between predicted labor demand shocks
and entry/exit of schools. Among four-year institutions, a 1 percentage point decrease in labor
demand leads to 0.02 more for-profit schools. These estimates are significant at the 10% level
or higher and are equivalent to only a 3% increase in for-profit institutions. Among two-year
schools, labor demand shocks increase the number of for-profits by 0.02, which is equivalent to
a 0.6% increase. However, this result is not robust to the inclusion of state-year fixed effects.
   The results in Panel B examine entry behavior in response to labor demand shocks differ-
entially by pre-existing for-profit supply. It could be the case that areas with higher for-profit
supply are more amenable to for-profit schools, in which case entry would be even higher in
areas with a higher for-profit supply in 2000 when there is a labor demand decrease. Among
four-year institutions, there is little evidence that this is the case: the effect of a negative labor
demand shock on entry is not different in areas that had a larger share of for-profit institutions
in 2000. We do find that two-year for-profits are slightly more likely to enter in areas in which
they were more prevalent in 2000 due to a negative labor demand shock, however the estimate
is quite small. Given a 1 percentage point labor demand shock, a 1 percentage point higher
for-profit supply leads to 0.001 more for-profit schools, which is equivalent to a 0.03% increase.
The estimate is only significant at the 10% level. Investigating these effects by sub-periods,
we find that the two-year for-profit entry effect is entirely coming from the 2008-14 period.
We continue to find no evidence of differential four-year for-profit entry by latent supply in
the sub-periods, given a labor demand shock. These results are presented in Online Appendix
Table A-20. As Online Appendix Table A-21 shows, the 2008-14 period is after most of the
cohorts are enrolled for which we observe the outcomes of interest. The timing of two-year

                                                 32
for-profit entry response to labor demand shocks (in higher baseline supply areas) thus does
not align with the period when the outcomes on which we focus are measured and hence are
unlikely to affect our results.
    The results in Table 10 are important because little currently is known about the for-profit
entry decision. Our estimates indicate that for-profit institutions are somewhat responsive
to labor-market driven demand, although they can only explain a very small portion of entry
behavior. Because the entry/exit effects are so small, our estimates are unlikely to be influenced
by changes in the composition of for-profit colleges in an area. Entry effects hence are unlikely
to be a core mechanism underlying our results.


5    Conclusion

For-profit providers are becoming an increasingly important fixture of the higher education
landscape. These institutions are controversial because they are more expensive to attend,
students who attend them take on more debt and default at higher rates, and post-enrollment
earnings of for-profit attendees is lower. Because students select into colleges based on factors
that are difficult to observe and that correlate with future outcomes, one cannot interpret
the negative correlation between for-profit attendance and student outcomes as evidence of a
negative causal effect relative to attending a public college or university. For-profit institutions
may be more responsive to student demand and to the needs of the local labor market, so it
also is possible that returns to investing in this type of school are positive. These arguments
underscore the importance of identifying the return to for-profit enrollment.
    The research to date on the returns to for-profit postsecondary attendance looks at a limited
set of outcomes and/or faces serious challenges overcoming the selection of students into differ-
ent higher education sectors. We contribute to the literature by using a novel instrument that
more credibly overcomes the selection problem than prior work using observational data, and
we provide a more comprehensive analysis of the return to for-profit enrollment using several
administrative datasources that have not previously been brought to bear on this question. Our
approach to overcoming the selection problem is to exploit predicted labor demand changes us-
ing the shift-share instrument first introduced by Bartik (1991) combined with the pre-existing
supply of for-profit institutions in a CBSA. The idea underlying our approach is that negative
labor demand shocks increase the demand for postsecondary enrollment (and vice versa), and a
substantial proportion of students induced to attend when labor demand is low will go to local


                                                33
schools. We compare enrollment and student outcomes across CBSAs that experience the same
labor demand shock in a given year but that have different for-profit supply in our base year
(2000). Our estimates strongly support the conclusion that students are more likely to sort into
for-profit schools due to a labor demand shock when there are more such schools in the area
in 2000. These results are interesting in their own right because they show that in many areas
the for-profit sector is an important component of worker training during recessions.
   Using predicted labor demand shocks interacted with 2000 for-profit supply as an instrument
for for-profit enrollment, we estimate the causal effect of for-profit enrollment relative to en-
rolling in a public college on a large set of financial aid, educational and labor market outcomes:
propensity to borrow, number of loans originated, loan amounts, loan default, graduation, em-
ployment and earnings. We do the analysis separately for four-year and two-year institutions
as well. The four-year estimates point consistently to negative effects of enrolling in a for-profit
college on student outcomes. Relative to their public counterparts, enrolling in a for-profit
institution increases the number of loans by one, increases the size of loans originated by over
$3,300, and leads to an 11 percentage point increase in the likelihood of loan default. There is
some evidence for-profit students are less likely to graduate and that they have substantially
worse labor market outcomes as well.
   Estimates among two-year and less-than-two-year students are less precisely estimated but
are consistent with worse outcomes among for-profit students. These students take out more
loans, originate over $6,000 more in loans, and are much more likely to default. They also
experience lower likelihoods of employment and lower earnings on average, but they are more
likely to earn over $25,000 (the median earnings of high school graduates). Interestingly, these
for-profit students appear more likely to graduate than community college students, which
suggests that the return to obtaining sub-baccalaureate for-profit degrees is particularly low.
Our estimates identify a (local) average treatment effect of for-profit enrollment, but we are
unable to determine what properties of for-profit colleges are associated with more versus less
productivity. We plan to examine this important question in subsequent research.
   Overall, our results indicate that, on average, for-profit enrollment leads to worse outcomes
for students than enrolling in a public college or university. This is an important set of findings
for several reasons. First, a substantial amount of public funds go to for-profit institutions
through the financial aid system. Our estimates indicate the return to such expenditures may be
quite low. Second, the results suggest that students who attend local postsecondary institutions
when there is a negative labor demand shock may be making mistakes: they would be better

                                                34
off attending the local public college or university instead. This highlights the potentially
important role for providing such students with more information to help support them in
making more informed choices. Exactly how to provide such information to students and what
effects it will have on enrollment decisions is an important set of questions for future research.


References
[1] Aguiar, Mark, Erik Hurst and Loukas Karabarbounis. 2013. “Time Use During the Great Recession.” Amer-
   ican Economic Review 103(5): 1664-1696.

[2] Andrews, Rodney J., Jing Li and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2016. “Quantile Treatment Effects of College
   Quality on Earnings.” Journal of Human Resources 51(1): 200-238.

[3] Arcidiacono, Peter and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2016. “Affirmative Action and the Quality-Fit Tradeoff.”
   Journal of Economic Literature 54(1): 3-51.

[4] Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2003. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in Unem-
   ployment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1): 157-205.

[5] Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. “Who Benefits from State and Local Development Policies?” Upjohn Institute for
   Employment Research: Kalamazoo, MI.

[6] Barr, Andrew, 2015. “From the Battlefield to the Schoolyard: The Short- Term Impact of the Post-9/11 GI
   Bill.” Journal of Human Resources 50(3): 580–613.

[7] Becker, Gary S. 1962. “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy
   70(5), Part 2: 9–49.

[8] Betts, Julian R. and Laurel L. McFarland. 1995. “Safe Port in a Storm: The Impact of Labor Market
   Conditions on Community College Enrollments.” Journal of Human Resources 30(4): 741–765.

[9] Black, Dan A. and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2004. “How Robust is the Evidence on the Effects of College Quality?
   Evidence from Matching.” Journal of Econometrics 121(1-2): 99–124.

[10] Black, Dan A. and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2006. “Estimating the Returns to College Quality with Multiple
   Proxies for Quality.” Journal of Labor Economics 24(3): 701–728.

[11] Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim and Sarah E. Turner. 2010. “Why Have College Completion Rates
   Declined? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate Resources.” American Economic
   Journal: Applied Economics 2(3): 129-157.

[12] Bound, John and Sarah E. Turner. 2007. “Cohort Crowding: How Resources Affect Collegiate Attainment.”
   Journal of Public Economics 91(5-6): 877-899.




                                                     35
[13] Brewer, Dominik, Eric Eide and Ronald Ehrenberg, 1999. “Does it Pay to Attend an Elite Private College?
   Cross-Cohort Evidence on the Effects of College Type on Earnings.” Journal of Human Resources 34(1):
   104-123.

[14] Card, David. 1995. “Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Return to Schooling.
   In Aspects of Labor Market Behaviour: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp, edited by L. N. Christofides,
   E. K. Grant, and R. Swidinsky. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

[15] Chakrabarti, Rajashri, Michael Lovenheim and Kevin Morris, 2016a. “Who falters at student loan payback
   time?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics (blog), September 9.

[16] Chakrabarti, Rajashri, Michael Lovenheim and Kevin Morris, 2016b. “Who Contributed to the Enrollment
   Bulge? The Changing Face of the Higher Education Market” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty
   Street Economics (blog), September 7.

[17] Christian, Michael S. 2007. “Liquidity Constraints and the Cyclicality of College Enrollment in the United
   States.” Oxford Economic Papers 59(1): 141-169.

[18] Cellini, Stephanie Riegg and Latika Chaudhary. 2014. “The Labor Market Returns to a For-profit College
   Education.” Economics of Education Review 43: 125-140.

[19] Cellini, Stephanie Riegg and Claudia Goldin. 2014. “Does Federal Student Aid Raise Tuition? New Evidence
   on For-Profit Colleges.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(4): 174-206.

[20] Cellini, Stephanie Riegg and Nicholas Turner. 2016. “Gainfully Employed? Assessing the Employment and
   Earnings of For-Profit College Students Using Administrative Data.” NBER Working Paper No. 22287.

[21] Cellini,   Stephanie    Riegg   and   Rajeev     Darolia.   2016.   “Different   Degrees    of     Debt:      Stu-
   dent    Borrowing    in    the    For-Profit,    Nonprofit,   and     Public   Sectors.”     Brookings       Report.
   https://www.brookings.edu/research/different-degrees-of-debt-studentborrowing-                     in-the-for-profit-
   nonprofit-and-public-sectors/.

[22] Cellini, Stephanie Riegg, Rajeev Darolia and Lesley J. Turner. 2016. “Where Do Students Go when For-
   Profit Colleges Lose Federal Aid?” NBER Working Paper No. 22967.

[23] Clark, Damon. 2011. “Do Recessions Keep Students in School? The Impact of Youth Unemployment on
   Enrolment in Post-compulsory Education in England.” Economica 78: 523-545.

[24] Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti. 2003. “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of
   Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1495-1532.

[25] Dale, Stacey Berg and Alan B. Krueger. 2002. “Estimating the Payoff to Attending A More Selective
   College: An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
   117(4): 1491-1527.




                                                         36
[26] Darolia, Rajeev. 2013. “Integrity Versus Access? The Effect of Federal Financial Aid Availability on
   Postsecondary Enrollment.” Journal of Public Economics 106: 101-114.

[27] Darolia, Rajeev, Cory Koedel, Paco Martorell, Katie Wilson, and Francisco Perez-Arce. 2015. “Do Em-
   ployers Prefer Workers Who Attend For-Profit Colleges? Evidence from a Field Experiment” Journal of
   Policy Analysis and Management 34(4): 881-903.

[28] Deming, David J., Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz. 2012. “The For-Profit Postsecondary School
   Sector: Nimble Critters or Agile Predators?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(1): 139-163.

[29] Deming, David J., Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz. 2013. “For-profit Colleges.” The Future of
   Children 23(1): 137-163.

[30] Deming, David J., Michael Lovenheim and Richard Patterson. 2016. “The Competitive Effects of Online
   Education.” NBER Working Paper No. 22749.

[31] Deming, David J., Noam Yuchtman, Amira Abulafi, Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. “The
   Value of Postsecondary Credentials in the Labor Market: An Experimental Study.” American Economic
   Review 106(3): 778-806.

[32] Denice, Patrick. 2015. “Does It Pay to Attend a For-Profit College? Vertical and Horizontal Stratification
   in Higher Education.” Social Science Research 52: 161–178.

[33] Gilpin, Gregory A., Joseph Saunders and Christiana Stoddard. 2015. “Why Has For-profit Colleges’ Share
   of Higher Education Expanded so Rapidly? Estimating the Responsiveness to Labor Market Changes.”
   Economics of Education Review 45: 53-63.

[34] Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Isaac Sorkin and Henry Swift. 2018. “Bartik Instruments: What, When, Why,
   and How.” NBER Working Paper No. 24408.

[35] Goodman, Sarena and Alice Henriques. 2016. “Attendance Spillovers between Public and For-Profit Col-
   leges: Evidence from Statewide Variation in Appropriations for Higher Education.” Mimeo.

[36] Hershbein, Bradley J. 2012. “Graduating High School in a Recession: Work, Education, and Home Pro-
   duction.” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 12(1): 1-30.

[37] Hoekstra, Mark. 2009. “The Effect of Attending the State Flagship University on Earnings: A Discontinuity-
   Based Approach.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(4): 717–724.

[38] Hoxby, Caroline M. 2009. “The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges.” Journal of Economic Perspec-
   tives 23(4): 95-118.

[39] Hoxby, Caroline M. 2014. “The Economics of Online Postsecondary Education: MOOCs, Nonselective
   Education, and Highly Selective Education.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 104(5):
   528-533.



                                                      37
[40] Hoxby, Caroline and Christopher Avery. 2013. “The Missing ”One-Offs”: The Hidden Supply of High-
   Achieving, Low-Income Students.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring: 1-50.

[41] Hoxby, Caroline and Sarah Turner. 2013. “Expanding College Opportunities for High-achieving, Low In-
   come Students.” Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 12-014.

[42] Jacobson, Louis, Robert LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan. 2005. “Estimating the Returns to Community
   College Schooling for Displaced Workers.” Journal of Econometrics 125(1-2): 271-304.

[43] Jepsen, Christopher, Kenneth Troske and Paul Coomes. 2014. “The Labor-Market Returns to Community
   College Degrees, Diplomas, and Certificates.” Journal of Labor Economics 32(1): 95-121.

[44] Jepsen, Christopher, Peter Mueser, and Kyung-Seong Jeon. 2016. “The Benefits of Alternatives to Con-
   ventional College: Labor-Market Returns to Proprietary Schooling.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 10007.

[45] Lang, Kevin and Russell Weinstein. 2012. “Evaluating Student Outcomes at For-Profit Colleges.” NBER
   Working Paper No. 18201.

[46] Lang, Kevin and Russell Weinstein. 2013. “The Wage Effects of Not-for-profit and For-profit Certifications:
   Better Data, Somewhat Different Results.” Labour Economics 24: 230-243.

[47] Liu, Yuen Ting and Clive Belfield. 2014a. “Evaluating For-Profit Higher Education: Evidence from the
   Education Longitudinal Study.” CAPSEE Working Paper, New York, NY.

[48] Liu, Yuen Ting and Clive Belfield. 2014b. “The Labor Market Returns to For-Profit Higher Education:
   Evidence for Transfer Students. CAPSEE Working Paper, New York, NY.

[49] Long, Bridget Terry. 2014. “The Financial Crisis and College Affordability: How Have Students and Their
   Families Responded?” In How the Recession Affected Higher Education, Jeffrey Brown and Caroline M.
   Hoxby (Eds.). University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL.

[50] Looney, Adam and Constantine Yannelis. 2015. “A Crisis in Student Loans?: How Changes in the Charac-
   teristics of Borrowers and in the Institutions They Attended Contributed to Rising Loan Defaults ” Brookings
   Papers on Economic Activity 2: 1–89.

[51] Scott-Clayton, Judith. 2018. “The Looming Student Loan Default Crisis is Worse than We Thought.”
   Evidence Speaks, Brookings Institution, 2(34), January 10.

[52] Stratford,   Michael. 2017. “Trump and DeVos fuel a for-profit college comeback.” Politico:
   https://www.politico.com/story/2017/08/31/devos-trump-forprofit-college-education-242193, last accessed
   11/6/2017.

[53] Turner, Nicholas. 2011. “Do Students Profit from For-Profit Education? Estimating the Returns to Post-
   secondary Education with Tax Data.” Available at: http://works.bepress.com/nicholas turner/6/.




                                                      38
Figure 1: Labor Demand Changes by CBSA, 1997-2000




                                                    Shock %
                                                    (−.0032706,.0262151]
                                                    (−.0124747,−.0032706]
                                                    (−.022401,−.0124747]
                                                    [−.0717643,−.022401]
                                                    No data




                       39
                 Figure 2: Quartiles of Labor Demand Changes by Year, 2000-2014
   10
   5
Percent
   0
   −5
   −10




          2000                 2005                          2010                      2015
                                      End Year of shock

                        Q1                  Q2                 Q3                 Q4




                                               40
Figure 3: Percent of Two-year and Less-than-two-year For-profit Postsecondary Institutions by
          CBSA, 2000




                                                                                    % For−profit Schools
                                                                                    (75,100]
                                                                                    (50,75]
                                                                                    (50,50]
                                                                                    (0,50]
                                                                                    [0,0]
                                                                                    No Schools




                                             41
Figure 4: Percent of Four-year For-profit Postsecondary Institutions by CBSA, 2000




                                                                              % For−profit Schools
                                                                              (33.33,100]
                                                                              (22.22,33.33]
                                                                              (13.04,22.22]
                                                                              (0,13.04]
                                                                              [0,0]
                                                                              No Schools




                                        42
 Figure 5: The Correlation of Demeaned Labor Demand Changes and 2000 For-Profit Supply


           .1
                                Four-year schools                                                       Two-year schools




                                                                                   .1
           .05




                                                                                   .05
   3yr Bartik shocks




                                                                           3yr Bartik shocks
           0




                                                                                   0
           -.05




                                                                                   -.05
           -.1




                                                                                   -.1




                       0     .2        .4        .6        .8     1                            0     .2        .4        .6        .8     1
                           % of All Schools that are fpi (2000)                                    % of All Schools that are fpi (2000)




This figure plots the relationship between 3-year rolling predicted labor demand changes at the CBSA-year
level that are residual to the CBSA-specific mean with 2000 for-profit supply. Each point shows a separate
CBSA-year observation, but only labor demand changes by year. The time span is 2000-14.




                                                                      43
Figure 6: Demeaned Predicted Labor Demand Trends by For-Profit Supply and Institution Type


                                                 3-Group graphs, Four-year schools
                                   .015
      3yr Bartik shocks (demeaned)
   -.005     0      .005    .01




                                          2000       2005                                      2010    2015
                                                                      Fall year

                                                 0          Lower Nonzero Half    Upper Nonzero Half



                                                 3-Group graphs, Two-year schools
                               .01
   3yr Bartik shocks (demeaned)
    -.01 -.005      0
                    -.015.005




                                          2000       2005                                      2010    2015
                                                                      Fall year

                                                 0          Lower Nonzero Half    Upper Nonzero Half




This figure plots trends over time in 3-year rolling predicted labor demand changes that are residual to the
CBSA-specific mean for CBSAs that have no for-profits in 2000 and for CBSAs with above and below median
for-profit shares among those with any for-profit institutions in 2000. The top panel shows trends among
four-year institutions while the bottom panel shows trends among two-year schools.




                                                                     44
Figure 7: Pre-2000 Trends in Educational and Labor Market Outcomes by Labor Demand x
          For-Profit Supply, Below and Above Median

                Total Students Enrolled                                  Total Undergraduates Enrolled                               Total Graduated
 15000




                                                          12000




                                                                                                                     6000
 10000




                                                                                                                     4000
                                                          8000
 5000




                                                                                                                     2000
                                                          4000
         1996              1997                    1998           1996                1997                    1998          1996            1997                    1998
                          Fall year                                                  Fall year                                             Fall year

                    Lower Half        Upper Half                               Lower Half        Upper Half                          Lower Half        Upper Half



                Total Earnings (millions)                                  Students Making >= $25k                                 Borrowers in Default




                                                          9000
 500




                                                                                                                     90
                                                          6000
 250




                                                                                                                     60
                                                          3000




                                                                                                                     30
 0




         1996              1997                    1998           1996                1997                    1998          1996            1997                    1998
                          Fall year                                                  Fall year                                             Fall year

                    Lower Half        Upper Half                               Lower Half        Upper Half                          Lower Half        Upper Half



                  Number Employed
 12000
 8000
 4000




         1996              1997                    1998
                          Fall year

                    Lower Half        Upper Half




This figure plots pre-2000 trends in educational and labor market outcomes separately for CBSAs that have
above and below median levels of labor demand interacted with for-profit supply (η̂ ∗ Supply).




                                                                                      45
Figure 8: First Stage Enrollment Estimates and 95% Confidence Intervals Using Different En-
          rollment Measures

                      0
                                                                                4 Year Institutions

                     50



                    100
FPI*Supply*Bartik




                    150



                    200



                    250



                    300



                    350
                          12M Total Enroll.   12M Undergrad. Enroll.   Fall Total Enroll.    Fall Undergrad. Enroll. Full-time Equivalent Enroll.   Full-time Enroll.
                                                                                        Outcome

                      0
                                                                                2 Year Institutions

                     20



                     40

                                                                                                     95% CI
FPI*Supply*Bartik




                     60



                     80



                    100



                    120



                    140
                          12M Total Enroll.   12M Undergrad. Enroll.   Fall Total Enroll.    Fall Undergrad. Enroll. Full-time Equivalent Enroll.   Full-time Enroll.
                                                                                        Outcome


This figure plots the coefficient α6 and the 95% confidence interval from first-stage equation (4), which is the
three-way interaction between predicted labor demand (η̂), baseline for-profit supply, and a for-profit
indicator. Each estimate comes from a regression that uses a different enrollment measure. The time span is
2000-14 and the coefficients capture the relative shifts in for-profit enrollment relative to the corresponding
public counterpart. The dependent variable is total enrollment aggregated to CBSA, sector (public or
for-profit) and level (two-year or four-year). The supply measure95%     CI
                                                                     is percentage of for-profit institutions at the
corresponding level (two year or four-year) in the specific geography at the start of the sample period in fall
2000. All regressions include geography and year fixed effects. Two year institution group includes two-year
and less than two year institutions.




                                                                                        46
                                                                    Table 1: Summary Statistics (2000-2014)

                                                                               All       Four-year For-profit    Four-year Public    Two-year For-profit    Two-year Public
                                                                               (1)               (2)                   (3)                  (4)                  (5)
      Total Enrollment                                                       6795.326           1812.815             10642.368             1313.935             13506.189
                                                                           (27899.942)        (16596.167)           (25522.423)          ( 5452.558)           (45732.309)
      Undergraduate Enrollment                                              6127.707           1463.798               8424.117            1313.205              13505.704
                                                                           (26146.055)        (12979.283)           (20098.621)          ( 5450.774)           (45732.303)

      Number of (Subsidized) Direct Loan Recipients                           868.515           494.962               1908.092             388.569               627.301
                                                                            (4525.769)         (6265.482)            (5341.759)          (2082.722)            (2444.709)
      Number of (Unsubsidized) Direct Loan Recipients                         795.530            523.187              1759.697             352.108               489.853
                                                                            (4513.010)         (6600.587)            (5143.623)          (1936.988)            (1973.825)
      Number of (Subsidized) FFEL Loan Recipients                             923.562            716.775              1658.113             543.541               731.713
                                                                            (4393.746)         (7129.228)            (3907.055)          (2275.365)            (1688.119)
      Number of (Unsubsidized) FFEL Loan Recipients                           744.239            671.991              1280.502             457.941               527.744
                                                                            (3997.139)         (6855.462)            (3013.819)          (1910.712)            (1311.669)
      Number of Federal Loans                                                3601.570           2733.968              7298.462             1865.439             2274.183
                                                                           (15364.285)        (23738.656)           (15625.840)          ( 7515.529)           ( 5653.429)
      Total Loan Origination (in $1000s )                                    15038.06           12077.12              33993.63             6241.13               6516.21
                                                                            (71651.02)        (110068.06)            (79014.35)          (25869.04)            (17057.94)

      Number of Borrowers in Default, 100% completion time                    61.639             62.339                68.939               57.531                57.067
                                                                             (461.430)         (850.749)             (151.577)            (249.950)             (123.442)




47
      Total students employed 6 years after enrolling                        5305.940           800.374               8942.683             749.428              10804.749
                                                                           (21529.781)        ( 7219.958)           (21009.969)          ( 3043.829)           (36068.290)
      Number of students graduating in 150% completion time                  1903.092           201.623              3786.638              697.031               2911.915
                                                                            (8233.027)        (1880.381)            (10953.214)          (2959.978)            (11420.827)

      Mean Earnings for non-enrolled students 6 years after enrolling       26538.17           30594.39              33276.99             20208.07              23551.17
                                                                            (7234.55)          (7791.45)             (6123.79)            (5333.66)             (3608.76)
      Share earning $25k or more 6 years after enrolling                      0.542              0.614                 0.661                0.417                 0.493
                                                                             (0.130)            (0.110)               (0.087)              (0.132)               (0.076)
      In-State Tuition for full-time undergraduates                          5093.84           13203.92               4273.72             10836.41               2284.48
                                                                            (4457.54)          (3351.73)             (2445.86)            (3520.67)             (1379.13)

      3-year Labor Demand Shock                                                -1.097             -1.096                -1.096               -1.098                -1.098
                                                                              (1.783)            (1.787)               (1.787)              (1.779)               (1.779)
      Base employment in 1999-2000                                           139436.6          135397.7              135397.7              143809.9             143809.9
                                                                           ( 460415.0)        ( 452057.5)           ( 452057.5)          ( 469288.4)           ( 469288.4)
      % For-Profit schools in 2000                                            14.758              2.561                 2.561               27.977                27.977
                                                                             (24.932)           (10.119)              (10.119)             (29.127)              (29.127)

      Observations                                                            45688              11876                 11876                10968                 10968
     Means of variables reported in cells. Standard deviations in parentheses. Predicted labor demand shocks are constructed using equation (1) in the text. Two-digit industry employment
     data from QCEW are used for computation of predicted labor demand shocks. Earnings, number working, and number not working are measured six years after entering college.
     Number of borrowers in default relate to imputed freshmen cohorts assuming 100% completion time (four years for 4-year and two years for 2-year institutions). All years are indexed
     by calendar year in the spring of the academic year. Both total and undergraduate enrollment refer to twelve-month enrollment.
                          Table 2: The Correlation Between the Instrument and the Composition of Students in For-Profits

     Dependent Variable                                            Four-Year       Two-Year         Dependent Variable                                       Four-Year        Two-Year
     % Undergraduates Black                                            0.006         -0.008         % Arts Degrees                                               0.034          -0.027
                                                                     (0.028)        (0.013)                                                                    (0.085)         (0.030)
     % Undergraduates Hispanic                                        0.025           0.006         % STEM Degrees                                              0.014            0.03
                                                                     (0.017)        (0.005)                                                                    (0.075)         (0.041)
     % Undergraduates White                                           -0.042         -0.018         % Vocational Degrees                                        -0.031           0.003
                                                                     (0.048)        (0.015)                                                                    (0.022)         (0.041)
     % Undergraduates Female                                          0.027         -0.051*         % Associates Degrees                                         0.040           0.017
                                                                     (0.046)        (0.027)                                                                    (0.097)         (0.050)
     % Undergraduates Over 25                                         0.068          -0.007         % Bachelors Degrees                                         -0.107          -0.000
                                                                     (0.066)        (0.013)                                                                    (0.098)         (0.000)
     % Undergraduates Receiving Pell Grant                           -0.110*         -0.001         % Certificates                                               0.025          -0.017
                                                                     (0.061)        (0.024)                                                                    (0.041)         (0.050)
     % Undergraduates Receiving Federal Loans                          0.006          0.023         Total Spending Per Student                                 131.87           -12.16
                                                                     (0.114)        (0.034)                                                                   (111.01)         (11.69)
     % Undergraduates Sending FAFSA to 1 College                       0.013          0.018         Instructional Spending Per Student                           11.97           -4.59
                                                                     (0.059)        (0.015)                                                                    (11.49)          (5.24)
     % Undergraduates Sending FAFSA to 2 Colleges                     -0.019         -0.013         Research Spending Per Student                                 5.41            0.19
                                                                     (0.030)        (0.011)                                                                    (10.71)          (0.30)
     % Undergraduates Sending FAFSA to 3 Colleges                     -0.009         -0.001         Academic Support Spending Per Student                        15.56           -0.79




48
                                                                     (0.010)        (0.003)                                                                    (24.77)          (2.61)
     % Undergraduates Sending FAFSA to 4 Colleges                     0.001          -0.002         Institutional Support Spending Per Student                   -1.36           -1.12
                                                                     (0.008)        (0.001)                                                                     (6.36)          (0.90)
     % Undergraduates Sending FAFSA to 5 Colleges                     0.017          -0.003         Share of Spending: Instruction                              -0.005           0.008
                                                                     (0.027)        (0.003)                                                                    (0.038)         (0.030)
     % Parents with HS Diploma                                        -0.050         -0.003         Share of Spending: Research                                 -0.042           0.003
                                                                     (0.046)        (0.018)                                                                    (0.035)         (0.005)
     % Parents with Middle School Diploma                              0.000         -0.003         Share of Spending: Academic Support                         -0.010           0.002
                                                                     (0.006)        (0.004)                                                                    (0.059)         (0.025)
     % Parents with College Degree                                  -0.130**          0.005         Share of Spending: Institutional Support                    -0.016        -0.020**
                                                                     (0.053)        (0.014)                                                                    (0.044)         (0.010)
     Average Family Income                                            -93.22           7.43
                                                                     (62.71)        (16.09)
     College Average SAT Score                                        -0.282         -0.290
                                                                     (1.331)        (0.205)
        Each cell is a separate estimate of equation (4) and shows the coefficient on (For-profit)*(2000 Supply)*η̂ (α6 ). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in
        parentheses: ∗ , ∗∗ , ∗∗∗ indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively. All % measures range from 0 to 100. Labor demand shocks are proxied by three-year
        rolling predicted changes as described in the text. Two- digit industry employment data from QCEW are used for computation of labor demand shocks. The supply measure
        is percentage of for-profit institutions at the corresponding level (two-year or four-year) in the CBSA at the start of the sample period in 2000. All regressions include CBSA
        and state-year fixed effects but exclude CBSA-by-year observables. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that
        only have a for-profit college in the base year.
                                     Table 3: First Stage Enrollment Estimates

Panel A: 4 year schools                        2000-2014                            2000-2006                          2008-2014
                                           (1)             (2)                 (3)              (4)                (5)              (6)
(2000 For-profit Supply)*η̂              12.624          25.154              39.933           46.130          88.091***         89.163***
                                       (46.124)        (42.462)            (36.827)         (35.519)           (24.026)          (24.044)
(For-profit)*(2000 Supply)*η̂        -209.420***     -209.420***         -148.950***      -148.950***        -292.370***      -292.370***
                                       (58.760)        (59.639)            (53.599)         (54.328)           (68.765)          (69.709)
                                        [-3.564]        [-3.511]            [-2.779]         [-2.742]           [-4.252]         [-4.194]
Time Fixed Effects                        Year        State*Year              Year         State*Year             Year        State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP                         No              No                  No               No                 No               No
Observations                             23482           23482               11044            11044              10954             10954
R-squared                                0.180            0.189               0.229            0.232             0.133             0.138
P-value                                  0.002            0.002              0.002            0.004              0.000             0.000
Panel B: 4 year schools                        2000-2014                            2000-2006                          2008-2014
                                           (1)             (2)                 (3)              (4)                (5)              (6)
(2000 For-profit Supply)*η̂              22.778          35.308              53.451          59.648*          92.657***         93.729***
                                       (42.845)        (41.869)            (33.447)         (32.397)           (20.359)          (21.510)
(For-profit)*(2000 Supply)*η̂        -229.730***     -229.730***         -175.990***      -175.990***        -301.510***      -301.510***
                                       (71.427)        (72.499)            (49.555)         (50.233)           (60.072)          (60.901)
                                        [-3.216]        [-3.169]            [-3.551]         [-3.503]           [-5.019]         [-4.951]
Time Fixed Effects                        Year        State*Year              Year         State*Year             Year        State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP                        Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations                             23482           23482               11044            11044              10954             10954
R-squared                                0.231            0.240               0.284            0.287             0.205             0.210
P-value                                  0.006            0.007              0.000            0.001              0.000             0.000
Panel C: 2 year schools                        2000-2014                            2000-2006                          2008-2014
                                           (1)             (2)                 (3)              (4)                (5)              (6)
(2000 For-profit Supply)*η̂           52.299***       50.074***           64.029***        62.654***          31.870***         31.233***
                                       (11.856)        (12.058)            (13.751)         (14.002)            (8.425)           (8.591)
(For-profit)*(2000 Supply)*η̂         -97.355***      -97.355***         -129.190***      -129.190***         -65.285***       -65.285***
                                       (21.025)        (21.366)            (25.890)         (26.274)           (16.359)          (16.603)
                                        [-4.630]        [-4.556]            [-4.990]         [-4.917]           [-3.991]         [-3.932]
Time Fixed Effects                        Year        State*Year              Year         State*Year             Year        State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP                         No              No                  No               No                 No               No
Observations                             21666           21666               10172            10172              10130             10130
R-squared                                0.155            0.157               0.163            0.165             0.135             0.136
P-value                                  0.000            0.000              0.000            0.000              0.000             0.000
Panel D: 2 year schools                        2000-2014                            2000-2006                          2008-2014
                                           (1)             (2)                 (3)              (4)                (5)              (6)
(2000 For-profit Supply)*η̂           55.879***       53.654***           67.996***        66.621***          28.155***         27.518***
                                       (12.964)        (13.152)            (14.654)         (14.980)            (8.698)           (8.836)
(For-profit)*(2000 Supply)*η̂        -104.510***     -104.510***         -137.120***      -137.120***         -57.855***       -57.855***
                                       (22.740)        (23.110)            (27.555)         (27.965)           (16.756)          (17.006)
                                        [-4.596]        [-4.522]            [-4.976]         [-4.903]           [-3.453]         [-3.402]
Time Fixed Effects                        Year        State*Year              Year         State*Year             Year        State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP                        Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations                             21666           21666               10172            10172              10130             10130
R-squared                                0.258            0.261               0.271            0.272             0.232             0.233
P-value                                  0.000            0.000              0.000            0.000              0.001             0.000
Authors estimates of equation (4) in the text using for-profit and public institutions. The dependent variable is total 12-month
enrollment aggregated by CBSA, sector (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted
for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: ∗ , ∗∗ , ∗∗∗ indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively. “P-value”
shows the p-value of F-tests for joint significance of instruments. Labor demand shocks are proxied by three-year rolling predicted
changes as described in the text. Two- digit industry employment data from QCEW are used for computation of labor demand
shocks. The supply measure is percentage of for-profit institutions at the corresponding level (two-year or four-year) in the CBSA
in 2000 or 2007 (for 2008-14 period). All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (% female), racial composition (% black, %Hispanic, %American Indian, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and
year fixed effects, while even columns include state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two
year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                  49
Table 4: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on the Number
         and Volume of Student Loan Originations and Defaults

                                                                      Panel A: Number of Loans
                                               4-year Schools                                          2-year Schools
                              (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)        (6)            (7)                 (8)
Enroll                     0.435***       0.490***       0.451**       0.502***           0.064      0.067          0.012               0.018
                            (0.162)         (0.114)       (0.192)        (0.147)         (0.128)    (0.123)        (0.233)             (0.220)
Enroll*For-profit          1.087***       1.008***      1.171***       1.108***           1.148      1.131          0.839               0.821
                            (0.305)         (0.255)       (0.327)        (0.286)         (0.727)    (0.747)        (1.364)             (1.381)
Time Fixed Effects           Year            Year      State*Year State*Year              Year       Year       State*Year           State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No              Yes           No             Yes             No         Yes            No                  Yes
Observations                 23482           23482         23482          23482           21666      21666          21666               21666
                                                                Panel B: Loan Origination Amount ($)
                                               4-year Schools                                          2-year Schools
                               (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)        (6)            (7)                  (8)
Enroll                    1401.50***     1823.20*** 1492.10** 1893.80***                 511.30     509.73         596.42               590.47
                            (480.40)       (324.99)      (585.54)       (313.97)        (380.01)   (365.75)       (606.55)             (577.29)
Enroll*For-profit         3375.80***      2770.50** 3846.70*** 3356.10***            5907.50*** 5915.30***       6412.90*             6427.70*
                           (1206.60)      (1108.80)     (1220.20)      (1034.70)       (2176.60)  (2252.00)      (3576.30)            (3654.10)
Time Fixed Effects            Year           Year      State*Year State*Year              Year       Year       State*Year           State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP             No             Yes           No             Yes             No         Yes            No                  Yes
Observations                 23482           23482         23482          23482           21666      21666          21666               21666
                                                          Panel C: Number of Borrowers in Default (100%)
                                               4-year Schools                                          2-year Schools
                              (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)        (6)            (7)                 (8)
Enroll                      0.064*          0.058*        0.057*         0.051*           0.026      0.026          0.044               0.044
                            (0.036)         (0.030)       (0.034)        (0.027)         (0.016)    (0.016)        (0.067)             (0.066)
Enroll*For-profit          0.108***       0.116***      0.101***       0.106***          0.214*     0.214*          0.342               0.342
                            (0.038)         (0.040)       (0.038)        (0.040)         (0.117)    (0.119)        (0.482)             (0.483)
Time Fixed Effects           Year            Year      State*Year State*Year              Year       Year       State*Year           State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No              Yes           No             Yes             No         Yes            No                  Yes
Observations                 15347           15347         15347          15347           14500      14500          14500               14500
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month total
enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or
four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and
year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include
state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs
that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                 50
Table 5: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on Student
         Borrowing, by Loan Type

                                                  Panel A: Number Recipients: Direct Subsidized Loans
                                             4-year Schools                                   2-year Schools
                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)      (6)         (7)                        (8)
Enroll                      0.343**      0.329**      0.353**     0.336**         0.008   0.009       -0.035                     -0.032
                            (0.156)      (0.150)      (0.177)     (0.170)       (0.122) (0.118)      (0.223)                    (0.211)
Enroll*For-profit           0.614**      0.634**      0.671**     0.692**        0.163    0.157       -0.090                     -0.099
                            (0.293)      (0.282)      (0.305)     (0.303)       (0.721) (0.742)      (1.329)                    (1.349)
Time Fixed Effects           Year         Year      State*Year State*Year         Year     Year    State*Year                 State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No           Yes           No         Yes            No      Yes          No                        Yes
Observations                 23482        23482        23482       23482         21666    21666       21666                      21666
                                                 Panel B: Number Recipients: Direct Unsubsidized Loans
                                             4-year Schools                                   2-year Schools
                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)      (6)         (7)                        (8)
Enroll                      0.296**     0.293***      0.310**     0.302**         0.020   0.021       -0.015                     -0.012
                            (0.126)      (0.111)      (0.147)     (0.134)       (0.106) (0.102)      (0.190)                    (0.180)
Enroll*For-profit           0.529**      0.534**      0.600**     0.610**        0.245    0.240       0.033                      0.025
                            (0.231)      (0.224)      (0.254)     (0.255)       (0.617) (0.636)      (1.131)                    (1.148)
Time Fixed Effects           Year         Year      State*Year State*Year         Year     Year    State*Year                 State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No           Yes           No         Yes            No      Yes          No                        Yes
Observations                 23482        23482        23482       23482         21666    21666       21666                      21666
                                                  Panel C: Number Recipients: FFEL Subsidized Loans
                                             4-year Schools                                   2-year Schools
                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)      (6)         (7)                        (8)
Enroll                     0.155**      0.168***      0.175**    0.186***        -0.027   -0.026      -0.093                     -0.090
                            (0.068)      (0.061)      (0.081)     (0.071)       (0.033) (0.033)      (0.094)                    (0.091)
Enroll*For-profit          0.457***     0.442***     0.487***    0.476***        0.007    0.000       -0.426                     -0.436
                            (0.117)      (0.114)      (0.134)     (0.134)       (0.213) (0.215)      (0.625)                    (0.631)
Time Fixed Effects           Year         Year      State*Year State*Year         Year     Year    State*Year                 State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No           Yes           No         Yes            No      Yes          No                        Yes
Observations                 17290        17290        17290       17290         15946    15946       15946                      15946
                                                 Panel D: Number Recipients: FFEL Unsubsidized Loans
                                             4-year Schools                                   2-year Schools
                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)      (6)         (7)                        (8)
Enroll                      0.096*       0.110**       0.112*     0.125**        -0.004   -0.002      -0.043                     -0.040
                            (0.050)      (0.043)      (0.058)     (0.051)       (0.024) (0.024)      (0.056)                    (0.055)
Enroll*For-profit          0.414***     0.397***     0.438***    0.424***        0.162    0.154       -0.093                     -0.102
                            (0.074)      (0.074)      (0.086)     (0.087)       (0.152) (0.153)      (0.366)                    (0.368)
Time Fixed Effects           Year         Year      State*Year State*Year         Year     Year    State*Year                 State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No           Yes           No         Yes            No      Yes          No                        Yes
Observations                 17290        17290        17290       17290         15946    15946       15946                      15946
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month total
enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or
four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and
year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include
state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs
that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                 51
                       Table 6: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on Tuition

                                                                                Panel A: Total In-state Tuition
                                                            4-year Schools                                             2-year Schools
                                         (1)               (2)           (3)           (4)               (5)          (6)            (7)                     (8)
     Enroll                         2475.50***       3191.60*** 2599.60*** 3291.40***              2884.10*** 2851.10*** 3319.20**                       3256.80**
                                      (932.01)         (783.49)       (983.26)      (694.47)         (818.11)     (795.41)       (1681.50)                (1590.40)
     Enroll*For-profit              6762.50***        5734.50** 7407.40*** 6562.40***              9215.30**     9379.20**       11798.90                 11953.90
                                     (2307.70)        (2295.70)      (2177.80)     (2057.30)        (4475.70)    (4646.90)       (9724.20)                (9849.10)
     Time Fixed Effect Type             Year             Year       State*Year State*Year               Year         Year       State*Year               State*Year
     State*FP & Year*FP                  No               Yes            No            Yes               No          Yes             No                      Yes
     Observations                      23482             23482         23482         23482             21666        21666          21666                    21666
                                                                               Panel B: Average In-state Tuition
                                                            4-year Schools                                             2-year Schools
                                         (1)               (2)           (3)           (4)               (5)          (6)            (7)                      (8)
     Enroll                             0.32             -0.86          0.05          -0.10            -0.085       -0.166         -0.088                   -0.266
                                       (0.86)           (35.83)        (0.12)        (0.46)           (0.076)      (0.151)        (0.096)                  (0.389)
     Enroll*For-profit                  -0.18             0.61          0.00          -0.01            -0.331       -1.039         -0.349                   -1.770
                                       (0.41)           (29.51)        (0.10)        (0.29)           (0.561)      (1.208)        (0.670)                  (3.003)
     Time FE Type                       Year             Year       State*Year State*Year               Year         Year       State*Year               State*Year
     State*FP, Yr*FP                     No               Yes            No            Yes               No          Yes             No                      Yes
     Observations                       7509             7509           7509          7509             14493        14493          14493                    14493
      Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month total enrollment. Enrollment and
     outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution sector (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by
     CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level




52
     variables as controls: base-year (t − 3) employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two
     or more races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and year fixed effects. Even
     columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include state-by-year fixed effects. Panel A shows estimates
     using the sum of tution payments by in-state students as the dependent variable, while Panel B uses the average in-state tuition payment per in-state student as
     the dependent variable. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that only have a for-profit college in
     the base year.
Table 7: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on Graduation,
         Employment, and Earnings

                                            Panel A: Total Graduated, assuming 150% Completion Time
                                                   4-year Schools                  2-year Schools
                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
                Enroll                       0.411***        0.399***           0.173          0.179*
                                              (0.103)         (0.093)          (0.114)         (0.108)
                Enroll*For-profit              -0.135          -0.122           0.298           0.281
                                              (0.257)         (0.266)          (0.768)         (0.780)
                Time Fixed Effects          State*Year      State*Year       State*Year      State*Year
                State*FP & Year*FP               No             Yes              No              Yes
                Observations                   18854           18854            17392           17392
                                                 Panel B: Number Employed, 6 years after enrollment
                                                  4-year Schools                    2-year Schools
                                                (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)
                Enroll                       0.859***       0.875***          0.800***          0.800***
                                              (0.029)         (0.022)          (0.099)           (0.099)
                Enroll*For-profit            -0.093**        -0.110**           -0.358            -0.356
                                              (0.044)         (0.048)          (0.780)           (0.785)
                Time Fixed Effects          State*Year     State*Year        State*Year        State*Year
                State*FP & Year*FP              No              Yes               No               Yes
                Observations                   9452            9452              8710              8710
                                                   Panel C: Total Earnings, 6 years after enrollment
                                                   4-year Schools                       2-year Schools
                                                 (1)             (2)                  (3)               (4)
                Enroll                      35981.20***     36887.60***         25879.60***       25865.20***
                                             (3396.50)       (2830.50)            (6618.60)         (6674.90)
                Enroll*For-profit             -5138.10        -6107.60             -9718.70          -8541.20
                                             (6306.90)       (6624.40)           (52342.50)        (53038.90)
                Time Fixed Effects          State*Year      State*Year          State*Year        State*Year
                State*FP & Year*FP               No             Yes                   No               Yes
                Observations                    9452            9452                 8710              8710
                                            Panel D: Total Students Making $25k, 6 years after enrollment
                                                   4-year Schools                   2-year Schools
                                                 (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)
                Enroll                       0.702***        0.713***          0.623***         0.623***
                                              (0.051)         (0.043)           (0.207)          (0.210)
                Enroll*For-profit              -0.073          -0.085            0.379            0.419
                                              (0.100)         (0.108)           (1.607)          (1.632)
                Time Fixed Effects          State*Year      State*Year        State*Year       State*Year
                State*FP & Year*FP               No             Yes               No               Yes
                Observations                    9452            9452             8710             8710
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month total
enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or
four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and
state-by-year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects. Two year estimates include
two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                53
Table 8: Instrumental Variables Estimates Including Current-year and One-year Leads of Pre-
         dicted Labor Demand Changes

                                                                      Panel A: Number of Loans
                                                4-year Schools                                         2-year      Schools
                              (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)       (6)                (7)            (8)
Enroll                     0.453**        0.508***         0.466*       0.519***           0.002     0.009             -0.062         -0.050
                            (0.205)         (0.142)        (0.241)        (0.181)        (0.129)   (0.123)            (0.219)        (0.205)
Enroll*For-profit          1.222***       1.142***       1.308***       1.246***           0.899    0.870              0.504          0.481
                            (0.340)         (0.270)        (0.357)        (0.304)        (0.771)   (0.781)            (1.338)        (1.336)
Time Fixed Effects           Year            Year       State*Year State*Year              Year      Year           State*Year     State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No              Yes             No            Yes             No        Yes                No            Yes
Observations                 20290           20290          20290          20290          18736     18736              18736          18736
                                                                Panel B: Loan Origination Amount ($)
                                                4-year Schools                                         2-year      Schools
                               (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)       (6)                (7)            (8)
Enroll                    1451.10**      1860.80*** 1535.20** 1927.20***                 291.11    302.92              288.24         302.90
                            (598.04)       (325.77)       (754.87)       (406.59)       (357.96)  (344.31)            (515.31)       (491.21)
Enroll*For-profit         3804.30***     3217.40*** 4338.30*** 3880.60***              5016.90** 4972.20**            4999.10        4972.00
                           (1156.30)      (1032.30)      (1194.90)       (984.49)      (2121.40) (2160.70)           (3115.90)      (3142.60)
Time Fixed Effects            Year           Year       State*Year State*Year              Year      Year           State*Year     State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP             No             Yes             No            Yes             No        Yes                No            Yes
Observations                 20290           20290          20290          20290          18736     18736              18736          18736
                                                         Panel C: Number of Borrowers in Default (100%)
                                                4-year Schools                                         2-year      Schools
                              (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)       (6)               (7)            (8)
Enroll                      0.064*          0.058*         0.057*         0.051*           0.026     0.026             0.044          0.044
                            (0.036)         (0.030)        (0.034)        (0.027)        (0.016)   (0.016)            (0.068)        (0.067)
Enroll*For-profit          0.108***       0.117***       0.101***       0.107***         0.213*    0.213*              0.344          0.345
                            (0.038)         (0.041)        (0.039)        (0.041)        (0.116)   (0.117)            (0.487)        (0.488)
Time Fixed Effects           Year            Year       State*Year State*Year              Year      Year           State*Year     State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No              Yes             No            Yes             No        Yes               No             Yes
Observations                 15283           15283          15283          15283          14462     14462              14462          14462
                                                       Panel D: Number Employed, 6 years after enrollment
                                                4-year Schools                                         2-year      Schools
                              (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)       (6)                (7)            (8)
Enroll                     0.857***       0.874***       0.856***       0.875***           0.592     0.590           0.791***       0.791***
                            (0.027)         (0.019)        (0.029)        (0.021)        (1.213)   (1.238)            (0.099)        (0.099)
Enroll*For-profit          -0.092**        -0.112**       -0.092**       -0.111**         -1.966    -1.994             -0.427         -0.425
                            (0.043)         (0.048)        (0.045)        (0.049)        (9.308)   (9.552)            (0.782)        (0.787)
Time Fixed Effects           Year            Year       State*Year State*Year              Year      Year           State*Year     State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No              Yes             No            Yes             No        Yes                No            Yes
Observations                 9410             9410           9410           9410           8684      8684               8684           8684
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions. We include controls for the current-year
(year η̂t ) and one-year lead (η̂t+1 ) predicted labor demand changes. The enrollment measure is 12-month total enrollment.
Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or four-year).
Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1
percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and
year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include
state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs
that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                 54
Table 9: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance, 4-year Schools
         by Different Categorizations

                                                                    Panel A: Number of Loans
                                          >25% Bachelors Degrees                            >25th Percentile Bachelors Degrees
                                (1)            (2)        (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)            (8)
Enroll                       0.372***      0.429***   0.390***      0.450***       0.392***       0.391***      0.393***     0.392***
                              (0.124)       (0.098)    (0.141)        (0.108)        (0.104)       (0.097)       (0.108)       (0.102)
Enroll*For-profit            0.898***      0.847***  0.999***       0.943***       0.871***       0.872***      0.885***      0.887***
                              (0.288)       (0.268)    (0.259)        (0.229)        (0.173)       (0.162)       (0.175)       (0.164)
Time Fixed Effect Type         Year          Year   State*Year State*Year             Year          Year       State*Year State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP              No            Yes         No            Yes             No           Yes           No            Yes
Observations                   23288         23288      23288          23288          21492         21492         21492         21492
                                                              Panel B: Loan Origination Amount ($)
                                          >25% Bachelors Degrees                            >25th Percentile Bachelors Degrees
                                 (1)           (2)        (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)            (8)
Enroll                        931.09*     1120.30** 1113.40*** 1333.20***         1341.80*** 1310.60*** 1345.90*** 1313.90***
                              (481.22)     (549.39)   (397.25)       (345.16)       (491.30)      (401.96)      (508.31)      (419.29)
Enroll*For-profit             1404.80      1234.50  2434.80**      2226.80**      3171.70*** 3203.40*** 3230.80*** 3262.90***
                             (2112.60)    (2006.80)  (1207.40)      (1099.40)      (1020.60)      (937.01)      (985.02)      (892.79)
Time Fixed Effect Type          Year         Year   State*Year State*Year             Year          Year       State*Year State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP               No           Yes         No            Yes             No           Yes           No            Yes
Observations                   23288         23288      23288          23288          21492         21492         21492         21492
                                                         Panel C: Number of Borrowers in Default (100%)
                                          >25% Bachelors Degrees                            >25th Percentile Bachelors Degrees
                                (1)            (2)        (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)            (8)
Enroll                         0.047         0.047      0.042          0.041       0.012***       0.013***      0.012***     0.012***
                              (0.041)       (0.038)    (0.033)        (0.030)        (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)
Enroll*For-profit             0.107**      0.104**    0.099**        0.095**       0.069***       0.068***      0.069***      0.068***
                              (0.054)       (0.051)    (0.042)        (0.040)        (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.010)
Time Fixed Effect Type         Year          Year   State*Year State*Year             Year          Year       State*Year State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP              No            Yes         No            Yes             No           Yes           No            Yes
Observations                   14922         14922      14922          14922          13729         13729         13729         13729
                                                      Panel D: Number Employed, 6 years after enrollment
                                          >25% Bachelors Degrees                            >25th Percentile Bachelors Degrees
                                 (1)           (2)        (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)            (8)
Enroll                       0.851***      0.856***   0.852***      0.857***       0.826***       0.825***      0.828***     0.827***
                              (0.028)       (0.025)    (0.027)        (0.024)        (0.032)       (0.025)       (0.034)       (0.027)
Enroll*For-profit            -0.130***    -0.137***  -0.128***      -0.134***       -0.144**      -0.142**      -0.140**     -0.138***
                              (0.044)       (0.042)    (0.043)        (0.041)        (0.066)       (0.056)       (0.062)       (0.053)
Time Fixed Effect Type          Year         Year   State*Year State*Year             Year          Year       State*Year State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP               No           Yes         No            Yes             No           Yes           No            Yes
Observations                    9386          9386       9386           9386           8710          8710         8710           8710
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month total
enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA and institution-type (public or for-profit). Only four-year
institutions are used in these estimates. In Columns (1)-(4), four-year institutions are those for which over 25% of all degrees
awarded are Bachelors degrees. In Columns (5)-(8), four-year institutions are the top 75% of institutions in the distribution of the
percent of degrees constituted by Bachelors degrees (among institutions that award any BA). Robust standard errors adjusted for
clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions
include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3) employment, gender composition (%female), racial
composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or
over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for
profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates
include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                 55
                   Table 10: Effects of Labor Demand Changes on Entry/Exit of Postsecondary Institutions, by Sector

     Panel A: Average Effects                                            4 year schools                                               2 year schools
                                                            For-Profit                        Public                       For-Profit                   Public
                                                        (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)                   (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)
     Predicted Labor Demand Change (η̂)             -0.020***      -0.015*         -0.003       0.002              -0.023**        -0.002        0.003         0.001
                                                     (0.006)       (0.008)        (0.003)     (0.003)               (0.011)       (0.013)       (0.004)      (0.005)
     Fixed Effects                                     Year      State*Year         Year    State*Year                Year      State*Year        Year     State*Year
     Observations                                     11876         11876          11876       11876                 10968         10968         10968        10968
     R-squared                                        0.443          0.484          0.069       0.225                0.315         0.366         0.076         0.249
     Mean of Dep. Var.                                0.651          0.651          0.769       0.769                3.148         3.148         1.669         1.669
     Panel B: Effects by FP Supply                                      4 year schools                                                2 year schools
                                                            For-Profit                    Public                           For-Profit                   Public
                                                        (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)                   (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)
     Predicted Labor Demand Change (η̂)             -0.020***      -0.014*         -0.002       0.003                -0.002        0.015         0.004         0.004
                                                     (0.005)       (0.008)        (0.002)     (0.003)               (0.009)       (0.011)       (0.004)      (0.005)
     (2000 Supply)*(η̂)                               -0.001        -0.001         -0.002      -0.001               -0.001*       -0.001*        -0.000       -0.000
                                                     (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.002)     (0.001)               (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.000)      (0.000)
     Fixed Effects                                     Year      State*Year         Year    State*Year                Year      State*Year        Year     State*Year




56
     Observations                                     11741         11741          11741       11741                 10833         10833         10833        10833
     R-squared                                         0.443         0.485          0.073       0.226                0.316         0.367         0.076         0.250
     Mean of Dep. Var.                                 0.658         0.658          0.778       0.778                3.179         3.179         1.687         1.687
        Authors estimates as described in the text using for-profit or public institutions (as indicated). Standard errors clustered by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,***
        indicates significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include CBSA-year controls as described in the text as well as CBSA and year
        fixed effects. State-year fixed effects are included in even columns. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65
        CBSAs that only have a for-profit college in the base year.
Online Appendix



                                                 Online Appendix: Not for Publication
                                         Figure A-1: Demeaned Predicted Labor Demand Trends by For-Profit Supply


                                                                     Below and Above Median Groups
                                   .01
      3yr Bartik shocks (demeaned)
   -.01    -.005     0     .005




                                          2000                        2005                                          2010    2015
                                                                                       Fall year

                                                                                Lower Half         Upper Half



                                                                                 3-Group graphs
                                .01
   3yr Bartik shocks (demeaned)
    -.01 -.005      0
                    -.015.005




                                          2000                        2005                                          2010    2015
                                                                                       Fall year

                                                                 0           Lower Nonzero Half        Upper Nonzero Half




The top panel of this figure plots trends over time in 3-year rolling predicted labor demand changes that are
residual to the CBSA-specific mean for CBSAs that have above and below median 2000 for-profit shares. In
the bottom panel, we plot demeaned 3-year rolling predicted labor demand changes for CBSAs with no
for-profits and for CBSAs with above and below median for-profit shares among those with any for-profit
institutions.




                                                                                      57
                    Figure A-2: Pre-2000 Trends by For-Profit Supply, Below and Above Median

                     Demeaned Labor Demand                                                    Total Students Enrolled                                               Total Undergraduates Enrolled




                                                                           15000




                                                                                                                                                 12000
  .01




                                                                           10000




                                                                                                                                                 8000
  0




                                                                           5000




                                                                                                                                                 4000
  -.01




         1994       1995            1996               1997         1998           1996                   1997                            1998           1996                      1997                            1998
                                   Fall year                                                             Fall year                                                                Fall year

                             Lower Half        Upper Half                                          Lower Half        Upper Half                                             Lower Half        Upper Half



                             Total Graduated                                                  Total Earnings (millions)                                               Students Making >= $25k
  6000




                                                                                                                                                 9000
                                                                           500
  4000




                                                                                                                                                 6000
                                                                           250
  2000




                                                                                                                                                 3000
                                                                           0
         1996                       1997                            1998           1996                   1997                            1998           1996                      1997                            1998
                                   Fall year                                                             Fall year                                                                Fall year

                             Lower Half        Upper Half                                          Lower Half        Upper Half                                             Lower Half        Upper Half



                           Borrowers in Default                                                  Number Employed
                                                                           12000
  90




                                                                           8000
  60
  30




                                                                           4000




         1996                       1997                            1998           1996                   1997                            1998
                                   Fall year                                                             Fall year

                             Lower Half        Upper Half                                          Lower Half        Upper Half




                                  Figure A-3: Pre-2000 Trends by For-Profit Supply, Three Groups

                     Demeaned Labor Demand                                                    Total Students Enrolled                                               Total Undergraduates Enrolled
                                                                           15000




                                                                                                                                                 12000
 .01
 0




                                                                           10000




                                                                                                                                                 8000
 -.01




                                                                           5000




                                                                                                                                                 4000
 -.02




        1994        1995            1996               1997         1998           1996                   1997                            1998           1996                      1997                            1998
                                   Fall year                                                             Fall year                                                                Fall year

                0     Lower Nonzero Half       Upper Nonzero Half                         0   Lower Nonzero Half     Upper Nonzero Half                         0      Lower Nonzero Half     Upper Nonzero Half



                             Total Graduated                                                  Total Earnings (millions)                                               Students Making >= $25k
 6000




                                                                                                                                                 9000
                                                                           500
 4000




                                                                                                                                                 6000
                                                                           250
 2000




                                                                                                                                                 3000
                                                                           0




        1996                        1997                            1998           1996                   1997                            1998           1996                      1997                            1998
                                   Fall year                                                             Fall year                                                                Fall year

                0     Lower Nonzero Half       Upper Nonzero Half                         0   Lower Nonzero Half     Upper Nonzero Half                         0      Lower Nonzero Half     Upper Nonzero Half



                           Borrowers in Default                                                  Number Employed
                                                                           12000
 90




                                                                           8000
 60
 30




                                                                           4000




        1996                        1997                            1998           1996                   1997                            1998
                                   Fall year                                                             Fall year

                0     Lower Nonzero Half       Upper Nonzero Half                         0   Lower Nonzero Half     Upper Nonzero Half




These figures show demeaned (by CBSA) labor demand trends, enrollment, and outcome variables in the
pre-2000 period for all institutions together without splitting into 2-year and 4-year schools. Figure A-2 shows
trends in each variable over time for CBSAs below and above the median in the baseline for-profit supply
distribution. Figure A-3 shows trends in each variable over time for CBSAs in 3 groups: the group with 0
for-profit supply, and below and above median groups in the non-zero baseline for-profit supply distribution.




                                                                                                          58
Figure A-4: Pre-2000 Educational and Labor Market Outcome Trends by Labor Demand, Below
            and Above Median

                 Total Students Enrolled                                  Total Undergraduates Enrolled                               Total Graduated
  15000




                                                           12000




                                                                                                                      6000
  10000




                                                                                                                      4000
                                                           8000
  5000




                                                                                                                      2000
                                                           4000
          1996              1997                    1998           1996                1997                    1998          1996            1997                    1998
                           Fall year                                                  Fall year                                             Fall year

                     Lower Half        Upper Half                               Lower Half        Upper Half                          Lower Half        Upper Half



                 Total Earnings (millions)                                  Students Making >= $25k                                 Borrowers in Default




                                                           9000
  500




                                                                                                                      90
                                                           6000




                                                                                                                      60
  250




                                                           3000




                                                                                                                      30
  0




          1996              1997                    1998           1996                1997                    1998          1996            1997                    1998
                           Fall year                                                  Fall year                                             Fall year

                     Lower Half        Upper Half                               Lower Half        Upper Half                          Lower Half        Upper Half



                   Number Employed
  12000
  8000
  4000




          1996              1997                    1998
                           Fall year

                     Lower Half        Upper Half




Figure A-5: Pre-2000 Educational and Labor Market Outcome Trends by Labor Demand, Below
            and Above Zero

                 Total Students Enrolled                                  Total Undergraduates Enrolled                               Total Graduated
                                                           20000




                                                                                                                      8000
  20000




                                                                                                                      6000
                                                           10000
  10000




                                                                                                                      4000
                                                                                                                      2000
  0




                                                           0




          1996              1997                    1998           1996                1997                    1998          1996            1997                    1998
                           Fall year                                                  Fall year                                             Fall year

                       Negative        Positive                                   Negative        Positive                              Negative        Positive



                 Total Earnings (millions)                                  Students Making >= $25k                                 Borrowers in Default
                                                           15000
  800




                                                                                                                      150
                                                           10000
  600




                                                                                                                      100
  400




                                                           5000




                                                                                                                      50
  200




                                                           0




                                                                                                                      0




          1996              1997                    1998           1996                1997                    1998          1996            1997                    1998
                           Fall year                                                  Fall year                                             Fall year

                       Negative        Positive                                   Negative        Positive                              Negative        Positive



                   Number Employed
  20000
  10000
  0




          1996              1997                    1998
                           Fall year

                       Negative        Positive




These figures show enrollment and outcome variables in the pre-2000 period for all institutions together
without splitting into 2-year and 4-year schools. Figure A-4 shows trends in each variable over time for CBSAs
below and above the median in predicted labor demand as measured in 1998 (η̂1998 ). Figure A-5 shows trends
in each variable over time for CBSAs with negative and positive predicted labor demand in 1998.




                                                                                       59
Figure A-6: Pre-2000 Trends in Educational and Labor Market Outcomes by Labor Demand x
            For-Profit Supply, Below and Above Zero

                 Total Students Enrolled                                  Total Undergraduates Enrolled                                  Total Graduated




                                                           20000




                                                                                                                       10000
  20000




                                                           10000




                                                                                                                       5000
  0




                                                           0




                                                                                                                       0
          1996                1997                  1998           1996                   1997                  1998           1996               1997                  1998
                             Fall year                                                   Fall year                                               Fall year

                  Negative        Zero   Positive                             Negative        Zero   Positive                         Negative        Zero   Positive



                 Total Earnings (millions)                                  Students Making >= $25k                                   Borrowers in Default




                                                           15000
  1000




                                                                                                                       150
                                                           10000




                                                                                                                       100
  500




                                                           5000




                                                                                                                       50
  0




                                                           0




                                                                                                                       0
          1996                1997                  1998           1996                   1997                  1998           1996               1997                  1998
                             Fall year                                                   Fall year                                               Fall year

                  Negative        Zero   Positive                             Negative        Zero   Positive                         Negative        Zero   Positive



                    Number Employed
  20000
  10000
  0




          1996                1997                  1998
                             Fall year

                  Negative        Zero   Positive




The figure shows pre-2000 enrollment and outcome variable trends for all institutions together without
splitting into 2-year and 4-year schools. The trends in each variable over time for CBSAs with negative and
positive labor demand interacted with for-profit supply as measured in 1998 (η̂1998 ∗ Supply) are shown.




                                                                                         60
                                                                                     Table A-1: Summary Statistics (2000-2006 and 2008-2014)

                                                                                                                             2000-2006                                                                                     2008-2014
                                                                                        All      Four-year For-profit   Four-year Public   Two-year For-profit   Two-year Public      All      Four-year For-profit   Four-year Public   Two-year For-profit   Two-year Public
                                                                                        (1)              (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)             (1)              (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)

                   Total Enrollment                                                   6156.197        910.343              9717.594             1004.619            13135.733      7463.464         2745.476             11595.837            1627.857            13931.810
                                                                                      (25897)        (8071.361)           (23082.377)          (4313.047)          (44842.689)      (29950)        (22347.120)          (27822.572)          (6418.006)          (46875.134)
                   Undergraduate Enrollment                                           5537.192         720.216             7530.966             1003.085            13135.007      6745.650          2233.364            9343.824             1627.849            13931.591
                                                                                      (24535)        (5956.145)           (17569.839)          (4308.577)          (44842.646)      (27833)        (17624.769)          (22410.841)          (6417.874)          (46875.151)

                   Number of (Subsidized) Direct Loan Recipients                       357.550           40.773             1102.824             119.410             130.687        1454.541         1017.180             2836.262             696.371             1192.359
                                                                                        (1773)         (505.335)           (3253.345)           (469.959)           (555.953)         (6299)        (9138.064)           (6888.767)          (2976.751)           (3439.840)
                   Number of (Unsubsidized) Direct Loan Recipients                    250.269            32.041              773.510              89.008             80.534         1419.336         1087.316             2890.968             652.515              954.844
                                                                                        (1232)         (415.995)           (2246.066)           (358.409)           (370.152)         (6419)        (9631.312)           (6968.402)          (2778.683)           (2787.825)
                   Number of (Subsidized) FFEL Loan Recipients                         774.679          443.594             1533.651             484.082             600.937        1214.201         1290.081             1853.813             656.079             999.410
                                                                                        (2945)        (3675.595)           (3654.711)          (2091.956)          (1335.456)         (6604)       (11750.588)           (4265.040)          (2598.812)           (2264.546)
                   Number of (Unsubsidized) FFEL Loan Recipients                       579.853          398.865             1097.197             388.634             406.061       1083.867          1253.348             1644.839             598.777             779.881
                                                                                        (2421)        (3470.651)           (2580.916)          (1668.136)           (987.504)         (6273)       (11351.095)           (3732.841)          (2349.925)           (1818.152)
                   Number of Federal Loans                                            2424.719         1201.736             5615.203            1351.328            1362.998        4828.849         4300.237             9085.814            2394.948             3234.379
                                                                                        (8280)        (9166.746)          (11414.531)          (5486.907)          (2886.927)        (20293)       (32689.069)          (19016.569)          (9161.830)           (7495.655)
                   Total Loan Origination (in $1000s )                                9282.513         5193.591            23525.955            4199.072            3346.373       21027.653        19180.003            44878.628            8389.539             9891.863
                                                                                       (36460)       (42359.200)          (51988.762)         (17647.477)          (7305.951)       (95636)        (1.52e+05)           (99038.418)         (32384.014)          (23094.140)

                   Number of Borrowers in Default, 100% completion time                 55.177          52.317               62.430               53.106              52.483
                                                                                         (413)        (758.987)            (134.778)            (231.143)           (112.053)
                   Total students employed 6 years after enrolling                    5305.940         800.374              8942.683             749.428            10804.749
                                                                                       (21530)       (7219.958)           (21009.969)          ( 3043.829)         (36068.290)
                   Number of students graduating in 150% completion time              2193.868         214.026              4916.165             573.442             3008.589      1283.788         123.717               1399.400             907.475            2788.272
                                                                                        (8888)       (1468.518)           (12037.518)          (2474.721)          (12172.253)      (6733)         (2099.620)            (7309.081)          (3668.473)          (10433.717)

                   Mean Earnings for non-enrolled students 6 years after enrolling   26538.172       30594.390             33276.985           20208.066           23551.168
                                                                                      (7235)         (7791.449)            (6123.789)          (5333.664)          (3608.764)
                   Share earning $25k or more 6 years after enrolling                  0.542            0.614                 0.661               0.417               0.493
                                                                                       (0.13)          (0.110)               (0.087)             (0.132)             (0.076)
                   In-State Tuition for full-time undergraduates                     3871.585        10876.063              3145.070            9285.528            1840.209       6273.606        14533.118              5348.690           12331.759            2759.385
                                                                                      (3617)         (2659.258)            (1752.140)          (3433.088)          (1151.746)       (4878)         (3041.327)            (2557.496)          (2995.120)          (1450.312)

                   3-year Labor Demand Shock                                            -1.312          -1.313               -1.313               -1.310              -1.310         -0.908           -0.905               -0.905               -0.912              -0.912
                                                                                         (1.9)         (1.861)              (1.861)              (1.842)             (1.842)          (1.7)          (1.731)              (1.731)              (1.736)             (1.736)
                   Base employment in 1999-2000                                       1.34e+05        1.30e+05             1.30e+05             1.38e+05            1.38e+05       1.45e+05         1.41e+05             1.41e+05             1.49e+05            1.49e+05
                                                                                      (444554)       (4.36e+05)           (4.36e+05)           (4.53e+05)          (4.53e+05)      (474920)        (4.67e+05)           (4.67e+05)           (4.84e+05)          (4.84e+05)
                   % For-Profit schools in 2000                                        14.697           2.599                 2.599              27.832              27.832         14.818             2.529                2.529              28.115              28.115
                                                                                         (25)         (10.351)             (10.351)             (29.119)            (29.119)          (25)           (9.911)              (9.911)             (29.138)            (29.138)




61
                   Observations                                                        21344            5554                 5554                 5118                5118          21304             5532                 5532                 5120                5120



     Means of variables reported in cells with standard deviations in parentheses. All years are indexed by spring of the academic year. Predicted labor demand shocks are constructed using
     equation (1) in the text. Two-digit industry employment data from QCEW are used for computation of predicted labor demand changes. Number of borrowers in default relate to
     imputed freshmen cohorts assuming 100% completion time (four years for 4-year and two years for 2-year institutions). All years are indexed by calendar year in the spring of the
     academic year. Both total and undergraduate enrollment refer to twelve-month enrollment.
                    Table A-2: Summary Statistics: Student Composition (2000-2014)

                                                                             Four-year      Four-year       Two-year    Two-year
                                                                  All        For-profit       Public       For-profit     Public
                                                                  (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)         (5)
 % Undergraduates Black                                         13.490         19.343         10.974          16.457      11.803
                                                               (16.706)       (17.679)       (16.044)       (19.418)     (14.007)
 % Undergraduates Hispanic                                       8.098          8.456          7.172           9.423       7.661
                                                               (14.115)       (11.260)       (13.132)       (16.378)     (13.374)
 % Undergraduates White                                         68.239         51.820         69.623          67.019      71.457
                                                               (22.663)       (23.101)       (20.893)       (25.625)     (19.761)
 % Undergraduates Female                                        65.347         57.047         55.698          83.813      59.816
                                                               (17.204)       (17.219)        (7.460)       (17.143)     (10.084)
 % Undergraduates Over 25                                       31.296         50.109         20.531          29.500      35.692
                                                               (20.408)       (25.874)       (13.567)       (21.564)     (17.742)
 % Undergraduates Receiving Pell grant                          48.013         62.454         34.988          64.438      40.776
                                                               (20.046)       (16.829)       (12.354)       (17.053)     (16.169)
 % Undergraduates Receiving Federal Loans                       46.210         75.793         50.597          61.824      24.094
                                                               (27.394)       (15.370)       (15.424)       (23.943)     (21.201)
 % Undergraduates Sending FAFSA to 1 College                    74.534         80.828         59.156          84.505      76.012
                                                               (13.360)        (9.080)       (10.006)       (10.226)      (8.501)
 % Undergraduates Sending FAFSA to 2 Colleges                   15.930         13.263         20.996          12.620      15.550
                                                                (7.663)        (7.228)        (4.911)        (9.503)      (5.895)
 % Undergraduates Sending FAFSA to 3 Colleges                    4.099          2.379          7.524           1.612       3.999
                                                                (2.890)        (1.604)        (2.343)        (1.476)      (1.852)
 % Undergraduates Sending FAFSA to 4 Colleges                    2.049          1.162          4.403           0.495       1.830
                                                                (1.973)        (1.159)        (2.105)        (0.675)      (1.073)
 % Undergraduates Sending FAFSA to 5 Colleges                    3.390          2.349          7.917           0.741       2.639
                                                                (4.225)        (2.510)        (5.837)        (1.097)      (1.840)
 % Parents with HS Diploma                                      36.661         16.318         33.439          34.213      44.652
                                                               (17.849)       (16.174)       (12.423)       (20.300)     (14.417)
 % Parents with MS                                               4.386          1.993          2.573           4.574       5.895
                                                                (4.120)        (2.435)        (2.477)        (4.664)      (4.142)
 % Parents with College Degree                                  39.978         17.895         56.763          28.500      42.080
                                                               (21.278)       (17.736)       (22.197)       (16.824)     (14.115)
 Average Family Income                                         37420.04      43060.09        59564.69       27826.09    29848.79
                                                              (17741.83)     (1661.96)      (16787.21)     (10059.62)   (9365.87)
 Average SAT score                                             1028.490      1010.418        1036.884        977.352     904.709
                                                               (94.244)      (101.712)       (90.246)       (81.539)     (59.776)
 % Arts degrees                                                 36.157         40.771         60.632           8.339      39.950
                                                               (26.645)       (26.099)       (13.915)       (15.870)     (20.451)
 % STEM degrees                                                 35.202         43.619         31.286          29.996      39.752
                                                               (23.304)       (27.021)       (12.572)       (31.796)     (18.637)
 % Vocational degrees                                           27.572          9.481          7.684          60.083      20.168
                                                               (30.857)       (12.366)        (6.168)       (38.150)     (13.849)
 % Associates Degrees                                           30.425         42.771          9.414          13.758      53.151
                                                               (32.391)       (29.163)       (19.431)       (23.670)     (28.947)
 % Bachelors Degrees                                            27.630         28.153         68.203           0.005       0.001
                                                               (34.403)       (21.751)       (19.470)        (0.189)      (0.025)
 % Certificates                                                 44.126         10.531          1.872          86.237      46.848
                                                               (39.358)       (16.136)        (5.978)       (23.680)     (28.947)
 Observations                                                    47504          11876          11876          11876        11876
Means of variables reported in cells, with standard deviations in parentheses. % tabulations range from 0-100.




                                                               62
                    Table A-3: Summary Statistics: CBSA-level Variables (2000-2014)

                                         Population Count (1000s)              344.531
                                                                             (1093.869)
                                         Percentage Female                      0.506
                                                                               (0.014)
                                         Percentage White                       0.850
                                                                               (0.140)
                                         Percentage Black                       0.100
                                                                               (0.131)
                                         Percentage American Indian             0.015
                                                                               (0.045)
                                         Percentage Asian                       0.019
                                                                               (0.038)
                                         Percentage Two or more races           0.017
                                                                               (0.019)
                                         Percentage Hispanic                    0.092
                                                                               (0.139)
                                         Percentage Age 0-19 years              0.274
                                                                               (0.029)
                                         Percentage Age 20-29 years             0.139
                                                                               (0.037)
                                         Percentage Age 30-39 years             0.126
                                                                               (0.015)
                                         Percentage Age 40+ years               0.460
                                                                               (0.056)
                                         Poverty Rate                           0.146
                                                                               (0.050)

                                         Observations                          47504
Means of variables reported in cells, with standard deviations in parentheses. Percentage and rate tabulations range from 0-1.




                                                               63
Table A-4: OLS Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on the Number and Volume of
           Student Loan Originations and Defaults

                                                                    Panel A: Number of Loans
                                              4-year Schools                                          2-year Schools
                              (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)         (6)             (7)                 (8)
Enroll                     0.528***       0.530***     0.529***      0.530***        0.044***    0.056***        0.043***             0.054***
                            (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)         (0.001)     (0.001)         (0.001)              (0.001)
Enroll*For-profit          0.818***       0.821***     0.817***      0.820***        1.043***    1.097***        1.032***             1.086***
                            (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)         (0.010)     (0.010)         (0.010)              (0.010)
Time Fixed Effects           Year           Year      State*Year State*Year             Year        Year       State*Year            State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No             Yes          No            Yes              No         Yes              No                  Yes
Observations                 23752          23752        23752         23752           21936       21936           21936                21936
                                                              Panel B: Loan Origination Amount ($)
                                              4-year Schools                                          2-year Schools
                              (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)         (6)             (7)                  (8)
Enroll                    2664.60***     2680.00*** 2672.70*** 2688.70***           129.85***   166.81***       124.27***             160.92***
                            (13.96)        (14.03)      (13.90)       (13.95)          (4.18)      (4.29)          (4.21)               (4.32)
Enroll*For-profit         3484.00***     3500.80*** 3475.50*** 3492.20***          3755.00*** 3921.00*** 3715.90***                  3881.30***
                            (20.18)        (20.34)      (20.19)       (20.33)         (31.47)     (31.23)         (31.66)              (31.41)
Time Fixed Effects           Year           Year      State*Year State*Year             Year        Year       State*Year            State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No             Yes          No            Yes              No         Yes              No                  Yes
Observations                 23752          23752        23752         23752           21936       21936           21936                21936
                                                        Panel C: Number of Borrowers in Default (100%)
                                              4-year Schools                                          2-year Schools
                              (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)         (6)             (7)                 (8)
Enroll                     0.004***       0.003***     0.004***      0.003***        0.001***    0.001***        0.001***             0.001***
                            (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)     (0.000)         (0.000)              (0.000)
Enroll*For-profit          0.023***       0.022***     0.024***      0.023***        0.041***    0.043***        0.040***             0.042***
                            (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)     (0.001)         (0.001)              (0.001)
Time Fixed Effects           Year           Year      State*Year State*Year             Year        Year       State*Year            State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No             Yes          No            Yes              No         Yes              No                  Yes
Observations                 15463          15463        15463         15463           14616       14616           14616                14616
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text by OLS using for-profit and public institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month
total enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or
four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and
year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include
state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs
that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                 64
Table A-5: OLS Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on Student Borrowing, by Loan
           Type

                                                      Panel A: Number Recipients: Direct Subsidized Loans
                                                4-year Schools                                    2-year Schools
                                 (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)           (7)                        (8)
Enroll                        0.168***     0.168***    0.168***    0.168***       0.026*** 0.031***       0.025***                    0.030***
                               (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)                     (0.001)
Enroll*For-profit             0.102***     0.107***    0.101***    0.106***       0.277*** 0.300***       0.273***                    0.296***
                               (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.005)    (0.006)      (0.005)                     (0.006)
Time Fixed Effect Type          Year         Year     State*Year State*Year         Year       Year      State*Year                  State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP               No           Yes         No          Yes            No         Yes           No                         Yes
Observations                    23752        23752       23752       23752          21936      21936        21936                       21936
                                                    Panel B: Number Recipients: Direct Unsubsidized Loans
                                                4-year Schools                                    2-year Schools
                                 (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)           (7)                        (8)
Enroll                        0.149***     0.149***    0.149***    0.150***       0.021*** 0.026***       0.021***                    0.025***
                               (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)                     (0.001)
Enroll*For-profit             0.131***     0.136***    0.131***    0.136***       0.270*** 0.291***       0.266***                    0.287***
                               (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.005)    (0.005)      (0.005)                     (0.005)
Time Fixed Effects              Year         Year     State*Year State*Year         Year       Year      State*Year                  State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP               No           Yes         No          Yes            No         Yes           No                         Yes
Observations                    23752        23752       23752       23752          21936      21936        21936                       21936
                                                      Panel C: Number Recipients: FFEL Subsidized Loans
                                                4-year Schools                                    2-year Schools
                                 (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)           (7)                        (8)
Enroll                        0.127***     0.129***    0.127***    0.129***       0.003*** 0.005***       0.003***                    0.004***
                               (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)                     (0.000)
Enroll*For-profit             0.388***     0.386***    0.388***    0.386***       0.264*** 0.275***       0.261***                    0.272***
                               (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.004)    (0.004)      (0.004)                     (0.004)
Time Fixed Effects              Year         Year     State*Year State*Year         Year       Year      State*Year                  State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP               No           Yes         No          Yes            No         Yes           No                         Yes
Observations                    17426        17426       17426       17426          16082      16082        16082                       16082
                                                    Panel D: Number Recipients: FFEL Unsubsidized Loans
                                                4-year Schools                                    2-year Schools
                                 (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)           (7)                        (8)
Enroll                        0.100***     0.102***    0.100***    0.102***         0.000    0.002***       -0.000                    0.002***
                               (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)                     (0.000)
Enroll*For-profit             0.396***     0.395***    0.396***    0.395***       0.227*** 0.239***       0.224***                    0.236***
                               (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.003)                     (0.003)
Time Fixed Effects              Year         Year     State*Year State*Year         Year       Year      State*Year                  State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP               No           Yes         No          Yes            No         Yes           No                         Yes
Observations                    17426        17426       17426       17426          16082      16082        16082                       16082
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text by OLS using for-profit and public institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month
total enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or
four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and
year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include
state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs
that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                 65
Table A-6: OLS Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on Employment, Earnings, and
           Graduation

                                           Panel A: Total Graduated, assuming 150% Completion Time
                                                  4-year Schools                      2-year Schools
                                                (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)
             Enroll                         0.329***        0.328***          0.274***           0.268***
                                             (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.001)             (0.001)
             Enroll*For-profit             -0.246***        -0.250***         0.750***            0.726***
                                             (0.004)          (0.004)          (0.009)             (0.009)
             Time Fixed Effects           State*Year       State*Year       State*Year          State*Year
             State*FP & Year*FP                 No              Yes               No                 Yes
             Observations                     19022            19022            17560               17560
                                                Panel B: Number Employed, 6 years after enrollment
                                                  4-year Schools                      2-year Schools
                                                (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)
             Enroll                         0.908***        0.908***          0.788***           0.791***
                                             (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.001)             (0.001)
             Enroll*For-profit             -0.043***        -0.046***        -0.337***           -0.325***
                                             (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.007)             (0.007)
             Time Fixed Effects           State*Year       State*Year       State*Year          State*Year
             State*FP & Year*FP                 No              Yes               No                 Yes
             Observations                      9516             9516             8774                8774
                                                  Panel C: Total Earnings, 6 years after enrollment
                                                  4-year Schools                      2-year Schools
                                                (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)
             Enroll                       37591.40*** 37485.30***           23900.90***        24042.30***
                                             (66.97)          (66.74)          (47.55)             (50.62)
             Enroll*For-profit                -23.15          -226.55      -11743.30***        -10920.40***
                                            (156.89)         (158.16)         (434.20)            (443.13)
             Time Fixed Effects           State*Year       State*Year       State*Year          State*Year
             State*FP & Year*FP                 No              Yes               No                 Yes
             Observations                      9516             9516             8774                8774
                                          Panel D: Total Students Making $25k, 6 years after enrollment
                                                  4-year Schools                      2-year Schools
                                                (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)
             Enroll                         0.710***        0.708***          0.505***           0.507***
                                             (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.001)             (0.001)
             Enroll*For-profit             -0.024***        -0.027***        -0.229***           -0.212***
                                             (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.009)             (0.009)
             Time Fixed Effects           State*Year       State*Year       State*Year          State*Year
             State*FP & Year*FP                 No              Yes               No                 Yes
             Observations                      9516             9516             8774                8774
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text by OLS using for-profit and public institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month
total enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or
four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and
year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include
state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs
that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                 66
Table A-7: First Stage Enrollment Estimates Using Base Year % For Profit Enrollment as Supply
           Measure

 Panel A: 4 year schools                        2000-2014                       2000-2006                         2008-2014
                                          (1)               (2)           (3)               (4)             (5)               (6)
 (2000 For-profit Supply)*η̂            -139.310        -127.050          9.254           13.594           37.402         40.709*
                                       (207.590)       (188.620)        (88.777)        (83.865)         (25.446)         (23.604)
 (For-profit)*(2000 Supply)*η̂          -121.430        -121.430        -132.560        -132.560       -247.130***      -247.130***
                                       (154.310)       (156.660)       (122.200)       (123.900)         (32.499)         (32.948)
                                         [-0.787]        [-0.775]        [-1.085]        [-1.070]         [-7.604]        [-7.501]
 Time Fixed Effects                        Year       State*Year           Year       State*Year            Year        State*Year
 State*FP & Year*FP                        Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
 Observations                             23178           23178           10876           10876            10952           10952
 R-squared                                0.220            0.230          0.261            0.264           0.219           0.224
 P-value1                                 0.332            0.316          0.225           0.221            0.000           0.000
 Panel B: 2 year schools                        2000-2014                       2000-2006                         2008-2014
                                          (1)               (2)           (3)               (4)             (5)               (6)
 (2000 For-profit Supply)*η̂             7.666            5.542          18.689          16.699            -1.847           -2.783
                                       (10.803)        (10.871)        (12.726)        (12.897)           (6.135)          (6.323)
 (For-profit)*(2000 Supply)*η̂          -18.674         -18.674         -40.425         -40.425            4.139             4.139
                                       (20.811)        (21.157)        (25.552)        (25.940)          (11.667)         (11.842)
                                        [-0.897]        [-0.883]        [-1.582]        [-1.558]          [0.355]          [0.349]
 Time Fixed Effects                       Year        State*Year          Year        State*Year            Year         State*Year
 State*FP & Year*FP                       Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes
 Observations                            21292           21292            9984            9984             10072            10072
 R-squared                               0.203            0.206          0.210            0.211            0.195             0.197
 P-value1                                0.100            0.163           0.121          0.017             0.896             0.824
Authors estimates of equation (4) in the text using for-profit and public institutions. The dependent variable is total 12-month
enrollment aggregated by CBSA, sector (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted
for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: ∗ , ∗∗ , ∗∗∗ indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively. “P-value”
shows the p-value of F-tests for joint significance of instruments. Labor demand shocks are proxied by three-year rolling predicted
changes as described in the text. Two- digit industry employment data from QCEW are used for computation of labor demand
shocks. The supply measure is percentage of enrollment in for-profit institutions at the corresponding level (two-year or four-year)
in the CBSA in 2000 or 2007 (for 2008-14 period). All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls:
base-year (t − 3) employment, gender composition (% female), racial composition (% black, %Hispanic, %American Indian,
%Asian, %Two or more races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty and total population. All regressions
also include CBSA and year fixed effects, while even columns include state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include
two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                  67
            Table A-8: First Stage Enrollment Estimates, Excluding Selective Institutions

Panel A: 4 year schools                        2000-2014                           2000-2006                         2008-2014
                                          (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)               (5)             (6)
(2000 For-profit Supply)*η̂             13.746           26.385             40.973           47.126         87.094***        88.355***
                                       (45.594)        (42.005)           (36.383)         (35.133)          (23.894)         (23.892)
(For-profit)*(2000 Supply)*η̂        -210.380***     -210.380***        -150.010***      -150.010***       -288.110***      -288.110***
                                       (59.056)        (59.939)           (53.245)         (53.970)          (69.179)         (70.129)
                                       [-3.562]         [-3.510]           [-2.817]         [-2.779]          [-4.165]        [-4.108]
Time Fixed Effects                       Year         State*Year             Year         State*Year            Year        State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP                        No               No                 No               No                No              No
Observations                            23482            23482              11044            11044             10954           10954
R-squared                               0.180             0.190              0.232            0.235            0.132            0.137
P-value1                                 0.002            0.002              0.002            0.003            0.000            0.000
Panel B: 4 year schools                        2000-2014                           2000-2006                         2008-2014
                                          (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)               (5)             (6)
(2000 For-profit Supply)*η̂             24.566           37.205             54.694          60.847*         92.066***        93.326***
                                       (42.704)        (41.812)           (33.517)         (32.544)          (20.323)         (21.406)
(For-profit)*(2000 Supply)*η̂        -232.020***     -232.020***        -177.450***      -177.450***       -298.050***      -298.050***
                                       (72.057)        (73.138)           (50.380)         (51.069)          (60.617)         (61.453)
                                       [-3.220]         [-3.172]           [-3.522]         [-3.475]          [-4.917]        [-4.850]
Time Fixed Effects                       Year         State*Year             Year         State*Year            Year        State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP                        Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Observations                            23482            23482              11044            11044             10954           10954
R-squared                               0.230             0.239              0.285            0.287            0.204            0.209
P-value1                                 0.006            0.007              0.000            0.001            0.000            0.000
Authors estimates of equation (4) in the text using for-profit and public institutions, excluding all institutions with a rating of
“Highly Competitive” or higher in the 2001 Barron’s rankings. The dependent variable is total 12-month enrollment aggregated
by CBSA, sector (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA
are in parentheses: ∗ , ∗∗ , ∗∗∗ indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively. “P-value” shows the p-value of
F-tests for joint significance of instruments. Labor demand shocks are proxied by three-year rolling predicted changes as described
in the text. Two- digit industry employment data from QCEW are used for computation of labor demand shocks. The supply
measure is percentage of for-profit institutions at the corresponding level (two-year or four-year) in the CBSA in 2000 or 2007 (for
2008-14 period). All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year employment, gender
composition (% female), racial composition (% black, %Hispanic, %American Indian, %Asian, %Two or more races), age
composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and year fixed
effects, while even columns include state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year
institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                 68
Table A-9: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on the Num-
           ber and Volume of Student Loan Originations and Defaults, Excluding Selective In-
           stitutions

                                                             Panel A: Number of Loans
                                                                   4-year Schools
                                                  (1)            (2)             (3)        (4)
                Enroll                        0.449***       0.501***         0.467**   0.515***
                                                (0.167)        (0.124)         (0.201)    (0.164)
                Enroll*For-profit             1.120***       1.044***        1.214***   1.156***
                                                (0.311)        (0.257)         (0.339)    (0.297)
                Time Fixed Effects               Year           Year        State*Year State*Year
                State*FP & Year*FP                No             Yes             No         Yes
                Observations                     23432          23432           23432      23432
                                                       Panel B: Loan Origination Amount ($)
                                                                   4-year Schools
                                                  (1)            (2)             (3)        (4)
                Enroll                       1531.30***     1906.80***      1626.80*** 1979.70***
                                               (465.52)       (290.02)        (590.00)   (338.95)
                Enroll*For-profit            3591.40***     3045.20***      4083.70*** 3646.00***
                                              (1141.40)      (1008.80)       (1191.00)   (988.24)
                Time Fixed Effects               Year           Year        State*Year State*Year
                State*FP & Year*FP                No             Yes             No         Yes
                Observations                     23432          23432           23432      23432
                                                  Panel C: Number of Borrowers in Default (100%)
                                                                   4-year Schools
                                                  (1)            (2)             (3)        (4)
                Enroll                          0.065*         0.059*          0.057*     0.052*
                                                (0.037)        (0.031)         (0.034)    (0.028)
                Enroll*For-profit             0.108***       0.116***        0.100***   0.105***
                                                (0.039)        (0.042)         (0.038)    (0.041)
                Time Fixed Effects               Year           Year        State*Year State*Year
                State*FP & Year*FP                No             Yes             No         Yes
                Observations                     15326          15326           15326      15326
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions, excluding all institutions with a rating of
“Highly Competitive” or higher in the 2001 Barron’s rankings. The enrollment measure is 12-month total enrollment. Enrollment
and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or four-year). Robust standard
errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level,
respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3) employment, gender
composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more races), age
composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and year fixed
effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include
state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs
that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                69
Table A-10: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on Borrow-
            ing, by Loan Type Excluding Selective Institutions

                                               Panel A: Number Recipients: Direct Subsidized Loans
                                                               4-year Schools
                                                 (1)        (2)            (3)          (4)
                Enroll                       0.352**      0.340**       0.363**       0.347*
                                              (0.162)     (0.157)       (0.183)      (0.177)
                Enroll*For-profit             0.608**     0.625**       0.664**      0.684**
                                              (0.303)     (0.294)       (0.314)      (0.315)
                Time Fixed Effects              Year       Year       State*Year   State*Year
                State*FP & Year*FP               No         Yes            No          Yes
                Observations                   23432       23432         23432        23432
                                             Panel B: Number Recipients: Direct Unsubsidized Loans
                                                               4-year Schools
                                                 (1)        (2)            (3)          (4)
                Enroll                       0.308**      0.305**       0.322**      0.314**
                                              (0.133)     (0.120)       (0.155)      (0.144)
                Enroll*For-profit             0.536**     0.541**       0.606**      0.616**
                                              (0.242)     (0.236)       (0.266)      (0.267)
                Time Fixed Effects              Year       Year       State*Year   State*Year
                State*FP & Year*FP               No         Yes            No          Yes
                Observations                   23432       23432         23432        23432
                                               Panel C: Number Recipients: FFEL Subsidized Loans
                                                               4-year Schools
                                                 (1)        (2)            (3)          (4)
                Enroll                       0.154**     0.163***       0.172**      0.179**
                                              (0.068)     (0.061)       (0.080)      (0.070)
                Enroll*For-profit            0.461***    0.450***      0.487***     0.479***
                                              (0.116)     (0.113)       (0.130)      (0.130)
                Time Fixed Effects              Year       Year       State*Year   State*Year
                State*FP & Year*FP               No         Yes            No          Yes
                Observations                   17256       17256         17256        17256
                                             Panel D: Number Recipients: FFEL Unsubsidized Loans
                                                               4-year Schools
                                                 (1)        (2)            (3)          (4)
                Enroll                       0.099**      0.111**        0.113*      0.123**
                                              (0.050)     (0.044)       (0.058)      (0.050)
                Enroll*For-profit            0.419***    0.405***      0.440***     0.428***
                                              (0.076)     (0.076)       (0.086)      (0.087)
                Time Fixed Effects              Year       Year       State*Year   State*Year
                State*FP & Year*FP               No         Yes            No          Yes
                Observations                   17256       17256         17256        17256
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions, excluding all institutions with a rating of
“Highly Competitive” or higher in the 2001 Barron’s rankings. The enrollment measure is 12-month total enrollment. Enrollment
and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or four-year). Robust standard
errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level,
respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3) employment, gender
composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more races), age
composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and year fixed
effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include
state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs
that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                70
Table A-11: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on Gradua-
            tion, Employment, and Earnings, Excluding Selective Institutions

                                           Panel A: Total Graduated, assuming 150% Completion Time
                                                                   4-year Schools
                                                 (1)                              (2)
          Enroll                             0.368***                         0.363***
                                              (0.082)                          (0.070)
          Enroll*For-profit                    -0.215                           -0.211
                                              (0.215)                          (0.226)
          Time Fixed Effects               State*Year                       State*Year
          State*FP & Year*FP                     No                              Yes
          Observations                         18816                            18816
                                                Panel B: Number Employed, 6 years after enrollment
                                                                   4-year Schools
                                                 (1)                              (2)
          Enroll                             0.858***                         0.873***
                                              (0.029)                          (0.022)
          Enroll*For-profit                  -0.095**                         -0.112**
                                              (0.044)                          (0.048)
          Time Fixed Effects               State*Year                       State*Year
          State*FP & Year*FP                     No                              Yes
          Observations                          9436                             9436
                                                  Panel C: Total Earnings, 6 years after enrollment
                                                                   4-year Schools
                                                 (1)                              (2)
          Enroll                           35379.70***                      36156.00***
                                            (3399.90)                        (2866.50)
          Enroll*For-profit                  -5657.80                         -6486.70
                                            (6402.00)                        (6665.10)
          Time Fixed Effects               State*Year                       State*Year
          State*FP & Year*FP                     No                              Yes
          Observations                          9436                             9436
                                           Panel D: Total Students Making $25k, 6 years after enrollment
                                                                   4-year Schools
                                                 (1)                              (2)
          Enroll                             0.694***                         0.705***
                                              (0.051)                          (0.043)
          Enroll*For-profit                    -0.084                           -0.095
                                              (0.099)                          (0.107)
          Time Fixed Effect Type           State*Year                       State*Year
          State*FP & Year*FP                     No                              Yes
          Observations                          9436                             9436
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions, excluding all institutions with a rating of
“Highly Competitive” or higher in the 2001 Barron’s rankings. The enrollment measure is 12-month total enrollment. Enrollment
and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or four-year). Robust standard
errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level,
respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3) employment, gender
composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more races), age
composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and state-by-year
fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects. Two year estimates include two-year and less
than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                71
Table A-12: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on the Num-
            ber and Volume of Student Loan Originations and Defaults, Including Baseline De-
            gree Composition X Year Controls

                                                                     Panel A: Number of Loans
                                               4-year Schools                                         2-year Schools
                              (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)        (6)           (7)                  (8)
Enroll                     0.441***       0.468***      0.453***       0.477***          0.103      0.124         0.083                0.120
                            (0.138)         (0.112)       (0.157)       (0.138)         (0.119)    (0.147)       (0.197)              (0.300)
Enroll*For-profit          1.016***       0.983***      1.078***       1.056***        1.391**     1.518*         1.276                1.491
                            (0.265)         (0.252)       (0.276)       (0.267)         (0.674)    (0.909)       (1.136)              (1.901)
Time Fixed Effects           Year            Year      State*Year State*Year             Year       Year      State*Year            State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No              Yes           No            Yes             No         Yes           No                   Yes
Observations                 23482           23482         23482         23482           21666      21666         21666                21666
                                                               Panel B: Loan Origination Amount ($)
                                               4-year Schools                                         2-year Schools
                               (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)        (6)           (7)                  (8)
Enroll                    1438.80***     1700.70*** 1502.70*** 1754.20***               617.12     759.67        782.95               1211.30
                            (411.06)       (381.13)      (432.22)      (320.68)        (376.36)   (480.96)      (616.15)             (1279.10)
Enroll*For-profit          2954.20**      2631.70** 3291.30*** 3065.00***            6566.70*** 7609.70** 7552.10**                  10524.90
                           (1175.60)      (1151.90)     (1107.60)     (1050.10)       (2198.60)  (3164.20)     (3720.70)             (8599.30)
Time Fixed Effects            Year           Year      State*Year State*Year             Year       Year      State*Year            State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP             No             Yes           No            Yes             No         Yes           No                   Yes
Observations                 23482           23482         23482         23482           21666      21666         21666                21666
                                                         Panel C: Number of Borrowers in Default (100%)
                                               4-year Schools                                         2-year Schools
                              (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)        (6)           (7)                  (8)
Enroll                      0.066*         0.062**        0.060*        0.055*          0.026*      0.044         0.040                0.201
                            (0.036)         (0.031)       (0.036)       (0.030)         (0.014)    (0.042)       (0.047)              (1.275)
Enroll*For-profit          0.109***       0.114***      0.104***       0.106***        0.211**      0.350         0.311                1.485
                            (0.037)         (0.039)       (0.039)       (0.040)         (0.101)    (0.314)       (0.338)              (9.290)
Time Fixed Effects           Year            Year      State*Year State*Year             Year       Year      State*Year            State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No              Yes           No            Yes             No         Yes           No                   Yes
Observations                 15347           15347         15347         15347           14500      14500         14500                14500
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month total
enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or
four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and
year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include
state-by-year fixed effects. All 2-year estimates include %Certificates Degrees awarded in the baseline year interacted with year
dummies, while all 4-year estimates include %Bachelors Degrees awarded in the baseline year interacted with year dummies. Two
year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that only have a for-profit college
in the base year.




                                                                 72
Table A-13: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on Student
            Borrowing, by Loan Type Including Baseline Degree Composition X Year Controls

                                                  Panel A: Number Recipients: Direct Subsidized Loans
                                             4-year Schools                                   2-year Schools
                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)      (6)         (7)                        (8)
Enroll                      0.343**     0.329**       0.353**     0.338*          0.011   0.006       -0.024                     -0.056
                            (0.154)      (0.158)      (0.177)     (0.182)       (0.121) (0.155)      (0.209)                    (0.371)
Enroll*For-profit           0.613**      0.634**      0.673**     0.696**        0.183    0.139       -0.025                     -0.258
                            (0.276)      (0.275)      (0.282)     (0.290)       (0.714) (0.995)      (1.244)                    (2.409)
Time Fixed Effects           Year         Year      State*Year State*Year         Year     Year    State*Year                 State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No           Yes           No         Yes            No      Yes          No                        Yes
Observations                 23482        23482        23482       23482         21666    21666       21666                      21666
                                                 Panel B: Number Recipients: Direct Unsubsidized Loans
                                             4-year Schools                                   2-year Schools
                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)      (6)         (7)                        (8)
Enroll                      0.297**     0.290**       0.310**    0.301**          0.020   0.020       -0.013                     -0.031
                            (0.122)      (0.116)      (0.144)     (0.141)       (0.106) (0.134)      (0.184)                    (0.316)
Enroll*For-profit           0.519**      0.532**      0.590**     0.608**        0.241    0.233       0.048                      -0.096
                            (0.215)      (0.220)      (0.234)     (0.244)       (0.623) (0.853)      (1.093)                    (2.047)
Time Fixed Effects           Year         Year      State*Year State*Year         Year     Year    State*Year                 State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No           Yes           No         Yes            No      Yes          No                        Yes
Observations                 23482        23482        23482       23482         21666    21666       21666                      21666
                                                  Panel C: Number Recipients: FFEL Subsidized Loans
                                             4-year Schools                                   2-year Schools
                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)      (6)         (7)                        (8)
Enroll                     0.155**      0.165**       0.174**    0.184**         -0.012   -0.012      -0.065                     -0.105
                            (0.069)      (0.065)      (0.084)     (0.078)       (0.031) (0.044)      (0.070)                    (0.163)
Enroll*For-profit          0.457***     0.444***     0.485***    0.476***        0.115    0.103       -0.237                     -0.541
                            (0.117)      (0.111)      (0.135)     (0.132)       (0.196) (0.287)      (0.458)                    (1.134)
Time Fixed Effects           Year         Year      State*Year State*Year         Year     Year    State*Year                 State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No           Yes           No         Yes            No      Yes          No                        Yes
Observations                 17290        17290        17290       17290         15946    15946       15946                      15946
                                                 Panel D: Number Recipients: FFEL Unsubsidized Loans
                                             4-year Schools                                   2-year Schools
                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)      (6)         (7)                        (8)
Enroll                      0.095*      0.106**        0.109*    0.120**          0.007   0.015       -0.023                     -0.032
                            (0.050)      (0.046)      (0.060)     (0.055)       (0.024) (0.034)      (0.044)                    (0.085)
Enroll*For-profit          0.414***     0.401***     0.435***    0.425***        0.241    0.275       0.041                      -0.045
                            (0.074)      (0.072)      (0.085)     (0.085)       (0.149) (0.225)      (0.280)                    (0.575)
Time Fixed Effects           Year         Year      State*Year State*Year         Year     Year    State*Year                 State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No           Yes           No         Yes            No      Yes          No                        Yes
Observations                 17290        17290        17290       17290         15946    15946       15946                      15946
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month total
enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or
four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and
year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include
state-by-year fixed effects. All 2-year estimates include %Certificates Degrees awarded in the baseline year interacted with year
dummies, while all 4-year estimates include %Bachelors Degrees awarded in the baseline year interacted with year dummies. Two
year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that only have a for-profit college
in the base year.




                                                                 73
Table A-14: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on Employ-
            ment, Earnings, and Graduation, Including Baseline Degree Composition X Year
            Controls

                                          Panel A: Total Graduated, assuming 150% Completion Time
                                                 4-year Schools                      2-year Schools
                                               (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)
             Enroll                        0.418***        0.417***             0.164              0.144
                                            (0.112)          (0.106)          (0.119)             (0.161)
             Enroll*For-profit               -0.099           -0.107            0.236               0.034
                                            (0.276)          (0.279)          (0.816)             (1.171)
             Time Fixed Effects          State*Year       State*Year      State*Year           State*Year
             State*FP & Year*FP                No              Yes               No                  Yes
             Observations                    18854            18854            17392               17392
                                               Panel B: Number Employed, 6 years after enrollment
                                                 4-year Schools                      2-year Schools
                                               (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)
             Enroll                        0.858***        0.872***         0.803***            0.803***
                                            (0.030)          (0.024)          (0.096)             (0.102)
             Enroll*For-profit             -0.096**         -0.110**           -0.336              -0.329
                                            (0.046)          (0.048)          (0.753)             (0.809)
             Time Fixed Effects          State*Year       State*Year      State*Year           State*Year
             State*FP & Year*FP                No              Yes               No                  Yes
             Observations                     9452             9452             8710                8710
                                                 Panel C: Total Earnings, 6 years after enrollment
                                                 4-year Schools                      2-year Schools
                                               (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)
             Enroll                      36024.90*** 37247.40***          25876.80***         25965.80***
                                          (3392.30)        (3014.90)        (6390.90)           (6899.90)
             Enroll*For-profit             -4976.50         -6182.40         -9741.60            -7630.60
                                          (6280.90)        (6600.20)       (50441.00)          (55001.50)
             Time Fixed Effects          State*Year       State*Year      State*Year           State*Year
             State*FP & Year*FP                No              Yes               No                  Yes
             Observations                     9452             9452             8710                8710
                                         Panel D: Total Students Making $25k, 6 years after enrollment
                                                 4-year Schools                      2-year Schools
                                               (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)
             Enroll                        0.702***        0.719***         0.620***            0.626***
                                            (0.051)          (0.045)          (0.197)             (0.221)
             Enroll*For-profit               -0.070           -0.086            0.355               0.452
                                            (0.100)          (0.108)          (1.526)             (1.720)
             Time Fixed Effects          State*Year       State*Year      State*Year           State*Year
             State*FP & Year*FP                No              Yes               No                  Yes
             Observations                     9452             9452             8710                8710
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month total
enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or
four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and
state-by-year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects. All 2-year estimates include
%Certificates Degrees awarded in the baseline year interacted with year dummies, while all 4-year estimates include %Bachelors
Degrees awarded in the baseline year interacted with year dummies. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year
institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                74
Table A-15: Instrumental Variables Analysis Estimates of the Impact of For-profit Attendance
            on Outcomes by Percent of Bachelors Degrees Awarded

                                                                   Panel A: Number of Loans
                                      25-50% Bachelors Degrees                                  75% or more Bachelors Degrees
                            (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)               (5)           (6)          (7)             (8)
Enroll                     0.413        0.489         0.399          0.477           0.418***      0.487***     0.432***         0.504***
                          (0.683)      (0.518)       (0.688)        (0.522)           (0.138)       (0.106)      (0.142)          (0.108)
Enroll*For-profit         1.290**     1.216***       1.315**       1.238***          0.781**       0.725**      0.889***         0.825***
                          (0.603)      (0.436)       (0.610)        (0.444)           (0.368)       (0.357)      (0.295)          (0.269)
Time Fixed Effects         Year         Year       State*Year     State*Year           Year          Year      State*Year       State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP          No           Yes           No             Yes               No            Yes          No               Yes
Observations               20642        20642         20642          20642             15418         15418        15418            15418
                                                           Panel B: Loan Origination Amount ($)
                                      25-50% Bachelors Degrees                           75% or more Bachelors Degrees
                            (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)        (6)         (7)                    (8)
Enroll                    3867.20      3639.40       3797.20        3581.60           969.65        1132.20    1166.80**        1381.60**
                         (3145.50)    (2417.70)     (3115.20)      (2392.50)         (913.79)      (1175.60)     (570.19)         (614.38)
Enroll*For-profit         2247.30      2469.20       2368.50        2578.70           -416.79       -550.02      1115.80           925.24
                         (2733.30)    (2035.70)     (2712.90)      (2018.60)        (5591.30)      (5239.70)    (2596.50)        (2400.20)
Time Fixed Effects         Year         Year       State*Year     State*Year           Year          Year      State*Year       State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP          No           Yes           No             Yes               No            Yes           No              Yes
Observations               20642        20642         20642          20642             15418         15418        15418            15418
                                                      Panel C: Number of Borrowers in Default (100%)
                                      25-50% Bachelors Degrees                            75% or more Bachelors Degrees
                            (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)               (5)          (6)         (7)                   (8)
Enroll                     0.065        0.049         0.066          0.048             0.044         0.042        0.034            0.032
                          (0.195)      (0.144)       (0.187)        (0.138)           (0.058)       (0.047)      (0.035)          (0.030)
Enroll*For-profit          0.063        0.077         0.057          0.070             0.145         0.129        0.118            0.108
                          (0.118)      (0.078)       (0.112)        (0.074)           (0.133)       (0.103)      (0.076)          (0.066)
Time Fixed Effects         Year         Year       State*Year     State*Year           Year          Year      State*Year       State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP          No           Yes           No             Yes               No            Yes          No               Yes
Observations               13856        13856         13856          13856             9654          9654         9654             9654
                                                    Panel D: Number Employed, 6 years after enrollment
                                      25-50% Bachelors Degrees                            75% or more Bachelors Degrees
                            (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)              (5)           (6)         (7)                   (8)
Enroll                   1.054***     1.022***      1.060***       1.024***          0.843***      0.852***     0.837***         0.846***
                          (0.234)      (0.157)       (0.226)        (0.151)           (0.039)       (0.033)      (0.045)          (0.037)
Enroll*For-profit          -0.149       -0.119        -0.171         -0.138            -0.184       -0.196*       -0.203          -0.215*
                          (0.331)      (0.257)       (0.295)        (0.223)           (0.113)       (0.103)      (0.126)          (0.118)
Time Fixed Effects          Year         Year      State*Year     State*Year            Year         Year      State*Year       State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP           No          Yes            No            Yes                No           Yes           No              Yes
Observations                8382         8382          8382           8382              6182         6182          6182            6182
This table uses public and for-profit institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month total enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes
are aggregated to geography (here CBSA), institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or four-year). *,**,***:
significant at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively. Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in
parentheses. Labor demand shocks are proxied by three-year or one-year rolling Bartik shocks. Results for one-year Bartik shocks
are not presented in tables, but are qualitavely similar. Two-digit industry employment data from QCEW are used for
computation of Bartik shocks. The supply measure is For-profit Attendance at the corresponding level (two-year or four-year) in
the specific geography at the start of the sample period in 1999-2000. All regressions include the following CBSA level variables as
controls: base-year employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India,
%Asian, %Two or more races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions
also include geography and year or state-year fixed effects.




                                                                 75
Table A-16: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on Out-
            comes, Including Opposite-Level Supply

                                                                       Panel A: Number of Loans
                                                4-year Schools                                           2-year Schools
                             (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)         (6)             (7)             (8)
Enroll                      0.300          0.411*           0.312          0.423           0.121       0.114          0.124            0.115
                           (0.360)         (0.241)        (0.399)        (0.288)         (0.123)     (0.114)         (0.191)          (0.174)
Enroll*For-profit          1.308**       1.148***         1.366**       1.230***        1.351**     1.369**            1.364           1.373
                           (0.550)         (0.386)        (0.545)        (0.414)         (0.554)     (0.584)         (0.899)          (0.926)
Time Fixed Effects          Year             Year       State*Year State*Year              Year        Year       State*Year        State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP           No              Yes             No             Yes             No          Yes             No              Yes
Observations                21666           21666          21666          21666           21666       21666           21666            21666
                                                                 Panel B: Loan Origination Amount ($)
                                                4-year Schools                                           2-year Schools
                             (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)         (6)             (7)              (8)
Enroll                     403.87         1081.40          462.88        1140.20        688.35*     641.45*          944.31            862.62
                          (1531.70)       (847.34)       (1707.90)     (1019.60)        (399.20)    (369.06)        (690.25)          (615.32)
Enroll*For-profit         5101.00**     4132.40*** 5386.10** 4552.40***               6208.00*** 6323.80*** 7476.00**               7558.90**
                          (2405.60)      (1565.40)       (2374.60)     (1610.00)       (1854.00)   (1952.40)       (3393.80)         (3426.60)
Time Fixed Effects          Year             Year       State*Year State*Year              Year        Year       State*Year        State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP           No              Yes             No             Yes             No          Yes             No              Yes
Observations                21666           21666          21666          21666           21666       21666           21666            21666
                                                           Panel C: Number of Borrowers in Default (100%)
                                                4-year Schools                                           2-year Schools
                             (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)         (6)             (7)             (8)
Enroll                     0.088*          0.080*           0.075         0.067*         0.027*      0.026*           0.054            0.051
                           (0.051)         (0.043)        (0.048)        (0.040)         (0.016)     (0.015)         (0.101)          (0.091)
Enroll*For-profit          0.069*         0.080**          0.065*        0.074**        0.195**     0.199**            0.356           0.358
                           (0.040)         (0.035)        (0.034)        (0.032)         (0.096)     (0.098)         (0.606)          (0.593)
Time Fixed Effects          Year             Year       State*Year State*Year              Year        Year       State*Year        State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP           No              Yes             No             Yes             No          Yes             No              Yes
Observations                14158           14158          14158          14158           14500       14500           14500            14500
                                                        Panel D: Number Employed, 6 years after enrollment
                                                4-year Schools                                           2-year Schools
                               (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)         (6)             (7)              (8)
Enroll                     0.822***      0.849***        0.820***       0.848***       0.790***    0.790***        0.827***          0.826***
                            (0.055)        (0.038)        (0.062)        (0.044)         (0.185)     (0.188)         (0.083)          (0.082)
Enroll*For-profit            -0.042         -0.074         -0.043         -0.074          -0.442      -0.429          -0.195           -0.174
                            (0.058)        (0.046)        (0.059)        (0.049)         (1.228)     (1.335)         (0.548)          (0.577)
Time Fixed Effects            Year           Year       State*Year State*Year              Year        Year       State*Year        State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP             No            Yes             No             Yes             No          Yes             No              Yes
Observations                  8710           8710           8710           8710            8710        8710            8710             8710
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month total
enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or
four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and
year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include
state-by-year fixed effects. Four-year estimates include controls for two-year for-profit supply fully interacted with F P and η̂,
while two-year estimates control for four-year for-profit supply fully interacted with F P and η̂. Two year estimates include
two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                 76
Table A-17: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on Out-
            comes, Replacing Total Population with College-age Population + College-age
            Population2

                                                                     Panel A: Number of Loans
                                               4-year Schools                                         2-year     Schools
                              (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)       (6)              (7)            (8)
Enroll                     0.443**       0.496***         0.463**      0.511***           0.104     0.105            0.117          0.119
                            (0.178)        (0.130)        (0.215)        (0.172)        (0.132)   (0.128)           (0.238)        (0.228)
Enroll*For-profit          1.128***       1.052***      1.234***        1.176***        1.385*    1.374*             1.465          1.460
                            (0.298)        (0.245)        (0.328)        (0.284)        (0.764)   (0.789)           (1.398)        (1.426)
Time Fixed Effects           Year           Year       State*Year State*Year              Year      Year          State*Year     State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No             Yes             No            Yes             No        Yes              No             Yes
Observations                 23482          23482          23482          23482          21666     21666             21666          21666
                                                               Panel B: Loan Origination Amount ($)
                                               4-year Schools                                         2-year     Schools
                              (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)       (6)               (7)            (8)
Enroll                   1422.20***     1837.20*** 1542.20** 1927.50***                 691.51    684.08            1063.30        1036.30
                           (522.01)       (310.33)       (677.46)       (376.33)       (453.87)  (435.80)           (891.36)       (841.24)
Enroll*For-profit        3483.00***     2886.60*** 4106.90*** 3636.00***              6977.60** 7021.80**          9185.20*       9256.90*
                          (1054.80)       (979.41)      (1116.40)       (898.59)      (2715.90) (2833.40)          (5415.70)      (5548.40)
Time Fixed Effects           Year           Year       State*Year State*Year              Year      Year          State*Year     State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No             Yes             No            Yes             No        Yes               No            Yes
Observations                23482           23482          23482          23482          21666     21666             21666          21666
                                                        Panel C: Number of Borrowers in Default (100%)
                                               4-year Schools                                         2-year     Schools
                              (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)       (6)              (7)            (8)
Enroll                       0.110          0.097          0.105          0.091         0.020**   0.020**            0.023         0.023*
                            (0.096)        (0.080)        (0.101)        (0.080)        (0.009)   (0.008)           (0.014)        (0.014)
Enroll*For-profit            0.167          0.180          0.166          0.174        0.173***  0.173***           0.195*         0.195*
                            (0.108)        (0.118)        (0.124)        (0.127)        (0.063)   (0.063)           (0.103)        (0.103)
Time Fixed Effects           Year           Year       State*Year State*Year              Year      Year          State*Year     State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No             Yes             No            Yes             No        Yes              No             Yes
Observations                 15347          15347          15347          15347          14500     14500             14500          14500
                                                      Panel D: Number Employed, 6 years after enrollment
                                               4-year Schools                                         2-year     Schools
                              (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)       (6)               (7)           (8)
Enroll                    0.849***       0.866***       0.848***       0.866***        0.815***  0.815***          0.846***       0.846***
                           (0.027)         (0.020)        (0.030)        (0.023)        (0.130)   (0.130)           (0.068)        (0.068)
Enroll*For-profit         -0.113***      -0.134***       -0.116**      -0.136***         -0.244    -0.239            -0.004         0.001
                           (0.043)         (0.045)        (0.047)        (0.050)        (1.021)   (1.025)           (0.520)        (0.519)
Time Fixed Effects           Year           Year       State*Year State*Year              Year      Year          State*Year     State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No             Yes             No            Yes             No        Yes               No            Yes
Observations                 9452            9452           9452           9452           8710      8710              8710          8710
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions. The enrollment measure is 12-month total
enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or
four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, college-age population, and college-age population squared. All
regressions also include CBSA and year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while
columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year
institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                77
Table A-18: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of For-profit Attendance on Out-
            comes, Fixing Institution Types in the Base Year

                                                                     Panel A: Number of Loans
                                                4-year Schools                                        2-year      Schools
                              (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)       (6)                (7)            (8)
Enroll                     0.450***       0.495***        0.461***      0.503***         -0.304    -0.288             -0.224         -0.210
                            (0.164)         (0.115)        (0.176)        (0.128)       (0.647)   (0.622)            (0.507)        (0.483)
Enroll*For-profit          0.997***        0.954***       1.043***       1.003***        -0.935    -0.968             -0.478         -0.495
                            (0.239)         (0.220)        (0.255)        (0.232)       (3.760)   (3.801)            (2.958)        (2.963)
Time Fixed Effects           Year            Year       State*Year State*Year             Year      Year           State*Year     State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No              Yes             No            Yes            No       Yes                 No            Yes
Observations                 23482           23482          23482          23482         21666     21666              21666          21666
                                                               Panel B: Loan Origination Amount ($)
                                                4-year Schools                                        2-year      Schools
                               (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)       (6)                (7)           (8)
Enroll                    1397.60***     1834.00*** 1476.30*** 1883.60***               -281.01   -257.69              8.90          23.10
                            (498.39)       (412.31)       (503.70)       (332.80)     (1468.90) (1413.40)           (1028.20)       (983.46)
Enroll*For-profit          2760.00**      2351.10** 3083.20*** 2694.90***              1489.60   1440.00             3137.10        3120.30
                           (1185.50)      (1139.70)      (1048.60)       (956.01)     (8376.40) (8481.90)           (5847.80)      (5884.10)
Time Fixed Effects            Year           Year       State*Year State*Year             Year      Year           State*Year     State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP             No             Yes             No            Yes            No       Yes                 No            Yes
Observations                 23482           23482          23482          23482         21666     21666              21666          21666
                                                         Panel C: Number of Borrowers in Default (100%)
                                                4-year Schools                                        2-year      Schools
                              (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)       (6)               (7)            (8)
Enroll                      0.046*          0.042*         0.036*         0.033*          0.010    0.010              0.007          0.007
                            (0.027)         (0.023)        (0.020)        (0.017)       (0.007)   (0.007)            (0.006)        (0.006)
Enroll*For-profit          0.083***        0.090***       0.077***       0.079***      0.090**   0.090**             0.072*         0.072*
                            (0.024)         (0.031)        (0.021)        (0.025)       (0.043)   (0.043)            (0.040)        (0.040)
Time Fixed Effects           Year            Year       State*Year State*Year             Year      Year           State*Year     State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP            No              Yes             No            Yes            No       Yes                No             Yes
Observations                 14997           14997          14997          14997         14500     14500              14500          14500
                                                       Panel D: Number Employed, 6 years after enrollment
                                                4-year Schools                                        2-year      Schools
                               (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)       (6)                (7)            (8)
Enroll                     0.867***       0.882***        0.869***      0.884***       0.735*** 0.735***            0.780***       0.780***
                            (0.029)         (0.020)        (0.030)        (0.022)       (0.259)   (0.259)            (0.190)        (0.190)
Enroll*For-profit          -0.101***      -0.118***      -0.097***      -0.113***        -0.806    -0.804             -0.477         -0.474
                            (0.032)         (0.033)        (0.035)        (0.038)       (1.889)   (1.888)            (1.399)        (1.400)
Time Fixed Effects            Year           Year       State*Year State*Year             Year      Year           State*Year     State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP             No             Yes             No            Yes            No       Yes                 No            Yes
Observations                  9452            9452           9452           9452          8710      8710               8710           8710
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions, classifying the 5% of schools that switch
from two-year to four-year during the period of our analysis as two-year schools. The enrollment measure is 12-month total
enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA, institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or
four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3)
employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition (%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more
races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over), %poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and
year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include
state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs
that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                 78
Table A-19: Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Impact of For-profit Attendance on Out-
            comes, Excluding Online Institutions

                                                                         Panel A: Number of Loans
                                                4-year  Schools                                           2-year Schools
                                (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)         (6)             (7)                 (8)
Enroll                       0.467***      0.518***       0.511***       0.568***           0.064       0.067          0.012                0.019
                              (0.150)       (0.120)        (0.172)         (0.137)        (0.127)     (0.122)         (0.231)              (0.218)
Enroll*For-profit            1.482***      1.358***       1.658***       1.565***           1.147      1.130            0.841               0.824
                              (0.452)       (0.402)        (0.452)         (0.409)        (0.724)     (0.744)         (1.351)              (1.367)
Time Fixed Effect Type         Year          Year       State*Year State*Year               Year        Year       State*Year            State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP              No            Yes             No             Yes             No          Yes             No                  Yes
Observations                   23482         23482          23482           23482          21666       21666           21666                21666
                                                                   Panel B: Loan Origination Amount ($)
                                                 4-year Schools                                           2-year Schools
                                 (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)         (6)             (7)                  (8)
Enroll                        1243.80     1560.50**       1524.00*     1870.70***         509.94      508.40          593.62                587.79
                              (774.05)     (679.42)       (780.48)        (612.70)       (377.97)    (363.75)        (600.59)              (571.58)
Enroll*For-profit             3885.10       3127.50      4985.90**      4416.60**      5898.20*** 5905.80***        6396.00*              6410.40*
                             (2609.30)    (2447.30)      (2272.00)       (2062.30)      (2168.60)   (2243.30)       (3546.70)             (3623.20)
Time Fixed Effect Type          Year          Year      State*Year State*Year               Year        Year       State*Year            State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP               No           Yes             No             Yes             No          Yes             No                  Yes
Observations                   23482         23482          23482           23482          21666       21666           21666                21666
                                                             Panel C: Number of Borrowers in Default (100%)
                                                 4-year Schools                                           2-year Schools
                                (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)         (6)             (7)                 (8)
Enroll                        0.034*        0.032*           0.032          0.030           0.026       0.026          0.043                0.043
                              (0.019)       (0.019)        (0.022)         (0.020)        (0.016)     (0.016)         (0.064)              (0.063)
Enroll*For-profit             0.102**       0.104**        0.098*          0.098*         0.214*      0.214*            0.336               0.336
                              (0.050)       (0.051)        (0.055)         (0.055)        (0.116)     (0.117)         (0.462)              (0.463)
Time Fixed Effect Type         Year           Year      State*Year State*Year               Year        Year       State*Year            State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP              No            Yes             No             Yes             No          Yes             No                  Yes
Observations                   15347         15347          15347           15347          14500       14500           14500                14500
                                                          Panel D: Number Employed, 6 years after enrollment
                                                 4-year Schools                                           2-year Schools
                                 (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)         (6)             (7)                  (8)
Enroll                       0.820***      0.835***       0.816***       0.832***           0.605       0.603       0.800***              0.800***
                              (0.066)       (0.058)        (0.079)         (0.069)        (1.099)     (1.120)         (0.099)              (0.099)
Enroll*For-profit              -0.247        -0.270         -0.258          -0.278         -1.872      -1.897          -0.359               -0.356
                              (0.152)       (0.169)        (0.186)         (0.198)        (8.442)     (8.664)         (0.778)              (0.783)
Time Fixed Effect Type          Year          Year      State*Year State*Year               Year        Year       State*Year            State*Year
State*FP & Year*FP               No           Yes             No             Yes             No          Yes             No                  Yes
Observations                    9452          9452           9452            9452           8710        8710            8710                 8710
Authors estimates of equation (5) in the text using for-profit and public institutions, excluding institutions classified as online at
the start of the sample period in 1999-2000. Online institutions as defined in the 2011-2014 IPEDS are excluded from the
estimating sample. The enrollment measure is 12-month total enrollment. Enrollment and outcomes are aggregated by CBSA,
institution-type (public or for-profit) and level (two-year or four-year). Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by CBSA
are in parentheses: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include the
following CBSA-year level variables as controls: base-year (t − 3) employment, gender composition (%female), racial composition
(%black, %Hispanic, %American India, %Asian, %Two or more races), age composition (%20-29, %30-39, %40 or over),
%poverty, and total population. All regressions also include CBSA and year fixed effects. Even columns include state-for profit
and year-for profit fixed effects, while columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include state-by-year fixed effects. Two year estimates include
two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that only have a for-profit college in the base year.




                                                                  79
     Table A-20: Effects of Labor Demand Changes and For-Profit Supply on Entry/Exit of Postsecondary Institutions, by
                 Sector and Period

     Panel A: 2000-2006                                                 4 year schools                                                   2 year schools
                                                             For-Profit                  Public                             For-Profit                   Public
                                                         (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)                     (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)
     Predicted Labor Demand Change (η̂)                -0.006       0.001          0.003       0.001                  -0.011        0.016         -0.003      -0.011*
                                                      (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.002)     (0.003)                 (0.009)      (0.016)        (0.005)      (0.006)
     (2000 Supply)*(η̂)                                0.003         0.002        -0.000      -0.000                   0.000        0.000         -0.000      -0.001*
                                                      (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.001)     (0.001)                 (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.000)      (0.000)
     Fixed Effects                                      Year     State*Year        Year    State*Year                  Year     State*Year         Year     State*Year
     Observations                                       5522         5522          5522        5522                    5086         5086           5086         5086
     R-squared                                         0.215        0.271          0.025       0.101                  0.066         0.143          0.041        0.259
     Mean of Dep. Var.                                  0.438       0.438         0.746        0.746                   2.899        2.899          1.751        1.751
     Panel B: 2008-2014                                                 4 year schools                                                2 year schools
                                                             For-Profit                  Public                            For-Profit                    Public
                                                         (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)                    (5)            (6)           (7)          (8)
     Predicted Labor Demand Change (η̂)                 0.003       0.002         -0.000       0.003               0.022***         0.014          0.005       0.007*
                                                      (0.004)      (0.005)       (0.002)     (0.002)                (0.007)       (0.010)        (0.003)      (0.004)
     (2000 Supply)*(η̂)                                -0.002       -0.002        -0.000       0.000               -0.001***     -0.001***         0.000        0.000
                                                      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)                (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)
     Fixed Effects                                      Year     State*Year        Year    State*Year                 Year      State*Year         Year     State*Year




80
     Observations                                       5477         5477          5477        5477                   5065          5065           5065         5065
     R-squared                                         0.502        0.537          0.048       0.197                 0.344          0.390          0.050        0.203
     Mean of Dep. Var.                                  0.882       0.882         0.807        0.807                 3.456          3.456          1.609        1.609
      Authors estimates as described in the text using for-profit or public institutions (as indicated). Standard errors clustered by CBSA are in parentheses: *,**,***
     indicates significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include CBSA-year controls as described in the text as well as CBSA and year fixed
     effects. State-year fixed effects are included in even columns. Two year estimates include two-year and less than two year institutions and exclude the 65 CBSAs that
     only have a for-profit college in the base year.
                             Table A-21: Data Ranges and Cohorts for Outcomes

 Outcome Variables                                                                                      Data Ranges      Cohorts
                                                                                                            (1)            (2)
 Number of Recipients: Direct Subsidized loans                                                           2000-2014      2000-2014
 Number of Recipients: Direct Unsubsidized loans                                                         2000-2014      2000-2014
 Number of Recipients: FFEL Subsidized loans                                                             2000-2014      2000-2014
 Number of Recipients: FFEL Unsubsidized loans                                                           2000-2014      2000-2014
 Number of Federal Loans                                                                                 2000-2014      2000-2014
 Loan Origination Amounts                                                                                2000-2014      2000-2014
 Number of Borrowers in Default, assuming 100% completion                 time   (2   year   schools)    2002-2011      2000-2009
 Number of Borrowers in Default, assuming 100% completion                 time   (4   year   schools)    2004-2011      2000-2007
 Number of Borrowers in Default, assuming 150% completion                 time   (2   year   schools)    2003-2011      2000-2008
 Number of Borrowers in Default, assuming 150% completion                 time   (4   year   schools)    2006-2011      2000-2005
 Number Employed, 6 years after enrollment                                                               2005-2011      2001-2006
 Total Earnings, 6 years after enrollment                                                                2005-2011      2001-2006
 Number of Students Making $25k, 6 years after enrollment                                                2005-2011      2001-2006
 Number of Students Graduated, assuming 150 % completion                  time (2 year schools)          2002-2013      2000-2011
 Number of Students Graduated, assuming 150 % completion                  time (4 year schools)          2005-2013      2000-2008
Years are reported in terms of the spring semester of academic years. Data for number of borrowers in default come in fiscal years.




                                                                81
