NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEBT, INFORMATION, AND ILLIQUIDITY
Efraim Benmelech
Nittai Bergman
Working Paper 25054
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25054

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

We thank Yakov Amihud and Bengt Holmstrom for numerous conversations. We also thank Jack
Bao, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, Douglas Diamond, Marty Eichanbaum, Paul Gao, Gary Gorton, Joel
Hasbrouck, Christopher Hennessy, Charlie Himmelberg, Ryan Israelsen, Ralph Koijen, Arvind Krishnamurthy,
Gregor Matvos, Toby Moskowitz, Jun Pan, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Adriano Rampini, Sergio Rebelo,
Alexi Savov, Stephen Schaefer, Adi Sunderam, Jeremy Stein, Steve Strongin, S. Viswanathan, Avi
Whol, Brian Weller, and seminar participants at AQR, Baruch College, Boston College, Brigham Young
University, Catolica Lisbon School of Business and Economics, Duke University, The Federal Reserve
Board of Governors, Goldman Sachs Global Markets Institute Academic Fellowship Conference, The
Hebrew University in Jerusalem, Kellogg School of Management, London Business School, London
School of Economics, Michigan State University, NBER Summer Institute: Macro, Money and Financial
Frictions, Notre Dame (Mendoza), NYU Stern, Stanford Conference in Honor of Bengt Holmstrom,
Tel Aviv University, University of Amsterdam, University of Miami, University of Texas at Austin,
University of Texas Dallas, and University of Washington. We are grateful to Jack Bao and Kewei
Hou for sharing their bond liquidity data. Yupeng Wang provided excellent research assistance. We
thank the Goldman Sachs Global Markets Institute for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Efraim Benmelech and Nittai Bergman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Debt, Information, and Illiquidity
Efraim Benmelech and Nittai Bergman
NBER Working Paper No. 25054
September 2018
JEL No. E44,E51,G01,G12,G14,G32
ABSTRACT
We analyze the empirical determinants of liquidity in debt markets in light of predictions
stemming from debt-based information theories. We conduct a battery of tests confirming
predictions of asymmetric information models of bond liquidity, including those that predict
a``hockey-stick" relation between bond liquidity and underlying fundamental value. When debt is
deep in the money, it becomes informationally insensitive and more liquid. In contrast, when firm
value deteriorates towards the left tail, the value of debt becomes informationally sensitive and
less liquid. We alleviate endogeneity concerns using exogenous variation in firm value that is
plausibly not driven by bond liquidity. Our results shed new empirical light on the determination
of liquidity in debt markets.

Efraim Benmelech
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Nittai Bergman
Coller School of Management
and Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv-Yafo
Israel
nbergman@tauex.tau.ac.il

Introduction
What determines liquidity in debt markets? Going back to seminal work by Akerlof (1970) and
Spence (1973), a large theoretical literature emphasizes the role that information asymmetries
play in determining liquidity in asset markets. If information asymmetries regarding asset
payo↵s are sufficiently severe, adverse selection will inhibit trade between buyers and sellers.
Beyond information asymmetries, other theories and frameworks have been proposed in
understanding the determinants of liquidity in asset markets. These include limited risk
bearing capacity among intermediaries, market maker inventory risk, search-based models,
and models of heterogeneous beliefs.1
A more recent theoretical literature applies insights from information economics to the
question of liquidity in debt markets. Prominent examples include Dang et al. (2012, 2013)
and Holmström (2015), which analyze how the information sensitivity of debt and the varying
nature of this sensitivity a↵ect liquidity and liquidity dry-ups in debt markets. In this
paper, we empirically analyze the determinants of liquidity in debt markets in light of these
debt-based information theories.
Before describing the empirical analysis, it is useful to review the intuition behind Dang
et al. (2012).2 The main idea is that the well-known “hockey-stick” functional form of debt
payo↵s is key in understanding debt liquidity.3 Because of this functional form, when debt is
deep in the money – that is, when the distribution of underlying firm value is concentrated
in the right tail, where the probability of default is low – debt becomes informationally
insensitive. Regardless of the realization of underlying firm value, the market value of debt
will be very close to its face value. Thus, even if parties may enjoy an informational advantage
regarding underlying firm value, when debt is relatively deep in the money, this informational
advantage will not translate into asymmetric information regarding debt value. Liquidity in
this informationally insensitive region is predicted to be high.
Consider, then, what happens when firm value deteriorates toward the left tail, with a
distribution that is centered closer to the “kink” of the hockey-stick-shaped payo↵ (that
is, below which the firm defaults on maturity). In this region of payo↵s, the value of debt
becomes very sensitive to private information since below the default threshold debt payo↵s
move one for one with firm value. Trading parties therefore have strong incentives to develop
and acquire information about underlying debt value. Information asymmetries will be
relatively high in this informationally sensitive region. As debt values deteriorate and enter
1

See, e.g., Stoll (1978), Grossman and Miller (1988), Varian (1989), Harris and Raviv (1993), Brunnermeier
and Pedersen (2006), Garleanu and Pedersen (2007), Weill (2007), and He and Milbradt (2014).
2
Holmström (2015) provides a nontechnical description of Dang et al. (2012).
3
This shape is, of course, determined by the put option the debtor owns.

1

the informationally sensitive region, liquidity will thus fall.4 Liquidity is thus endogenously
a↵ected by variation in underlying asset values.5
Testing the mechanisms behind asymmetric-information theories of debt liquidity is
difficult. For example, simply showing that bond liquidity declines as bond values deteriorate
– in essence, regressing measures of bond liquidity on bond prices or credit spreads – su↵ers
from a severe reverse causality endogeneity concern. Rather than deteriorations in bond value
endogenously causing declines in liquidity, it could be that bond prices are deteriorating in
response to exogenous changes in bond liquidity. Indeed, in analyzing the pricing implications
of bond illiquidity a large literature regresses credit spreads on measures of liquidity – that
is,. the exact opposite regression to that described above.6
In this paper we analyze the determinants of debt liquidity along two avenues. First, we
test a series of predictions derived from the asymmetric-information theory of bond liquidity
in Dang et al. (2012). These tests, in essence, present a series of empirical time-series
and cross-sectional correlations in the data relating bond liquidity to observable bond and
firm level characteristics. While in and of themselves, these empirical tests cannot rule out
endogeneity concerns, taken together, they provide support to the single, parsimonious theory
from which they are derived. In the second part of the paper, we alleviate endogeneity
concerns using an instrumental variables (IV) approach (described below) to lend support for
a causal relation between declines in bond values and diminished bond liquidity.
Our empirical analysis employs TRACE data on nonfinancial corporate bonds between
July 2002 and December 2012, we employ three commonly used measures of bond liquidity:
the

measure based on Bao et al. (2011), the Amihud measure, and the Imputed Roundtrip

Trades (IRT ) measure (Feldhütter 2012).7 We begin the analysis by confirming in our data
that bond illiquidity rises as bond price declines. This well-known result is a basic prediction
of the asymmetric information theory of bond illiquidity, and indeed of essentially all other
theories of liquidity.8 The economic e↵ect is significant; a standard deviation fall in bond
price, for example, is associated with increased illiquidity that ranges between 56.9 percent
4

Myers and Majluf (1984) employ a distinction of a similar flavor in their Pecking Order Theory of capital
structure in which debt is shown to be less informationally sensitive than equity.
5
He and Milbradt (2014) provide a search-based model together with optimal firm default dynamics in
which liquidity and default risk are endogenously determined. In their model, riskier bonds are more illiquid.
Importantly, though, this result is driven by an exogenous assumption that bonds in default are illiquid – an
assumption that can be justified using asymmetric-information primitives or, alternatively, an assumption
regarding institutional di↵erences regarding the market for defaulted bonds.
6
See e.g., Chen et al. (2007), and Bao et al. (2011).
7
All three measure il liquidity – that is, rises in the measure are associated with greater illiquidity.
8
For studies showing a negative relation between bond illiquidity and credit spreads, see, e.g., Chen et
al. (2007), Covitz and Downing (2007), Bao et al. (2011), de Jong and Driessen (2012), Dick-Nielsen et al.
(2012).

2

and 78.9 percent of the unconditional mean of . The negative relation is robust to the
inclusion of industry, issuing firm, and bond fixed e↵ects, as well as year-by-month fixed
e↵ects, with the latter implying that the negative relation between price and illiquidity is not
solely due to the fall in bond prices and concurrent rise in illiquidity that occurred during
the 2008-9 financial crisis.
We proceed by testing a series of predictions stemming from the asymmetric-information
theory of bond liquidity in Dang et al. (2012). First, we consider a more refined prediction
of the theory – namely, that the hockey-stick relation in bond payo↵s implies a nonlinear
hockey-stick relation between bond illiquidity and bond price. This prediction is confirmed
in the data: the negative relation between illiquidity and bond price exhibited in our baseline
results is indeed highly nonlinear, exhibiting a hockey stick structure. In the lower deciles of
bond price, illiquidity rises rapidly. We also confirm this hockey stick relation using credit
ratings as well as Merton’s Distance-to-default measure instead of bond prices.
Second, we show that when we control for current credit rating, bonds with a higher
credit rating at issuance are more illiquid – consistent with a prediction of the asymmetricinformation theory of bond liquidity based on Hanson and Sunderam (2013). According to this,
bonds issued at a high rating do not develop a robust information-gathering infrastructure
since market participants have little incentive to create one. As a consequence, when
highly rated bonds become risky and enter the informationally sensitive region, the lack of
information-gathering infrastructure increases adverse selection problems, thereby reducing
liquidity. In contrast, bonds issued with a relatively low credit rating enjoy developed
information-gathering environments, which diminish adverse selection and hence increase
liquidity. Our results provide strong support for the Hanson and Sunderam (2013) hypothesis:
when we hold constant the current credit rating of a bond, those bonds that declined from
higher credit ratings exhibit lower liquidity. For example, bonds that deteriorate from a AA
credit rating to a BB rating are less liquid than bonds that are issued at and remain with a
BB rating.
Third, we show that, consistent with an asymmetric-information model, firms that are
covered by more equity analysts have more liquid bonds and that the sensitivity of bond
illiquidity to bond price is decreasing in the number of analysts covering the firm. As a fourth
prediction, we examine how underlying collateral a↵ects bond liquidity. Since collateral makes
debt safer, expanding the range of the informationally insensitive region, theory predicts that
secured bonds will be more liquid. This is precisely what the data show.
The fifth prediction we examine pertains to the e↵ect of shifts in bond maturity on
liquidity. The asymmetric-information theory of bond liquidity predicts that the regime

3

shift from the information-sensitive region to the information-insensitive region will be more
pronounced in bonds with shorter maturity. In-the-money short-maturity bonds are extremely
safe (indeed, are almost like money) and hence are predicted to be extremely liquid. As bond
value deteriorates, the debt becomes informationally sensitive and illiquidity rises rapidly.
In contrast, in longer-maturity bonds this rise in illiquidity will be less pronounced since
in-the-money long maturity bonds are riskier than their short-term equivalents and hence are
less liquid. When the sample is segmented based on bond maturity, the data confirm this
prediction. Bond illiquidity is more sensitive to reductions in bond price in shorter-maturity
bonds. Further, the hockey-stick relation between illiquidity and bond price is far more
pronounced in short-maturity bonds, precisely as predicted.
Sixth, we analyze the e↵ect of changes in underlying equity volatility. The asymmetricinformation theory of bond liquidity predicts that the sensitivity of bond illiquidity to bond
price will be greater for bonds issued by more volatile firms. Using measures of implied equity
volatility calculated from OptionMetrics, we confirm this result: the hockey-stick relation
between bond illiquidity and bond price is substantially more pronounced in bonds of high(implied) volatility firms.
In the second part of the paper, we use an instrumental variables (IV) approach to test a
causal relation between declines in bond values and diminished bond liquidity. To be valid,
an instrument must shift bond values without directly a↵ecting bond liquidity.9 We use three
instruments that plausibly satisfy this requirement: the cumulative return in the stock of
the firm issuing the bond since the first date the bond is traded in our data, the cumulative
return of the equal-weighted portfolio of all stocks in the issuing firm’s industry since the
first date the bond trades, and an instrument measuring large price changes in the equity
of the firm issuing the bond. Instrumenting for bond prices using all three instruments –
e↵ectively, movements in related equity returns – confirms the baseline finding that declines
in bond price bring about increases in bond illiquidity. We confirm this result with a fourth
instrumental variable – oil price movements – showing that oil price declines are associated
with increases in illiquidity of bonds issued by oil and gas firms.
While the evidence presented herein supports the asymmetric-information theory of bond
liquidity, there are clearly additional determinants a↵ecting bond market liquidity. These
include intermediary balance sheet strength, risk bearing capacity, and institutional di↵erences
across markets.10 Still, our empirical analysis shows how informational asymmetries and
9

Somewhat less formally, what is required are variables that shift firm (and hence bond) value, due to a
fundamental change in firm cash flow.
10
As one example, asymmetric information theories would find it difficult to explain di↵erences in liquidity
and credit spreads between on- and o↵-the run Treasuries (as in, e.g., Amihud and Mendelson, 1991) or
between Treasuries and Refcorp Bonds (as in Longsta↵, 2014).

4

changes in the degrees of bond safety have an economically meaningful e↵ect in explaining
liquidity in a manner consistent with the predictions of Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2012).
In addition, in robustness tests we show that our results continue to hold when focusing solely
on investment grade bonds and when excluding the time-period of the 2008-09 financial crisis.
The results due not appear, therefore, to be driven by institutional constraints precluding
certain market participants from holding non-investment grade bonds or by weak intermediary
balance sheets during a financial crisis.
Our paper relates to the ideas behind the literature on the money premium associated with safe assets (see, e.g., Stein 2012; Gorton and Metrick 2012; Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen 2012; and Gorton 2016). Due to their high liquidity and extremely safe
nature, highly safe assets provide moneylike services, which are valued by household and
institutional investors alike. The literature shows empirically that investors are willing to
pay a substantial money premium for highly safe assets, particularly those with short-term
maturities.11 Underlying reasons for this money premium include, but are not limited to,
costs incurred by households in understanding investments in risky assets (Vissing-Jorgensen,
2003; Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen 2012), the use of safe assets as collateral in
financial transactions (Gorton 2010), and the use of Treasuries to back checkable deposits by
commercial banks and money market funds (Bansal and Coleman 1996). While US government liabilities are clear examples of safe assets that provide security of nominal repayment,
the safe asset literature argues that certain relatively safe and liquid debt instruments issued
by the private sector can substitute in part for public debt in providing moneylike services.12
As in the safe assets literature, we focus on the relation among liquidity, asset safety, and
bond prices. However, while the safe assets literature seeks to explain how safety and high
liquidity a↵ect bond yields, we focus on the opposite direction of causality: namely, how
do variation in bond values and the degree of bond safety a↵ect bond liquidity?13 We seek,
therefore, to explain the determinants of bond liquidity rather than the pricing implications
of this liquidity. Our empirical tests rely on predictions from the theory of adverse selection of
Dang et al., which relates the relative safety of a bond to its degree of information sensitivity
and hence its liquidity. We empirically examine the relation among liquidity, safety, and bond
11

For example, Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) estimate a convenience premium on Treasuries
of 73 bps. Greenwood et al. (2015) estimate a money premium of approximately 60 bps for one-week T-bills.
12
Indeed, much of this literature focuses on the incentive of private actors, particularly in the financial
sector, to capture the money premium by issuing relatively safe, short-term liabilities (see, e.g., Stein 2012;
Greenwood et al. 2015; Carlson et al. 2016; and Sunderam 2016). Stein (2012) analyzes how such issuance
may induce negative externalities with adverse a↵ects on financial sector stability.
13
Put di↵erently and somewhat informally: whereas the literature on the money premium places bond
prices on the lefthand side of the regression analysis, relating it to the supply of liquid, highly safe assets (see,
e.g., Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen 2012 and Greenwood et al. 2015), our analysis places liquidity on
the left-hand side of the regression, relating it to plausible variation in the degree of bond safety.

5

values on a varying spectrum of the degree of bond riskiness, ranging from highly safe AAA
bonds to bonds with very low credit ratings. Perhaps the closest paper to ours is Friewald et
al. (2016) who develop and test a market-microstructure model of seniority and liquidity and
show that more senior tranches of Asset-Backed Securities are indeed more liquid.
In addition, our paper is related to the large literature on the asset-pricing implications
of liquidity, starting with Amihud and Mendelson (1986) and continuing with such studies
as Aiyagari and Gertler (1991), Heaton and Lucas (1996), Vayanos and Vila (1999), Pastor
and Stambaugh (2003), Acharya and Pedersen (2005), Sadka (2006), and Rocheteau (2010).
This literature analyzes theoretically the premium that investors will pay for assets of greater
liquidity and shows empirically that asset liquidity is indeed priced, with a sizable e↵ect
of liquidity on expected returns. Like the case of the safe assets literature, these studies
focus on the pricing implications of liquidity rather than on the empirical determinants of
liquidity, the focus of our study. One notable exception is Goldstein et al. (2007), who use
the introduction of TRACE as a natural experiment to study the e↵ects of transparency
on liquidity in the corporate bond market. Similarly, Hameed et al. (2010) use a model of
capital constraints and show that negative market and firm returns decrease stock liquidity.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 presents the data sources and
explains the construction of the variables used in the analysis. Section 2 explores the relation
between bond prices and liquidity. Section 3 presents the analysis of the cross-sectional
relation among bond characteristics, informational sensitivity, and liquidity. Section 4 presents
the instrumental variables analysis. Section 5 concludes.

1
1.1

Data Sources and Variable Definitions
Construction of illiquidity measures

We use bond-pricing data from the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority’s TRACE
(Transaction Reporting and Compliance Engine).14 Our initial sample includes all corporate
bonds traded in TRACE. Following Bao et al. (2011), we keep bonds with a time-to-maturity
of at least six months and standard coupon intervals (including zero-coupon bonds). We
exclude bonds that are issued by financial firms, as well as convertible, putable, and fixed-price
callable bonds.
14

The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) is a self-regulatory organization that is responsible
for the collection and reporting of over-the-counter corporate bond trades.

6

We construct three measures of illiquidity. Our first measure, , has been proposed by Bao
et al. (2011), and is defined as the negative covariance of log-price changes in two consecutive
periods:
=

Cov( pt , pt 1 ).

(1)

Our second measure of illiquidity has been been suggested by Amihud (2002). The Amihud
measure captures the e↵ect of trading volume on return and is constructed by first calculating
a daily average price impact measure:
N1
1 X
|ri |
,
Nt i=1 V olumei

(2)

where Nt is the number of trades in a day, ri is the return of trade i, and V olumei is the
face value of trade i in millions of dollars. Next, we calculate a monthly Amihud measure by
taking the median daily measure within a month.
Our third measure of illiquidity, the Implied Round-Trip Cost (IRT ), is calculated by first
identifying all trades in a particular bond with identical trading volumes within a trading
date. Next, we calculate the scaled di↵erence between the highest and lowest prices of these
trades:
Pmax Pmin
,
Pmax

(3)

where Pmax and Pmin are the highest and lowest prices paid for these same-volume transactions.
We calculate a monthly IRT measure by calculating the mean daily measure within a month.

1.2

Summary statistics

We supplement the data from TRACE with bond characteristics from Thomson Reuter’s
SDC Platinum and Mergent FISD. Next, we augment the data using firm characteristics
from Compustat, stock and industry returns from the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP), and measures of implied volatility from OptionMetrics. Our sample period in most
of our empirical tests begins with the introduction of TRACE in July 2002 and extends
through December 2012.
Table 1 reports summary statistics for our liquidity measures as well as for such bond
characteristics as price, time to maturity, yield spread, Moody’s rating, and amount of the
outstanding face value. As the table shows, the mean bond price is 104, with an interquartile
range of 99.06-109.2 and a standard deviation of 11.82. Bonds have an average of 8.7 years
7

to maturity and an average spread that ranges from a 25th percentile of 0.897% to a 75th
percentile of 2.58%, with a median of 1.51%. The mean current Moody’s rating is Baa1, and
the mean amount of bond outstanding is $367.4 million.
Table 1 also presents summary statistics for our three measures of illiquidity. The mean
illiquidity measure

is 1.533, and its interquartile range is between 0.136 (more liquid)

and 1.460 (less liquid). The construction of the

measure results in 178,971 bond-month

observations from 2002 to 2012. The mean Amihud measure is 0.0119 and ranges from a 25th
percentile of 0.00159 to a 75th percentile of 0.0131, and is available for 245,633 bond-month
observations. Our third measure, IRT , is available for 248,920 bond-month observations,
with a mean of 0.00256 and a standard deviation of 0.00353.
Figure 1 displays the behavior of the three illiquidity measures over time. We calculate
the cross-sectional mean of each measure in every month and plot the time-series of the
cross-sectional means from 2002 to 2012. As the three panels of Figure 1 demonstrate,
illiquidity is high in 2002 but falls during the later months of 2002 and reaches its lowest
level (high liquidity) during 2005 and 2006. The three panels also illustrate the dramatic
increase in illiquidity during the financial crisis of 2008-9.15
To further gauge the behavior of aggregate bond illiquidity over time, Table 2 reports
summary statistics for each of the three measures of illiquidity for three subperiods: 2002-6,
2007-9, and 2010-12. As Panel A shows, the median

measure was 0.549, with an interquartile

range of 0.147-1.692, while the Amihud and IRT means in 2002-6 were 0.0110 and 0.00257,
respectively. Panel B of Table 2 shows that, consistent with Figure 1, illiquidity increased
considerably between 2007 and 2009. For example, the mean

measure in 2007-9 is 2.270 -

representing an increase of 30.5 percent relative to 2002-6. Similarly, the Amihud measure
increases by 23.6 percent and the IRT measure is 8.9 percent higher. The increase in
illiquidity in 2008-9 is much higher if we exclude the year 2002, which is characterized by high
illiquidity, from the earlier period. Illiquidity is down in 2010-12 – the

measure declines by

64.1 percent from 2007-9 to 2010-12, while the Amihud and IRT measures decline by 14.7
percent and 15.7 percent, respectively.

2

Bond Prices and Liquidity

According to Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2012), shifts in underlying firm value impact
liquidity in debt markets. As underlying value deteriorates, debt shifts from being informationally insensitive to informationally sensitive as asymmetric information between market
15

For an in-depth analysis of credit markets’ illiquidity during financial crises, see Benmelech and Bergman
(2018).

8

participants and adverse selection problems rise. Declines in bond prices thus lead to rises in
bond illiquidity.16
Testing this mechanism is an extremely difficult endeavor. Simply regressing bond
illiquidity on bond prices raises a fundamental reverse causality concern. Rather than declines
in bond values causing illiquidity to rise, it could be that bond prices are declining due to an
expected subsequent reduction in bond liquidity. Another concern is omitted variables – that
is, factors correlated with both with bond illiquidity and bond prices.
We proceed, therefore, along two avenues. The first is to test a series of predictions
stemming directly from the asymmetric-information theory of bond liquidity in Dang et al.
(2012). Although the tests, in and of themselves, cannot rule out the endogeneity concerns
above, taken together they lend support to the single, parsimonious theory from which
they are derived.17 In doing so, we emphasize that the evidence presented in support of
the asymmetric-information theory of bond liquidity clearly does not rule out additional
mechanisms a↵ecting bond liquidity.
Our second avenue of research, presented below, is to alleviate endogeneity concerns using
an instrumental variables (IV) approach. To be valid, an instrument must shift bond values
without directly a↵ecting bond liquidity.18 We use three instruments that plausibly satisfy
this requirement: (1) the cumulative return in the stock of the firm issuing the bond since
the first date the bond is traded in TRACE; (2) the cumulative return of the equal-weighted
portfolio of all stocks in the issuing firm’s industry since the first date that the bond trades;
and (3) an instrument measuring large price changes in the equity of the firm issuing the
bond. Instrumenting for bond prices using all three approaches – e↵ectively, movements
in related equity returns – verifies our baseline finding: declines in bond price bring about
increases in bond illiquidity. We confirm this result using a fourth instrumental variable – oil
price movements – showing that oil price declines are associated with increases in illiquidity
of bonds issued by oil and gas companies.
We begin our analysis by testing a series of predictions on the relation between bond
liquidity and bond price derived from the asymmetric-information theory of bond liquidity.
16

Information regarding underlying firm value is clearly also produced in equity markets as well. An
implicit assumption, then, in asymmetric information theories of debt liquidity is that some form of market
segmentation exists between equity and debt markets in that information between participants in the two
markets does not flow seamlessly. Such segmentation can arise due to organizational constraints or constraints
in the ability and willingness of participants in debt markets, such as insurance companies and pension funds,
to analyze information on ‘informationally-sensitive’ assets.
17
Alternatively, the results presented in this section present empirical evidence with which alternative
theories should be consistent
18
Somewhat less formally, what is required are variables that shift firm (and hence bond) value, due to a
fundamental change in firm cash flow.

9

2.1

Baseline results

To document the empirical relation between bond illiquidity and prices, we estimate
variants of the following baseline specification:19
Illiquidityi,t = ↵ +

1

⇥ P ricei,t

1

where Illiquidity is one of our three measures:
bond (i) and month (t), P ricei,t

1

+

2

⇥ Xi,t

1

+

t

+ ✓i + ✏i,t ,

(4)

, Amihud, and IRT , subscripts indicate

is bond price or the yield spread over a maturity-matched

Treasury lagged by one month, Xi is a vector of bond characteristics that include the issue
size and time since issuance,

t

is a vector of either year or year-by-month fixed e↵ects, ✓i

is a vector of cross-sectional fixed e↵ects – industry (three-digit SIC), firm, or bond fixed
e↵ects – and ✏i,t is the regression residual. We report the results from estimating variants
of regression 4 in Table 3. Tables throughout this paper report regression coefficients and
standard errors clustered at the bond level (in parentheses).
Table 3 reports the coefficients from estimating regression 4 using the

measure of

illiquidity as the dependent variable. The main explanatory variable in the first six columns
is the bond yield spread, and in Columns 7-12 it is price. As can be seen, the table confirms
a well-known result in the literature on liquidity: bond illiquidity is negatively related to
bond price (and positively related to bond yields).
Column 1, based on regression 4 and estimated with year and industry fixed e↵ects, shows
a positive association between illiquidity and yield spread. We obtain very similar results
when we include year-by-month – instead of just year fixed e↵ects – and industry fixed e↵ects
(Column 2). The year-by-month fixed e↵ects imply that this relation is not driven simply by
variation in risk-free rates over time, or variation in any other component of credit spreads
common to all bonds in a given year-month. Similarly, these year-by-month fixed e↵ects
also imply that the relation presented here, as well as those described below, are not driven
simply by the rise in illiquidity during the 2008-9 financial crisis.
Next, Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 show that the results hold whether we include both
firm and year fixed e↵ects (Column 3) or firm and year-by-month fixed e↵ects (Column 4).
Finally, in Columns 5 and 6 we control for time-invariant bond fixed e↵ects – e↵ectively
identifying o↵ of within-bond time-series variation in addition to year fixed e↵ects (Column
5) and year-by-month fixed e↵ects (Column 6). The positive association between

and yield

spread remains positive and significant at the 1 percent level when we control for bond fixed
e↵ects.
19

As our left-hand side measures are positively correlated with bond il liquidity, we refer throughout the
paper to bond illiquidity rather than bond liquidity.

10

The economic e↵ect of the yield spread on

is sizable: a one standard deviation increase is

associated with increased illiquidity between 56.9 percent and 78.9 percent of ’s unconditional
mean. Moving from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile results in increased illiquidity
that is between 15.5 percent and 21.5 percent of the unconditional mean.20
In Columns 7-12 of Table 3 we use bond price as our variable of interest in explaining
. Column 7 is estimated with year and industry fixed e↵ects. As can be seen, there is a
negative correlation between illiquidity and bond price, implying that bonds with lower prices
have a high

measure of illiquidity. As in the first six columns, we obtain similar results

when we include: year-by-month – instead of just year – and industry fixed e↵ects (Column
8); both firm and year fixed e↵ects (Column 9); firm and year-by-month fixed e↵ects (Column
10); bond and year fixed e↵ects (Column 11); and bond as well as year-by-month fixed e↵ects
(Column 12). Turning to the economic e↵ect of bond prices on , moving from the 25th
percentile to the 75th percentile results in increased illiquidity that is between 54.2 percent
and 83.4 percent of the unconditional mean of . We obtain similar results when we use the
Amihud measure of illiquidity as the dependent variable and report the results in Table 4.
In unreported results we repeat the analysis in Tables 3 and 4 using the IRT measure of
illiquidity and find similar values.

2.2

Robustness Tests

Controlling for Volatility
One concern with the results presented in Tables 3 and 4 is that our findings are driven
by volatility. For example, Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) predict that market liquidity
declines as volatility increases, especially when capital markets are distressed. Similarly, Stoll
(1978), Grossman and Miller (1988), and Vayanos (2004) show that volatility and liquidity
are linked. Table 5 presents a correlation matrix between our three measures of illiquidity and
two measures of volatility: (1) implied equity volatility – which we extract from the volatility
surface files in OptionMetrics – calculated from option prices on the traded stock of the issuer
of each bond; and (2) bond volatility defined as the standard deviation of daily bond returns
in a given month.21 As Table 5 illustrates, implied volatility is positively correlated with our
three measures of illiquidity with a Pearson correlation coefficient that ranges from 0.157 to
0.293 (all statistically significant at the 1 percent level). While our measure of bond volatility
20

The distribution of the yield spread is highly skewed, and hence the e↵ect of one standard deviation is
considerably higher than the e↵ect of an interquartile range change.
21
We use at-the-money call and put options’ implied volatilities with a delta of 0.5 and an expiration of 30
days.

11

is also correlated with the three measures of illiquidity – its correlations with the measures
are much smaller, ranging from 0.015 to 0.026.
We reestimate regression 4 adding the two measures of volatility as explanatory variables
and report the results in Table 6. As Table 6 illustrates, implied volatility is positively
correlated with bond illiquidity – while bond volatility is not significantly related to illiquidity.
The mean implied volatility in our sample is 0.305, and a one standard deviation increase in
implied volatility results in increased illiquidity of 13.3 percent relative to the unconditional
mean when we include year and firm fixed e↵ects (Column 3). Importantly, the negative
correlation between bond price and illiquidity remains significant while the magnitude of the
e↵ect of bond price on illiquidity is slightly lower – for example, with both firm and year fixed
e↵ects the coefficient changes from -0.093 to -0.081. In summary, our findings are robust to
the inclusion of implied volatility and bond volatility and are unlikely driven by an omitted
variable related to volatility.
Bond Illiquidity and the 2008-09 Financial Crisis
Another concern with our results is that they are driven by the financial crisis period
of 2008-09. According to this, sharp bond price declines during the crisis may have forced
institutional investors to sell o↵ portions of their bond portfolios, thereby resulting in bond
market illiquidity. We address this concern in the remaining columns of Table 6. Column 7 of
Table 6 presents results from reestimating regression 4 for the non-crisis years – i.e., we run the
regression pooling together the 2002-07 and 2010-12 periods but excluding the 2008-09 period.
As the table shows, the negative relation between

and lagged price remains negative and

significant at the one percent level. The magnitude of the e↵ect of bond price on illiquidity
is lower in non-crisis years – for example, with both bond and year-by-month fixed e↵ects
the coefficient changes from -0.112 to -0.077. Indeed, when we estimate regression 4 solely
for the 2008-09 crisis period, the coefficient on

jumps to -0.172. This increased sensitivity

between illiquidity and bond price during the financial crisis is very much consistent with
additional factors such as intermediary balance sheet strength, risk bearing capacity, and
institutional constraints increasing in importance during the crisis. Nevertheless, as Table 6
demonstrates, the results continue to hold outside of the financial crisis as well.
Institutional Investors and Investment Grade Rating
An additional concern is that our results are driven by various market participants that
are legally required to hold investment-grade bonds in their portfolios. Declines in bond prices,
together with associated downgrades across the investment-grade threshold, may lead to
12

bond illiquidity. We address this concern directly in the last two columns of Table 6 in which
we estimate regression 4 separately for investment grade (Column 9) and non-investment
grade bonds (Column 10). As can be seen, the negative relation between lagged price and
illiquidity holds in both investment grade and non-investment grade bonds.22

3

The Asymmetric Information Theory of Bond Liquidity: Reduced Form Evidence

Having established the baseline result of a negative relation between bond illiquidity and
bond price, we present a series of empirical tests pertaining to predictions stemming from
the asymmetric-information theory of bond liquidity of Dang et al. (2012).

3.1

Liquidity and bond prices: A “hockey-stick” relation

Beyond the negative relation between bond illiquidity and bond price, an important prediction
of the informational theory of bond liquidity is that this relation exhibits a nonlinear hockeystick-like shape. Moving from high to low bond prices increases illiquidity, but the e↵ect should
be larger at lower bond prices. Indeed, at low bond prices, payo↵s are concentrated within
the “informationally sensitive” region of the concave payo↵ structure of bonds, implying high
uncertainty and adverse-selection frictions that are predicted to increase bond illiquidity. In
contrast, declines in bond values in the informationally insensitive region should be associated
with relatively small increases in bond illiquidity.
To test the prediction of a nonlinear e↵ect, we regress our measures of bond illiquidity
on indicator variables for the 10 deciles of bond price. Specifically, we run the following
regression:

Illiquidityi,t =

0

+

10
X
k=1

k

⇥ P riceDecileki,t

1

+ bi + ct + ✏i,t ,

(5)

where Illiquidity is one of three measures of bond illiquidity, , Amihud, or IRT , for bond i
in month t. PriceDecile is a set of 10 indicator variables based on the (within-year) deciles of
bond price – P riceDecileki,t

1

equals one if bond i is in price decile k at month t

22

1.23 bi is a

We use the standard definition of investment grade which includes a bond rating of BBB- and above.
Our results hold when we define investment grade as BBB+ and higher, or A- and higher.
23
Price decile 1 represents bonds with the lowest price.

13

vector of bond fixed e↵ects, and ct is a vector of either year or year-by-month fixed e↵ects.24
Standard errors are clustered at the bond level. The results are reported in Table 7.
Similar to the results documented in Tables 3 and 4, we find a negative relation between
price and illiquidity across all three measures of bond liquidity. Importantly, the coefficients
on the 10 price decile variables present a nonlinear relation between bond prices and illiquidity.
Focusing on Column 2, which employs

as the dependent variable along with year-by-month

fixed e↵ects, we see that a rise from price decile 1 (the lowest decile in the regression) to
price decile 2 reduces

by 1.289 units (as compared to a sample mean of 1.533). In contrast,

moving from price decile 9 to price decile 10 reduces

measure by only 0.079 (=2.455-2.376).

As Table 7 demonstrates, the results using the other two measures of bond liquidity are
similar (Columns 3-6).
Figure 2 provides a graphical representation of the nonlinear relation between price and
illiquidity. To create the figure, we rerun regression 5 relating

to bond price, but use

indicator variables based o↵ of 20 equal-sized price bins rather than 10 equal-sized bins (that
is, deciles).25 As in equation 5, the regression is estimated with bond and year-by-month
fixed e↵ects. Figure 2 then plots the coefficients on the resulting price bins. The predicted
nonlinear, hockey-stick relation between illiquidity and price is readily observable, with the
lower five price bins exhibiting the highest increases in bond illiquidity.

3.2

Liquidity and Distance to Default

Figure 3 provides an additional representation of the nonlinear hockey-stick behavior
of bond illiquidity, using Merton’s Distance-to-default – a structural measure for default
risk based on the Merton model – as the left-hand side variable measuring the degree of
bond distress. We construct the Distance-to-default measure following Campbell, Hilscher et
al.(2008), Bao, Chen, Hou, and Lu (2015), and Bao and Hou (2017).26 Figure 3 is constructed
in a manner similar to Figure 2, but bond price is replaced by Distance-to-default. That
is, we run a variant of regression ]5 using 20 indicator variables based o↵ of 20 equal-sized
bins of Distance-to-default. As in equation 5, the regression is estimated with bond and
year-by-month fixed e↵ects. Figure 3 plots the coefficients on the resulting Distance-to-default
bins. As in Figure 2, the predicted nonlinear, hockey-stick relation between illiquidity and
24

Note that with the inclusion of bond fixed e↵ects, the regression is identified o↵ of changes over time in
the level of illiquidity and bond price for each bond.
25
20 bins are used solely to obtain a finer picture of the nonlinear relation. Results are similar using deciles.
26
Distance-to-default incorporates information on both the value of firm assets compared to debt obligations
and the volatility of assets.

14

distance-to-default is readily observable in Figure 3 as. In this case, bonds in the two lowest
Distance-to-default bins exhibit large increases in bond illiquidity.

3.3

Liquidity and credit ratings

Analyzing the relation between bond illiquidity and credit ratings is another way to view
the nonlinear behavior of liquidity within the bond market. To analyze this relation we
group credit ratings into seven categories, with Category 1 encompassing Moody’s credit
ratings between Aaa and Aa3 (inclusive), Category 2 encompassing ratings between A1 and
A3, and so on.27 We then regress the

measure of bond illiquidity on indicator variables

defined using the seven rating categories. Regressions include industry, firm, or bond fixed
e↵ects, as well as year or year-by-month fixed e↵ects. The results are shown in Table 8.
Consistent with higher uncertainty regarding underlying value, bond illiquidity decreases
with credit rating. Importantly, similar to the results above, the relation exhibits a strong
nonlinear e↵ect, with illiquidity rising substantially in Categories 6 and 7. Figure 4 provides
a graphical representation of the relation between bond rating and illiquidity, depicting the
average illiquidity for each Moody’s ratings category.28
Next, we examine a prediction of the asymmetric-information theory of bond liquidity
based on Hanson and Sunderam (2013). According to their model, market incentives to build
an “information production infrastructure” when analyzing relatively safe debt securities
will be weak because market participants will are likely obtain only a small informational
advantage in trading such assets. As a consequence, when the default risk of highly rated
bonds rises, the informational infrastructure meant to reduce asymmetric information is
lacking, and further, because this infrastructure takes time to develop, trading in such debt
instruments will su↵er from adverse selection. In contrast, bonds issued with a low rating
will enjoy a more developed information-gathering environment from the outset. Thus, based
on Hanson and Sunderam (2013), a natural prediction of the information-asymmetry theory
of bond liquidity is that, holding constant the current credit rating of a bond, those issued at
a higher credit rating should be less liquid.
To test the prediction, we mark each bond’s S&P credit rating at any point in time.29 We
then regress our illiquidity measures on the change in credit rating from the bond’s previous
rating to its current rating while controlling for current credit rating. We use the entire rating
distribution for this test and assign a value of 1 to a rating of AAA, 2 to AA+, 3 to AA, and
27

Category 3 includes ratings between Baa1 and Baa3, Category 4 between Ba1 and Ba3, Category 5
between B1 and B3, Category 6 between Caa1 and Caa3, and Category 7 ratings Ca and C.
28
The figure is plotted by calculating sample means of the measure for each rating category.
29
We obtain the initial credit rating for each bond by matching TRACE data to SDC Platinum data.

15

so forth to the lowest rating category of D, which is assigned a value of 22. Specifically, we
run the following regression:

Illiquidityi,t =
+

0+
7
X
k=1

where

⇣⇥
k

Ratingi,t

1

+ T ime elapsedi,t

⇥ Rating Category ki,t

1

1

+

Ratingi,t

1

⇥ T ime elapsedi,t

+ bi + ct + ✏i,t ,

(6)

Rating is the bond-level di↵erence between the previous credit rating and the current

(lagged t 1) credit rating:
A positive

Credit Ratingi,t

1

= Credit Ratingi,t

1

Credit Ratingi,previous .

Rating implies that the bond has been downgraded in its last rating action. The

regressions are run with current rating, bond, and year-by-month fixed e↵ects.
The results are shown in Table 9. As seen in Column 1, the coefficient on the change in
credit rating is positive and significant. As predicted, controlling for current rating, if the drop
from the previous rating to the current rating is larger, the bond is more illiquid. Consistent
with incentives for“information production infrastructure” in Hanson and Sunderam (2013),
the trajectory of bond ratings is related to bond illiquidity, above and beyond the current
rating. One concern with the results presented in Table 9 is that rating agencies may tend to
smooth rating changes over time, leading to a “rating momentum” phenomenon in which a
recent downgrade contains information on future expected downgrades (Lando and Skødeberg
2002). Such a momentum e↵ect would imply that our results may be driven by expected
future deterioration in credit quality rather than by information production. To alleviate
the concern about rating momentum, we add lagged bond price to our regression. To the
extent that rating agencies exhibit rating momentum bond market prices should reflect and
adjust to such information. As Column 2 of Table 9 shows, after controlling for bond prices,
the coefficient of

Credit Ratingi,t

1

is still statistically significant at the 1 percent level,

although its magnitude reduces from 0.237 to 0.106. Nevertheless, the economic magnitude
of

Credit Ratingi,t

1

is still sizable – holding constant current credit rating, a downgrade

of three notches increases illiquidity by 0.318, representing an increase of 20.7 percent relative
to the unconditional illiquidity mean. Column 3 adds the two measures of volatility used
in Table 6, in addition to the bond price, and the coefficient of

Credit Ratingi,t

1

remains

significant.
In Columns 4-6 we add to the change in bond credit rating,

Credit Rating, the time

(in months) that elapsed since the previous rating, as well as the interaction between
Credit Rating and the time that elapsed since the rating change. We hypothesize that
as time elapses, an informational infrastructure for downgraded bonds will be created, and
16

1

thus illiquidity should decrease over time. As Columns 4-6 of Table 9 demonstrate, we find
that the coefficient on the interaction term

is negative, suggesting that, controlling for the

current credit rating, the e↵ect of a downgrade on illiquidity does indeed decay over time.

3.4

Liquidity and Analyst Coverage

We next turn to test the relation between informational infrastructure and bond illiquidity
more directly using data on analyst coverage. We use the number of equity analysts covering
the firm issuing the bond as a proxy for the degree of asymmetric information among bond
market participants.30 In particular, we hypothesize that when there are more equity analysts,
more public information will be produced on the underlying firm value supporting the bond,
which implies in turn that the bond should become more liquid. Implicit in the hypothesis
relating analyst equity coverage to information asymmetries in bond markets are one of the
following two assumptions: (1) equity and bond markets are not completely segmented in that
at least some information produced by equity-analysts flows between the two markets; or (2)
the degree of analyst equity coverage is positively correlated with the degree of information
produced by participants in bond markets.31
Using analyst coverage as a proxy for information asymmetries, we test two predictions of
the asymmetric-information theory of bond illiquidity. The first is simply that bond illiquidity
should be negatively associated with analyst coverage. The second, more nuanced prediction
is that decreases in the sensitivity of bond illiquidity to bond price should be decreasing in
the number of analysts covering the firm. With greater analyst coverage, bonds entering the
informationally sensitive region of debt should have a smaller impact on bond illiquidity, as
analysts’ information production reduces market information asymmetries.
To test these two predictions, we regress the Gamma measure of bond illiquidity on
indicator variables defined from five (equal-sized) quintiles of analysts’ coverage as well as
their interactions with lagged price:

Illiquidityi,t = ↵0 + ↵1 ⇥ P ricei,t
+

5
X
s=1

1

+

5
X
k=1

k

⇥ Analysts Coverageki,t

⇣s ⇥ Analysts Coverageki,t ⇥ P ricei,t

30

1

+ bi ⇠ + ct + ✏i,t ,

(7)

The number of analysts is obtained from I/B/E/S.
Of course, we maintain the plausible assumption required in asymmetric-information theories of debt
that information flows between debt and equity markets are not perfect: participants in debt markets cannot
fully benefit from all information produced in equity markets.
31

17

where Illiquidity is the

measure of bond illiquidity for bond i in month t, P ricei,t

1

is

the one-month lagged bond price, and Analysts Coverage is a set of five indicator variables
constructed from equal-sized quintiles of the number of analysts covering the bond. We report
the results in Table 10.
All regressions are run with time fixed e↵ects (either year or year-by-month) as well as
bond fixed e↵ects. Bond fixed e↵ects imply that identification is achieved from variation over
time in the number of analysts covering the firm. This alleviates concerns that cross-sectional
correlations between analyst coverage and various firm characteristics – such as firm size –
are driving the results.
As Table 10 shows, the two predictions are borne out in the data. First, the number of
analysts covering the firm is negatively correlated with bond illiquidity. That is, consistent
with an asymmetric-information theory of liquidity, bonds issued by firms with greater
analysts coverage are more liquid. Further, we also find evidence supporting the second
prediction that the sensitivity of bond illiquidity to bond price is decreasing in the number of
analysts covering the firm. As the table illustrates, while lagged price is negatively related to
bond illiquidity, the e↵ect of lagged price on illiquidity is diminished for bonds with more
analysts covering their firms. Indeed, based on the coefficient on the interaction term between
the highest quintile of analyst coverage and bond price in Column 2 of the table (with bond
and year-by-month fixed e↵ects), the sensitivity of illiquidity to declines in bond prices is
approximately 40 percent smaller among bonds in the highest quintile of analyst coverage as
compared to bonds in the lowest quintile of analyst coverage.32

3.5

Collateral and liquidity

As another test of the asymmetric-information theory of liquidity, we examine the role
played by collateral in determining bond liquidity. Controlling for the probability of default,
theory predicts that collateral serves to increase liquidity because it supports bond payo↵s
in the event of default, making such payo↵s less sensitive to private information regarding
the distribution of firm cash flows. To test for this, we use SDC’s security description to
construct an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if a bond is secured by collateral
and zero otherwise. Although the SDC security description is lacking for many bonds, we
are able to classify more than 600 secured and unsecured bonds that account for 20,474
bond-month observations. We then regress each of the three illiquidity measures on the
secured bond indicator variable as well as on firm and year fixed e↵ects and the seven credit
32

The coefficient on lagged bond price for Quintile 1 of analyst coverage (the omitted quintile) is -0.13,
while the total di↵erential on lagged bond price in Quintile 5 of analyst coverage is -0.08 = -0.13 + 0.05.

18

rating indicator variables used in Table 9. The results are presented in Table 11. Consistent
with the hypothesis, and similar to Friewald et al. (2016) we find that secured bonds are
indeed more liquid than unsecured bonds, controlling for firm, year, and rating fixed e↵ects.
The e↵ect is economically significant: as shown in Column 1 of Table 11, secured bonds have
a Gamma illiquidity measure that is on average lower by 0.895 than that of unsecured bonds
issued by the same firm. Bond collateral thus reduces illiquidity by 58.4 percent relative to
the sample unconditional mean of 1.533.

3.6

Liquidity, bond prices, and bond maturity

In this section we analyze the relation between bond maturity and bond liquidity in light
of the asymmetric-information theory of bond liquidity. We begin by confirming a basic
result well known in the literature: longer-maturity bonds are more illiquid. Longer time
to maturity should be associated in general with greater uncertainty over underlying value.
When trading such bonds, information-asymmetry and adverse selection problems should
thus be greater, and hence illiquidity should be larger as well – Indeed, Bao et al. (2011)
show that longer-term corporate bonds are more illiquid.
To analyze the relation between bond maturity and illiquidity, we regress the Gamma
measure of bond liquidity on indicator variables defined from five (equal-sized) quintiles of
bond maturity, running the following specification:

Illiquidityi,t =

0

+

5
X
k=1

k

⇥ M aturityQuintileki,t + bi + ct + ✏i,t ,

(8)

where Illiquidity is the measure of bond illiquidity for bond i in month t, and M aturityQuintileki,t
is a set of five indicator variables based on quintiles of bond time to maturity – that is,
M aturityQuintileki,t equals one if bond i is in maturity quintile k at month t

1.33 bi is

a vector of industry, issuing firm, or bond fixed e↵ects, and ct is a vector of either year or
year-by-month fixed e↵ects. Standard errors are clustered at the bond level.
The results are shown in Table 12. Longer maturity bonds are indeed more illiquid, as
theory predicts. This result holds across di↵erent fixed-e↵ect specifications – industry, firm,
and bond – with bonds in the fifth quintile of maturity exhibiting a

measure of illiquidity

that is higher by 1.46 on average than bonds in maturity quintile 1.34
We continue by examining a more specific prediction of the asymmetric-information view
of bond liquidity. In particular, the theory predicts that the sensitivity of illiquidity to bond
33
34

Quintile 1 represents bonds with the shortest maturity.
This estimate is based on Column 6, which employs bond and year-by-month fixed e↵ects.

19

price will be greater among shorter-maturity bonds as compared to bonds of longer maturity.
To see this, note first that when bonds are distressed, the value of the underlying asset – that
is, the firm – is in the informationally sensitive region, and hence bond illiquidity should be
high. This rise in illiquidity of distressed bonds should occur regardless of bond maturity. In
contrast, theory predicts that the illiquidity of short- and long-maturity bonds will behave
very di↵erently when bond values are high and far from distress. Indeed, in short-maturity
bonds, a high value of the underlying asset (that is, firm value) compared to the level of
debt outstanding implies that the probability that the bond will become distressed – that is,
enter the informationally sensitive region where illiquidity is high – is relatively small. Thus,
short-maturity bonds far from distress should be very liquid.
In contrast, in longer-maturity bonds, even if firm value is high compared to debt level, a
longer maturity implies a significantly probability that adverse shocks will push the bond
into the distressed, informationally sensitive region. Thus, longer-maturity bonds should
be relatively illiquid even when bond prices are high. Since both short- and long-maturity
bonds are predicted to be illiquid when bond values are low, the end prediction, therefore, is
that the sensitivity of bond illiquidity to bond price should be lower among longer-maturity
bonds.
To test this prediction, we rerun regression 5 separately for each of the five maturity
quintiles. All regressions focus on the

illiquidity measure and employ bond and year-

by-month fixed e↵ects with standard errors clustered at the bond level. Consistent with
the prediction, Table 13 shows that the sensitivity of bond illiquidity to price is indeed
smaller in longer-maturity bonds. For example, within the shortest-maturity quintile, moving
from the lowest to the highest price decile increases the

by 3.013. In contrast, within the

longest-maturity quintile, the same change results in an increase of 1.785 in the

illiquidity

measure.
Figure 5 presents the relation between bond illiquidity and price by maturity quintile. To
construct the figure, we rerun regression 5 for each of the five maturity quintiles using indicator
variables constructed from 20 equal-sized bins of bond price (with bond and year-by-month
fixed e↵ects). The coefficients are plotted on the 20 price-bin indicator variables.35
As can be seen, the figure is highly consistent with the predictions of the asymmetricinformation theory of bond liquidity. In both short- and long-maturity bonds, illiquidity is
high among the low bond-price deciles. In contrast, in short-maturity bonds, high deciles of
bond price are extremely liquid, consistent with the low probability that these bonds will
35

The figure plots the average e↵ect for each price bin using the average of the coefficients of the year-bymonth fixed e↵ects. Put di↵erently, for each price bin we add the coefficient on the price-bin indicator to the
average coefficient on the temporal fixed e↵ects.

20

enter distress before maturity. High deciles of bond price in long-maturity bonds are far more
illiquid, consistent with the greater likelihood that these bonds will enter the informationally
sensitive region before maturity.

3.7

Liquidity, bond prices, and equity volatility

As discussed above, and confirmed in Table 6, bond illiquidity increases with the volatility of
the issuing firm’s equity. This well-known result is, of course, consistent with the asymmetricinformation theory of bond liquidity: all else equal, increased volatility raises the probability
that the bond will become distressed, with payo↵s falling within the informationally sensitive
region. Bond illiquidity should thus be higher when equity volatility rises.
A second, more specific, prediction of the asymmetric-information theory of bond illiquidity
is that the sensitivity of bond illiquidity to bond price should be decreasing in the issuing
firm’s equity volatility. To see this, it is useful to consider the extreme case where equity
volatility is near zero, so that there is little uncertainty in the underlying asset. When this is
the case, even when the bond is distressed and the likelihood of default is high, there will be
no asymmetric information regarding the underlying value of the bond: the volatility of the
underlying asset is extremely low, and hence there should be little uncertainty regarding the
bond’s true value. Put di↵erently, even when bond prices drop into the distressed region where
bond payo↵s depend on the value of the underlying asset, both buyer and seller are relatively
certain of the value of the bond because underlying uncertainty is low. In contrast, when
equity volatility is relatively high, liquidity is predicted to depend greatly on whether the
bond is in the informationally sensitive or insensitive regions. Indeed, as the bond price rises
and the value of the firm enters the informationally insensitive region, liquidity is predicted
to rise since bond payo↵s will not be very sensitive to the realization of the underlying value
of the firm.
To test the prediction that illiquidity is less sensitive to bond price when underlying
uncertainty is low, we regress

on the interaction between the bond-price level and equity

implied volatility. Specifically, we run the following regression:

Illiquidityi,t = ↵0 + ↵1 ⇥ P ricei,t
+

5
X
s=1

1

+

5
X
k=1

k

⇥ Implied V ol Quintileki,t

⇣s ⇥ Implied V ol Quintileki,t ⇥ P ricei,t

21

1

+ bi ⇠ + ct + ✏i,t ,

(9)

where Illiquidity is the

measure of bond illiquidity for bond i in month t, P ricei,t

1

is the

one-month lagged bond price, and Implied V ol Quintile is a set of five indicator variables constructed from equal-sized quintiles of implied equity volatility – that is, Implied V ol Quintileki.t
equals one if bond i is in implied volatility quintile k at month t

1.

The results are shown in Table 14. First, consistent with the results in Table 6, we
find that illiquidity rises with underlying equity volatility. Second, consistent with our
results throughout, illiquidity declines with bond price. Importantly, and consistent with
the asymmetric-information theory of bond liquidity, the table shows that the sensitivity
of bond illiquidity to bond price increases with underlying equity volatility. Inspecting the
interaction coefficients in Table 14 shows that the sensitivity of

to bond price in the highest

implied equity volatility quintile is 2.7 times larger than the sensitivity of

to bond price in

the lowest equity volatility quintile.36
Figure 6 provides a graphic representation of this result. To construct the figure, we run
regression 5 – the baseline regression relating

to ten indicator variables constructed from

the ten deciles of bond price – on three separate subsamples of the data: (1) bonds in the
lowest decile of equity implied volatility; (2) bonds in decile 5 of equity implied volatility;
and (3) bonds in the highest decile of equity implied volatility.37 The coefficients on the price
deciles are then plotted for each of the three regressions. The results are consistent with
the asymmetric-information theory of bond liquidity. Among bonds in the lowest decile of
equity volatility, bond illiquidity is low and insensitive to bond price. As described above,
with little underlying volatility, uncertainty and asymmetric information are low regardless
of the bond price level. As compared to decile 1, bonds in decile 5 of implied equity volatility
exhibit higher illiquidity as well as a higher sensitivity of illiquidity to bond price. Finally,
among bonds in the highest decile of implied equity volatility, bond illiquidity is both high
and extremely sensitive to bond price. Indeed, as predicted, the hockey-stick relation between
illiquidity and bond price is most pronounced for bonds in this decile, with illiquidity rising
substantially in the lowest three deciles of bond prices.
36

Focusing on Column 6, which includes bond and year-by-month fixed e↵ects, the coefficient on bond
price is -0.054 for the lowest equity implied volatility quintile, whereas it is -0.1456 for bonds in the highest
quintile of equity-implied volatility.
37
All regressions include bond and year-by-month fixed e↵ects.

22

4

Instrumental Variables Regressions of Liquidity on
Prices

In this section, we employ an instrumental variable approach to analyze the relation between bond prices and bond liquidity. Whereas prior literature analyzing the asset pricing
implications of liquidity regresses yield spreads on bond liquidity, our focus is on the determinants of bond liquidity and, in particular, how underlying bond values a↵ect bond liquidity.
Hence, the regressions we analyze take the exact opposite form to those employed in the
asset-pricing literature: bond liquidity is the dependent variable and bond prices or yields are
the explanatory variable. The results presented in Tables 3 and 4 and the additional tests
in Tables 7-14 present a strong negative correlation between illiquidity and bond prices in
line with the asymmetric information theory of bond liquidity. Still the estimates are subject
to endogeneity and reverse causality concerns. Rather than declines in bond values causing
illiquidity to rise, it could be that bond prices are declining due to an expected (future)
reduction in bond liquidity. While throughout the paper we estimate variants of regression 4
using lagged values of yield spreads and bond prices, it is of course still possible that lagged
bond prices contain information on future liquidity, thereby maintaining the reverse causality
concern. We thus address the reverse causality concern through an instrumental variables
(IV) approach.

4.1

Cumulative stock and industry returns

We start by using the return on the equity of the firm that issued the bond as an
instrument for its bond price. We argue that the return of the firm’s stock is unlikely to
be driven by concurrent bond liquidity and is thus not subject to the reverse causality
concern. Theoretically, the sign of the correlation between the firm’s stock and bond returns
is ambiguous. On one hand, the value of the firm’s assets a↵ects the value of the firm’s bonds
and stocks in the same direction, resulting in a positive relation between stock returns and
bond prices. On the other hand, the variance of the firm’s assets leads to opposite e↵ects
on the value of firm debt and equity. The empirical evidence suggests that the first e↵ect
– which predicts a positive correlation between stock returns and bond prices – dominates
the second, variance-based e↵ect. For example, Kwan (1996) regresses weekly changes in
individual bond yields on the issuing firm’s lagged stock returns and finds that bond returns
are significantly and negatively correlated with lagged stock returns – implying a positive
correlation between lagged stock returns and bond prices.

23

Before running two-stage regressions, we begin by estimating the following reduced form
specification:
Illiquidityi,t = ↵ +
where Illiquidity is the

1

⇥ Creti,t

1

+

2

⇥ Xi,t

1

+

t

+ ✓i + ✏i,t ,

measure, subscripts indicate bond (i) and month (t), Creti,t

(10)
1

is

the lagged cumulative return on the stock of the issuing firm since the first date that the
bond is traded in TRACE, Xi is a vector of bond characteristics that includes the bond’s
issue size and time since issuance,

t

is a vector of either year or year-by-month fixed e↵ects,

✓i is a vector of cross-sectional fixed e↵ects – either firm or bond fixed e↵ects – and ✏i,t is the
regression residual. We report the results from estimating variants of regression 10 in Table
15. We define Creti,t

1

as a cumulative return variable so as to: (1) enable identification

o↵ of large changes in stock prices that may shift bond values across the informationally
sensitive and insensitive regions; and (2) avoid a weak instruments problem. We also use
large lagged monthly returns as an instrument in the next subsection.
As the first column of Table 15 illustrates, cumulative stock returns have a statistically
significant negative e↵ect on , implying that higher stock returns lead to higher bond
liquidity (i.e., lower ). The estimate of

1

is -0.281 (Column 1 with bond and year-by-month

fixed e↵ects) and is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. As stock returns and bond
prices are positively related in the data (Kwan 1996), the reduced form result supports the
hypothesized mechanism: higher stock returns are associated with higher bond prices, which
in turn leads to higher bond liquidity.
In Column 2 of Table 15 we use a di↵erent instrument, defined as Industry Creti,t 1 , the
lagged cumulative return on an equal-weighted portfolio of all the stocks in the issuing firm’s
industry since the first date that the bond is traded in TRACE.38 The underlying idea in
this industry-based instrument is that lagged stock returns on other firms within the same
industry contain important information for the determination of a given firm’s underlying
value but are unlikely to be a↵ected by the expected bond liquidity of that firm. We run the
same reduced form specification above, using industry, rather than firm, cumulative stock
return. The results in Column 2 are similar to those in Column 1: cumulative industry
returns have a significant negative e↵ect on the bond’s

measure of illiquidity.

In the last three columns of Table 15, we estimate IV regressions via two-stage least
squares (2SLS):
38

We use the Fama-French 48 industries classification to assign firms to industries in constructing the
portfolios.

24

Illiquidityi,t = ↵ +

1

⇥ P ricei,t

1

+

2

⇥ Xi,t

1

+

t

+ ✓i + ✏i,t

(11)

and
P ricei,t

1

Regression 12, with P ricei,t

= + ⌘1 ⇥ Zi,t
1

1

+ ⌘2 ⇥ Xi,t

1

+ ⌧t + i + ⌫i,t .

(12)

as the dependent variable, is the first stage in the estimation,

and it includes an instrument (Z) that is excluded from the illiquidity regression (11). Column
3 of Table 15 presents estimates of the second-stage regression (11) using the lagged cumulative
return on the stock of the issuing firm, Creti,t 1 , as the instrument. The model includes bond
and year-by-month fixed e↵ects. Column 4 of Table 15 presents estimates of (11) using the
lagged cumulative return on an equal-weighted portfolio of all the stocks in the issuing firm’s
industry – Industry Creti,t

1

– with the same fixed-e↵ects specifications as in Column 3.

The 2SLS estimates of the e↵ect of the bond price on

is -0.133 when using the firm’s

own stock return as an instrument (Column 3) and is -0.167 when using industry returns as
an instrument (Column 4), respectively. Thus, the instruments uncover a negative relation
between bond liquidity and bond prices, which are larger than those documented in Table
3. We obtain similar results using the two other measures of illiquidity, Amihud and IRT ,
which we omit here for brevity.
In the last column of Table 15 we employ the same 2SLS identification strategy using
a variant of the industry return instrument used in Column 4 of the Table. In particular,
for each bond-month in the sample we calculate the lagged cumulative return on an equalweighted portfolio of stocks in the issuing firm’s industry since the first date the bond is
traded in TRACE, using only financially strong firms within the industry. Financially strong
firms are calculated as those with a ratio of earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, and
amortization (EBITDA) to interest expense in the top of their respective industry quartile.
The strong-firm industry instrument is meant to alleviate concerns that variation in returns
of financially weak firms could be driven, in part, by changes in expected market liquidity,
due for example to increased informational frictions in such firms. Put di↵erently, equity
movements in strong firms are plausibly less likely driven by changes in expected future
liquidity movements, and more likely driven by changes to “market fundamentals.” As can
be seen from the last column of Table 15, using the strong-firm industry cumulative return
variable to instrument for bond prices, we find a negative and statistically significant relation
between bond illiquidity and bond price.

25

4.2

Large drops in stock returns

The results presented in Table 15 are based on firm- or industry-level cumulative stock
returns. We supplement the cumulative returns analysis in Table 15 with IV regressions that
are based on large lagged monthly stock returns as an instrument. For every bond-month in
our sample we calculate the one-month lagged return on the stock of the issuing firm. We
then define two dummy variables that equal one if the return on the stock in the previous
month is less or equal to the 10th or 25th percentile, respectively, of the stock’s return
distribution during our sample period. Table 16 presents the summary statistics of lagged
monthly stock returns that are at or below the 25th percentile (first row), above the 25th
percentile (second row), at or below the 10th percentile (third row), and above the 10th
percentile (fourth row). The 10th and 25th percentile-based dummies capture significant
declines in one-month lagged stock returns with mean monthly returns of -0.145 and -0.099,
respectively. These lagged large movements in stock returns are unlikely to be driven by
anticipation of declining liquidity of the bonds issued by the same firm, and thus these large
stock price declines dummies are valid instruments for P ricei,t

1

in equation 12. We report

the results of the second-stage regression (11) using large stock price declines dummies as the
instruments in Table 17. The first two columns of the table use the 25th percentile dummy
as the instrument, while Columns 3 and 4 are estimated with the 10th percentile instrument.
As Table 17 shows, and consistent with the findings in Tables 3, 4, and 15, large declines in
stock prices are associated with shrinking liquidity of the bonds issued by the same firms.

4.3

Oil Prices

As our final empirical identification strategy, we estimate the e↵ect of oil price shocks
on the liquidity of bonds issued by oil and gas firms. We restrict our issuing firms to seven
industries: Crude Petroleum and Natural Gas (SIC code 1311), Drilling Oil and Gas Wells
(SIC code 1381), Oil and Gas Field Exploration Services (SIC codes 1382 and 1389), Petroleum
Refining (2911), Miscellaneous Products of Petroleum and Coal (SIC code 2990), and Oil and
Gas Field Machinery and Equipment (SIC code 3533). We also extend our sample period up
to 2015 to cover the large decline in oil prices in 2014 and 2015. Oil prices directly a↵ect the
prices of oil and gas bonds, which in 2015 accounted for about 15 percent of high-yield bonds
in the US bond market. The final sample size of oil and gas bonds for which we are able to
calculate illiquidity measures ranges from 19,142 to 29,452 bond-year observations depending

26

on the measure of illiquidity we use in the analysis. We present reduced form estimates of
the e↵ect of monthly oil prices on all three measures of illiquidity in Table 18.39
In Columns 1, 3, and 5 we regress each of the three measures of bond illiquidity on
the natural log of monthly oil prices as well as bond and year fixed e↵ects. As the table
demonstrates, oil prices have a negative e↵ect on illiquidity: higher oil prices make bonds more
liquid. Although we cannot include year-by-month fixed e↵ects, given that the underlying
variation in oil prices is at the same level, the results are robust to the inclusion of bond
and year fixed e↵ects. We next add the issuing firm lagged leverage ratio and an interaction
term between lagged leverage and log oil price. Oil and gas companies with higher financial
leverage are more likely to be sensitive to oil prices as the exogenous price shock is amplified
by their firm specific financial risk. As Columns 2, 4 and 6 demonstrate, that is exactly the
case. Bonds of firms with higher leverage are less liquid and as the negative and significant
coefficient on the interaction term shows – leverage amplifies the e↵ect of oil prices on bond
illiquidity.

5

Conclusion

We test several predictions of asymmetric-information-based models of bond liquidity. We
show that bond illiquidity rises as bond price declines using both OLS and IV regression models.
We conduct a series of empirical cross-sectional tests that pertain to predictions stemming
from the asymmetric-information theory of bond liquidity of Dang et al. (2012). Our results
are consistent with the model. Bond liquidity is determined by the informational sensitivity
structure of debt contracts. When debt is deep in the money it becomes informationally
insensitive; regardless of the realization of underlying firm value, the market value of debt will
be very close to its face value. Even if parties may enjoy an informational advantage regarding
underlying firm value, this informational advantage will not translate into asymmetric
information regarding debt value: liquidity in this informationally insensitive region is
predicted to be high. Our results shed new empirical light on the informational nature of
“safe assets” and the determinants of their informational sensitivity and liquidity.

39

For monthly oil prices we use the end-of-the month price per barrel of Europe Brent Spot Price FOB.

27

References
Acharya, Viral V., and Lasse H. Pedersen, “Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk,” Journal of
Financial Economics (2005), 77: 375-410.
Akerlof, George A., “The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (1970), 488-500.
Aiyagari, S.R., and Mark Gertler, “Asset Returns with Transaction Costs and Uninsured
Individual Risk,” Journal of Monetary Economics (1991), 27: 311-331.
Amihud, Yakov, “Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series E↵ects,”
Journal of Financial Markets (2002), 5: 31-56.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, “Asset Pricing and the Bid-Ask Spread,” Journal of
Financial Economics (1986), 17: 223-249.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, “Liquidity, Maturity, and the Yields on U.S. Treasury
Securities,” Journal of Finance (1991), 46: 1411-1425.
Bansal, Ravi., and John Coleman, “A Monetary Explanation of the Equity Premium, Term
Premium, and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzles,” Journal of Political Economy (1996), Vol. 104
1135-1171.
Bao, Jack, Jun Pan, and Jian Wang, “Liquidity of Corporate Bonds,” Journal of Finance
(2011), 66: 911-946.
Bao, Jack, Jia Chen, Kewei Hou, and Lei Lu, “Prices and Volatilities in the Corporate Bond
Market,” Working paper (2015).
Bao, Jack and Kewei Hou, “De Facto Seniority, Credit Risk, and Corporate Bond Prices”
Review of Financial Studies (2017), 30: 4038-4080.
Benmelech, Efraim and Nittai Bergman, “Credit Market Freezes,” Working paper (2018).
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse H., Pedersen, “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,”
Review of Financial Studies (2009), 22: 2201-2238.
Campbell, John, Jens Hilscher and Jan Szilagyi, “In Search of Distress Risk,” Journal of
Finance (2008), 63: 2899-2939.
Carlson Mark, Burcu Duygan-Bump, Fabio Natalucci, Bill Nelson, Marcelo Ochoa, Jeremy C.
Stein, and Skander Van den Heuvel, “The Demand for Short-Term, Safe Assets and Financial
Stability: Some Evidence and Implications for Central Bank Policy,” Working paper, Harvard

28

University (2016).
Chen, Long, David A., Lesmond, and Jason Wei, “Corporate Yield Spreads and Bond Liquidity,” Journal of Finance (2007), 62: 119-149.
Covitz, Dan, and Chris Downing, “Liquidity or Credit Risk? The Determinants of Very
Short?Term Corporate Yield Spreads,” Journal of Finance (2007), 62: 2303-2328.
Dang Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström, “Ignorance, Debt and Financial Crises,”
Working paper (2012).
Dang Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström, “The Information Sensitivity of a Security,”
Working paper (2013).
de Jong, Frank, and Joost Driessen, “Liquidity Risk Premia in Corporate Bond Markets,”
Quarterly Journal of Finance, (2012), 2.
Dick-Nielsen, Jens, Peter Feldhütter, and David Lando, “Corporate Bond Liquidity Before and
After the Onset of the Subprime Crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics (2012), 103: 471-492.
Feldhütter, Peter, “The Same Bond at Di↵erent Prices: Identifying Search Frictions and
Selling Pressures,” Review of Financial Studies (2012), 25: 1155-1206.
Friewald, Nils , Christopher A. Hennessy and Rainer Jankowitsch, “Secondary Market Liquidity and Security Design: Theory and Evidence from ABS Markets,” Review of Financial
Studies (2016), 29: 1254-1290.
Garleanu, Nicolae B., and and Lasse H., Pedersen, ‘Liquidity and Risk Management,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, (2007), 97: 193-197.
Goldstein, Michael A., Edith S. Hotchkiss and Erik R. Sirri, “Transparency and Liquidity: A
Controlled Experiment on Corporate Bonds,” Review of Financial Studies (2007), 20: 253-273.
Gorton, Gary B.,“Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007,” Oxford University
Press (2010).
Gorton, Gary B.,“The History and Economics of Safe Assets,” NBER Working Paper (2016).
Gorton, Gary B., and Andrew Metrick, “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,” Journal
of Financial Economics (2012), 103: 425-451.
Gorton, Gary B., and George Pennacchi, “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation,”
Journal of Finance (1990), 45: 49-72.

29

Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein, “A Comparative-Advantage
Approach to Government Debt Maturity,” Journal of Finance (2015), 70: 1683-1722.
Grossman, S J., and M. H. Miller, “Liquidity and Market Structure,” Journal of Finance
(1988), 43: 617-633.
Hameed, Allaudeen, Wenjin Kang and S. Viswanathan, “Stock Market Declines and Liquidity,”
Journal of Finance (2010), 65: 257-293.
Hanson, Samuel G., and Adi Sunderam., “Are There Too Many Safe Securities? Securitization
and the Incentives for Information Production,” Journal of Financial Economics (2013), 108:
565-584.
Harris, Milton, and Artur Raviv, “Di↵erences of Opinions Make a Horse Race,” Review of
Financial Studies (1993), 6: 473-506.
He, Zhighu, and Konstantin Milbradt, “Endogenous Liquidity and Defaultable Bonds,,”
Econometrica (2014), 84: 1443-1508.
Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas., “Evaluating the E↵ects of Incomplete Markets on Risk
Sharing and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Political Economics (1996), 104: 443-487.
Holmström, Bengt, “Understanding the Role of Debt in the Financial System,” BIS working
paper (2015).
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, “The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt,” Journal of Political Economy (2012), 120: 233-567.
Kwan, Simon, “Firm-specific Information and the Correlation between Individual Stocks and
Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics (1996), 40: 63-80.
Lando, David, and Torben M. Skødeberg, “Analyzing Rating Transitions and Rating Drift
with Continuous Observations,” Journal of Banking and Finance (2002), 26: 423-444.
Longsta↵, Francis A., “The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury Bond Prices,”
Journal of Business (2004), 77: 511-526.
Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S., Majluf, “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions
when Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial Economics
(1984) 13: 187-221.
Pastor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh., “Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns,”
Journal of Political Economy (2003), 111: 642-685.

30

Rocheteau, Guillaume, “A Monetary Approach to Asset Liquidity,” Working Paper, University of California-Irvine, 2010.
Sadka, Ronnie, “Momentum and Post-Earnings-Announcement Drift Anomalies: The Role of
Liquidity Risk,” Journal of Financial Economics (2006), 80: 309-349.
Spence, Michael, “Job Market Signaling,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (1973), 355-374.
Stein, Jeremy C., “Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulator,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics (2012), 57-95.
Stoll, H. R., “The Supply of Dealer Services in Securities Markets,” Journal of Finance
(1978), 33: 1133-51.
Sunderam, Adi, “Money Creation and the Shadow Banking System,” Review of Financial
Studies (2015) 28: 939-977.
Varian, H. R., “Di↵erences of Opinion in Financial Markets,” in Courtenay C. Stone (ed.),
Financial Risk: Theory, Evidence and Implications, Kluwer, Boston, (1989) 3-37.
Vayanos, Dimitri, “Flight to Quality, Flight to Liquidity, and the Pricing of Risk,” Working
Paper, London School of Economics (2004).
Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jean-Luc Vila, “Equilibrium Interest Rates and Liquidity Premium
With Transaction Costs,” Economic Theory (1999), 509-539.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, “Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does ‘Irrationality’ Disappear with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions,” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual (2003) 18:139-208.
Weill, Pierre-Olivier, “Leaning Against the Wind,” Review of Economic Studies (2007)
74:1329-54.

31

.025
Amihud, monthly
.01
.015
.02

8

.005

Gamma, monthly
2
4
6
0

2004m1

2006m1

2008m1

2010m1

2012m1

2004m1

2006m1

2008m1

2010m1

2012m1

2002m1

2004m1

.001

IRC, monthly
.002 .003 .004

.005

2002m1

2002m1

Figure 1: Liquidity over Time, Cross-sectional Means

32

2006m1

2008m1

2010m1

2012m1

Predicted Gamma by Price Bin

0

1

Predicted Gamma
2
3

4

YearMonth and Bond FE

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Figure 2: Liquidity and Bond Prices

33

Graph

10/9/17, 2:05 PM

0

1

Predicted Gamma
2

3

Predicted Gamma by Merton Distance to Default

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Figure 3: Liquidity and Merton Distance-to-Default

34

35

Aaa

Aa1

Aa2

Aa3

A1

Figure 4: Liquidity and Credit Rating

Gamma

15

10

5

0

A2

A3

Baa1 Baa2 Baa3 Ba1

Ba2

Ba3

B1

B2

B3

Caa1 Caa2 Caa3 Ca

C

0

1

Predicted Gamma
2
3

4

5

Predicted Gamma by Price Bin and Maturity Quintile

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011121314151617181920 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011121314151617181920 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011121314151617181920 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011121314151617181920 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011121314151617181920

Q1 - Shortest

Q2

Q3

Figure 5: Liquidity by Price Bin and Maturity Quintile

36

Q4

Q5 - Longest

0

1

Predicted Gamma
2
3
4

5

Predicted Gamma by Price Bin and Implied Vol. Decile

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Dec1 - Low Vol

Dec5

Dec10 - High Vol

Figure 6: Liquidity by Price Bin and Implied Volatility

37

Table 1: Bond Characteristics
Mean

Standard
Deviation

25th
Percentile

Median

75th
Percentile

Observations

Gamma

1.533

3.145

0.136

0.484

1.460

178,971

Amihud

0.0119

0.0189

0.00159

0.00478

0.0131

245,633

IRT

0.00256

0.00353

0.000401

0.00134

0.00321

248,920

Price

104.0

11.82

99.06

103.5

109.2

465,719

Time to Maturity

8.675

9.907

2.542

5.042

9.625

465,719

Yield Spread

0.0238

0.0619

0.00897

0.0151

0.0258

465,637

Baa1

-

Baa3

Baa31

A2

465,719

367,402

469,414

67,000

250,000

500,000

465,662

Moody’s Rating
Amount Outstanding

This table provides summary statistics for bond characteristics.

38

Table 2: The Evolution of Bond Illiquidity over Time
Mean

Standard
Deviation

25th
Percentile

Median

75th
Percentile

Observations

Panel A: 2002-6
Gamma

1.739

3.438

0.147

0.549

1.692

70,870

Amihud

0.0110

0.0191

0.00114

0.00364

0.0114

106,580

IRT

0.00257

0.00389

0.000254

0.00114

0.00307

104,821

Panel B: 2007-9
Gamma

2.270

4.063

0.254

0.797

2.242

43,253

Amihud

0.0136

0.0205

0.00175

0.00577

0.0159

63,886

IRT

0.00280

0.00360

0.000484

0.00166

0.00361

64,148

Panel C: 2010-12
Gamma

0.815

1.561

0.0885

0.308

0.880

64,848

Amihud

0.0116

0.0171

0.00237

0.00558

0.0131

75,167

IRT

0.00236

0.00290

0.000534

0.00141

0.00305

79,951

This table presents the evolution of our three measures of bond Illiquidity over time. The table provides summary statistics for
the three liquidity measures for three subperiods: 2002-6 (Panel A), 2007-9 (Panel B) and 2010-12 (Panel C).

39

40

1

1

1.103 ***
(0.094)
0.25
176,316
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes
No

17.724 ***
(2.251)

3.111 ***
(0.351)
0.21
176,316
Yes

19.529 ***
(2.499)

(2)
Gamma

No
Yes
No
Yes
No

3.068 ***
(0.192)
0.29
176,316
Yes

17.332 ***
(2.714)

(3)
Gamma

No
Yes
No
No
Yes

1.211 ***
(0.094)
0.32
176,316
Yes

14.663 ***
(2.357)

(4)
Gamma

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

3.614 ***
(0.137)
0.35
176,316
Yes

17.204 ***
(2.491)

(5)
Gamma

No
No
Yes
No
Yes

1.197 ***
(0.085)
0.39
176,316
Yes

14.091 ***
(2.105)

(6)
Gamma

Yes
No
No
Yes
No

-0.097 ***
(0.011)
13.564 ***
(1.103)
0.23
176,328
Yes

(7)
Gamma

Yes
No
No
No
Yes

-0.090 ***
(0.012)
10.564 ***
(1.173)
0.27
176,328
Yes

(8)
Gamma

No
Yes
No
Yes
No

-0.093 ***
(0.006)
12.927 ***
(0.653)
0.30
176,328
Yes

(9)
Gamma

No
Yes
No
No
Yes

-0.082 ***
(0.006)
9.737 ***
(0.659)
0.33
176,328
Yes

(10)
Gamma

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

-0.126 ***
(0.003)
16.511 ***
(0.350)
0.39
176,328
Yes

(11)
Gamma

No
No
Yes
No
Yes

-0.112 ***
(0.003)
12.673 ***
(0.351)
0.41
176,328
Yes

(12)
Gamma

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of the Gamma measure of bond illiquidity on either the lagged credit spread (Columns 1-6) or lagged bond price
(Columns 7-12), as well as a vector of bond characteristics that includes the issue size and time since issuance. Depending on the specification, we include industry, firm, bond, year. and
year-by-month fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Adjusted R2
Observations
Bond Characteristics
Fixed E↵ects
industry
firm
bond
year
year ⇥ month

Constant

Pricet

Spreadt

(1)
Gamma

Table 3: Bond Illiquidity (Gamma) and Bond Price

41

1

1

0.011 ***
(0.001)
0.12
233,881
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes
No

0.035 ***
(0.006)

0.016 ***
(0.001)
0.11
233,881
Yes

0.040 ***
(0.007)

Amihud

No
Yes
No
Yes
No

0.015 ***
(0.001)
0.19
233,881
Yes

0.036 ***
(0.008)

Amihud

No
Yes
No
No
Yes

0.009 ***
(0.001)
0.21
233,881
Yes

0.029 ***
(0.007)

Amihud

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

0.016 ***
(0.0004)
0.26
233,881
Yes

0.034 ***
(0.007)

Amihud

No
No
Yes
No
Yes

0.009 ***
(0.001)
0.28
233,881
Yes

0.025 ***
(0.005)

Amihudq

Yes
No
No
Yes
No

-0.0002 ***
(0.00005)
0.041 ***
(0.005)
0.11
233,904
Yes

Amihud

Yes
No
No
No
Yes

-0.0002 ***
(0.0005)
0.030 ***
(0.004)
0.12
233,904
Yes

Amihud

No
Yes
No
Yes
No

-0.0002 ***
(0.00002)
0.036 ***
(0.002)
0.19
233,904
Yes

Amihud

No
Yes
No
No
Yes

-0.00002 ***
(0.00002)
0.024 ***
(0.002)
0.21
233,904
Yes

Amihud

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0002 ***
(0.00001)
0.041 ***
(0.001)
0.26
233,904
Yes

Amihud

No
No
Yes
No
Yes

-0.0002***
(0.00001)
0.027 ***
(0.002)
0.28
233,904
Yes

Amihud

This Table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of the Amihud measure of bond illiquidity on either the lagged credit spread (Columns 1-6) or lagged bond price
(Columns 7-12), as well as a vector of bond characteristics that includes the issue size and time since issuance. Depending on the specification, we include industry, firm, bond, year, and
year-by-month fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Adjusted R2
Observations
Bond Characteristics
Fixed E↵ects
industry
firm
bond
year
year ⇥ month

Constant

Pricet

Spreadt

Amihud

Table 4: Bond Illiquidity (Amihud) and Bond Price

Table 5: Correlation Matrix: Bond Illiquidity and Volatility

Gamma
Amihud
IRT
Implied Volatility
Bond Volatility

Gamma

Amihud

IRT

Implied
Volatility

Bond
Volatility

1.000
0.328
0.341
0.293
0.026

1.000
0.510
0.157
0.019

1.000
0.245
0.015

1.000
0.019

1.000

This table reports Pearson product-moment correlation coefficients between each of the three measures of bond illiquidity,
implied volatility, and bond volatility.

42

43

-0.0687 ***
(0.012)
1.373 ***
(0.285)
0.007
(0.005)
0.2663
148,679
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes
No

2002-12
All

-0.0785***
(0.012)
1.349 ***
(0.294)
0.008
(0.006)
0.218
148,679
Yes

2002-12
All

No
Yes
No
Yes
No

-0.081 ***
(0.011)
1.028 ***
(0.222)
0.006
(0.005)
0.283
148,679
Yes

2002-12
All

No
Yes
No
No
Yes

-0.0671 ***
(0.011)
0.904 ***
(0.189)
0.005
(0.004)
0.332
148,679
Yes

2002-12
All

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

-0.123 ***
(0.010)
0.259
(0.191)
0.004
(0.003)
0.376
148,679
Yes

2002-12
All

No
No
Yes
No
Yes

-0.105 ***
(0.011)
0.223
(0.152)
0.003
(0.002)
0.419
148,679
Yes

2002-12
All

No
No
Yes
No
Yes

0.408
145,086
Yes

-0.077 ***
(0.004)

Excl. 2008-09
All

No
No
Yes
No
Yes

-.460
31,236
Yes

-0.172 ***
(0.007)

2008-2009
All

No
No
Yes
No
Yes

0.378
143,601
Yes

-0.096 ***
(0.004)

2002-12
Investment
Grade

No
No
Yes
No
Yes

0.460
31.666

-0.128 ***
(0.005)

2002-12
Non-Investment
Grade

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of the Gamma measure of bond illiquidity on lagged bond price, lagged implied volatility and lagged bond volatility,
as well as a vector of bond characteristics that includes the issue size and time since issuance. Depending on the specification, we include industry, firm, bond, year, and year-by-month
fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Adjusted R2
Observations
Bond Characteristics
Fixed E↵ects
industry
firm
bond
year
year ⇥ month

Lagged Bond Volatility

Lagged Implied Volatility

Lagged Price

Period
Rating

Table 6: Robustness Tests: Volatility, Non-Crisis Years and Investment Grade

Table 7: Price Deciles and Bond Illiquidity

Price Decilest
2.

Gamma

Gamma

Amihud/100

Amihud/100

IRT/100

IRT/100

-1.356 ***
(0.07)
-1.936 ***
(0.0752)
-2.169 ***
(0.077)
-2.367 ***
(0.078)
-2.518 ***
(0.078)
-2.674 ***
(0.08)
-2.812 ***
(0.082)
-2.954 ***
(0.084)
-3.108 ***
(0.093)
0.37
176,328
Yes

-1.289 ***
(0.067)
-1.762 ***
(0.07)
-1.93 ***
(0.072)
-2.046 ***
(0.073)
-2.126 ***
(0.074)
-2.217 ***
(0.076)
-2.305 ***
(0.079)
-2.376 ***
(0.082)
-2.455 ***
(0.093)
0.41
176,328
Yes

-0.31 ***
(0.027)
-0.45 ***
(0.029)
-0.51 ***
(0.029)
-0.57 ***
(0.03)
-0.62 ***
(0.031)
-0.68 ***
(0.031)
-0.69 ***
(0.032)
-0.69 ***
(0.033)
-0.71 ***
(0.039)
0.29
233,904
Yes

-0.27 ***
(0.027)
-0.38 ***
(0.029)
-0.41 ***
(0.029)
-0.45 ***
(0.03)
-0.47 ***
(0.031)
-0.51 ***
(0.032)
-0.51 ***
(0.034)
-0.49 ***
(0.036)
-0.48 ***
(0.042)
0.31
233,904
Yes

-0.1 ***
(5.07e-03)
-0.122 ***
(5.38e-03)
-0.139 ***
(5.33e-03)
-0.155 ***
(5.39e-03)
-0.162 ***
(5.43e-03)
-0.173 ***
(5.54e-03)
-0.175 ***
(5.65e-03)
-0.185 ***
(5.83e-03)
-0.199 ***
(6.87e-03)
0.26
235,650
Yes

-0.093 ***
(5.03e-03)
-0.114 ***
(5.38e-03)
-0.127 ***
(5.36e-03)
-0.139 ***
(5.44e-03)
-0.143 ***
(5.53e-03)
-0.152 ***
(5.70e-03)
-0.153 ***
(5.89e-03)
-0.162 ***
(6.21e-03)
-0.174 ***
(7.41e-03)
0.27
235,650
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes

1

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Adjusted R2
Observations
Bond Characteristics
Fixed E↵ects
bond
year
year ⇥ month

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of the three measures of bond illiquidity on 10 indicator
variables that are based on bond price deciles, as well as a vector of bond characteristics that includes the issue size and time
since issuance. Depending on the specification, we include bond, year, and year-by-month fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors
in parentheses are clustered by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

44

Table 8: Credit Rating and Bond Illiquidity

Credit Rating Binst
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Adjusted R2
Observations
Bond Characteristics
Fixed E↵ects
industry
firm
bond
year
year ⇥ month

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

0.194
(0.165)
0.808 ***
(0.210)
1.347 ***
(0.259)
1.597 ***
(0.341)
2.969 ***
(0.338)
7.629 ***
(2.004)
0.17
176,328
Yes

0.192
(0.168)
0.804 ***
(0.211)
1.358 ***
(0.251)
1.600 ***
(0.338)
3.025 ***
(0.346)
7.482 ***
(1.878)
0.22
176,328
Yes

0.113
(0.091)
0.616 ***
(0.143)
0.944 ***
(0.239)
1.187 ***
(0.264)
1.661 ***
(0.418)
6.037 ***
(1.628)
0.24
176,328
Yes

0.108
(0.097)
0.590 ***
(0.146)
0.938 ***
(0.222)
1.168 ***
(0.256)
1.717 ***
(0.412)
5.797 ***
(1.457)
0.30
176,328
Yes

-0.036
(0.068)
0.235 ***
(0.088)
0.403 ***
(0.118)
0.562 ***
(0.168)
0.972 ***
(0.247)
5.333 ***
(0.825)
0.32
176,328
Yes

-0.036
(0.071)
0.211 **
(0.091)
0.404 ***
(0.120)
0.552 ***
(0.169)
1.005 ***
(0.235)
5.080 ***
(0.765)
0.37
176,328
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes
No

Yes
No
No
No
Yes

No
Yes
No
Yes
No

No
Yes
No
No
Yes

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes
No
Yes

1

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of Gamma measure of bond illiquidity on seven indicator
variables that are based on bond Moody’s credit ratings, where Category 1 corresponds to the highest ratings and Category 7
corresponds to the lowest ratings, as well as a vector of bond characteristics that includes the issue size and time since issuance.
Depending on the specification, we include industry, firm, bond, year, and year-by-month fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors
in parentheses are clustered by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

45

Table 9: Information Infrastructure and Bond Illiquidity

Dependent Variable
Credit Rating

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

0.237 ***
(0.044)

0.106 ***
(0.035)

0.122***
(0.033)

0.302 ***
(0.048)
0.006 ***
(0.002)
-0.007 **
(0.001)

-0.131 ***
(0.006)

0.131 ***
(0.039)
0.007 ***
(0.002)
-0.004 ***
(0.001)
-0.131 ***
(0.006)

0.41
52,714
Yes

0.46
52,216
Yes

0.146 ***
(0.038)
0.004 **
(0.002)
-0.003 ***
(0.001)
-0.126 ***
(0.007)
-0.106
(0.260)
0.009
(0.007)
0.46
43,373
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Months Elapsed since previous rating
Months Elapsed since previous rating
⇥ Credit Rating
Pricet 1

0.41
52,714
Yes

0.46
52,216
Yes

-0.126 ***
(0.007)
-0.105
(0.257)
0.009
(0.007)
0.46
43,373
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Lagged Implied Volatility
Lagged Bond Volatility
Adjusted R2
Observations
Bond Characteristics
Fixed E↵ects
bond
current credit rating
year ⇥ month

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of Gamma measure of bond illiquidity on Credit
Rating – the bond-level di↵erence between the previous and the current credit rating, the time (in months) that elapsed since
the previous rating action, the interaction between Credit Rating and the time that elapsed since the last credit rating action,
as well as seven indicator variables that are based on bond Moody’s credit ratings, where Category 1 corresponds to the highest
ratings and Category 7 corresponds to the lowest ratings, lagged bond price, lagged implied volatility, lagged bond volatility,
and a vector of bond characteristics that includes the issue size and time since issuance. All specifications include bond and
year-by-month fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

46

Table 10: Analysts Coverage and Bond Illiquidity

Lagged Price
Analysts Coverage Quintilest
2.

Gamma

Gamma

-0.147 ***
(0.008)

-0.130 ***
(0.008)

1.683 **
(0.859)
-2.400 ***
(0.895)
-4.600 ***
(0.902)
-5.857 **
(1.194)

1.647 *
(0.847)
-1.805 **
(0.877)
-3.886 ***
(0.875)
-5.221 ***
(1.184)

-0.015 *
(0.008)
0.023 ***
(0.009)
0.044 ***
(0.009)
0.055 ***
(0.011)
0.41
92.022
Yes

-0.015 *
(0.008)
0.018 **
(0.008)
0.038 **
(0.008)
0.050 ***
(0.022)
0.45
92.022
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes

1

3.
4.
5.
Lagged Price
⇥ Analysts Coverage Quintile 2
⇥ Analysts Coverage Quintile 3
⇥ Analysts Coverage Quintile 4
⇥ Analysts Coverage Quintile 5
Adjusted R2
Observations
Bond Characteristics
Fixed E↵ects
bond
year
year ⇥ month

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of Gamma measure of bond illiquidity on lagged bond
price, indicators variables defined from five quintiles of analysts coverage, as well as the interactions between the analysts
coverage quintiles and lagged price, and a vector of bond characteristics that includes the issue size and time since issuance.
Specifications include bond and either year, or year-by-month fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered
by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

47

Table 11: Collateral and Bond Illiquidity

Secured Bond
Credit Rating Binst
2.

Gamma

Amihud

IRT

-0.895 ***
(0.339)

-0.005 *
(0.002)

-0.002 ***
(0.0004)

0.255
(0.284)
0.655 *
(0.376)
0.730
(0.518)
1.522 **
(0.644)
2.326 ***
(0.646)
6.223 ***
(1.086)
0.35
13,194
201
460
Yes

0.003 *
(0.0019)
0.007 ***
(0.002)
0.007 **
(0.003)
0.008 ***
(0.003)
0.005
(0.004)
0.017 ***
(0.005)
0.21
19,766
278
670
Yes

0.0005 *
(0.0003)
0.0009 ***
(0.0003)
0.0012 ***
(0.0004)
0.0013 ***
(0.0005)
0.0010 *
(0.0006)
0.0015 *
(0.001)
0.18
20,474
282
681
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

1

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Adjusted R2
Observations
Number of Issuers
Number of Bonds
Bond Characteristics
Fixed E↵ects
firm
year

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of three measures of bond illiquidity on a dummy
variable that takes the value of one if the bond is secured, and zero otherwise, as well as seven indicator variables that are
based on bond Moody’s credit ratings, where Category 1 corresponds to the highest ratings and Category 7 corresponds to the
lowest ratings, and a vector of bond characteristics that includes the issue size and time since issuance. Specifications include
firm and year fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Table 12: Maturity and Bond Illiquidity

Maturity Quintilet
2.

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

0.417 ***
(0.091)
0.673 ***
(0.099)
0.928 ***
(0.123)
2.220 ***
(0.208)
0.19
176,328
Yes

0.409 ***
(0.092)
0.675 ***
(0.105)
0.935 ***
(0.128)
2.232 ***
(0.214)
0.24
176,328
Yes

0.420 ***
(0.057)
0.636 ***
(0.053)
0.942 ***
(0.058)
2.029 ***
(0.087)
0.27
176,328
Yes

0.411 ***
(0.059)
0.636 ***
(0.055)
0.947 ***
(0.059)
2.046 ***
(0.089)
0.32
176,328
Yes

0.178 ***
(0.040)
0.287 ***
(0.063)
0.455 ***
(0.096)
1.549 ***
(0.273)
0.31
176,328
Yes

0.144 ***
(0.041)
0.251 ***
(0.065)
0.400 ***
(0.099)
1.460 ***
(0.271)
0.37
176,328
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes
No

Yes
No
No
No
Yes

No
Yes
No
Yes
No

No
Yes
No
No
Yes

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes
No
Yes

1

3.
4.
5.
Adjusted R2
Observations
Bond Characteristics
Fixed E↵ects
industry
firm
bond
year
year ⇥ month

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of the Gamma measure of bond illiquidity on a indicator
variables defined from five equal-sized quintiles of bond maturity, and a vector of bond characteristics that includes the issue
size and time since issuance. Specifications include industry, firm, bond, year, and year-by-month fixed e↵ects. Robust standard
errors in parentheses are clustered by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

48

Table 13: Price Deciles and Bond Illiquidity, by Maturity Quintiles

Price Decilest
2.

Quintile 1 (Short)

Quintile 2

Quintile 3

Quintile 4

Quintile 5 (long)

-1.333 ***
(0.203)
-1.843 ***
(0.228)
-2.069 ***
(0.243)
-2.238 ***
(0.253)
-2.414 ***
(0.262)
-2.511 ***
(0.270)
-2.681 ***
(0.282)
-2.717 ***
(0.299)
-3.013 ***
(0.364)
0.52
28,864
Yes

-1.129 ***
(0.196)
-1.859 ***
(0.223)
-2.121 ***
(0.219)
-2.216 ***
(0.221)
-2.205 ***
(0.218)
-2.305 ***
(0.222)
-2.341 ***
(0.223)
-2.371 ***
(0.225)
-2.323 ***
(0.249)
0.51
34,968
Yes

-1.043 ***
(0.130)
-1.532 ***
(0.149)
-1.586 ***
(0.156)
-1.726 ***
(0.158)
-1.808 ***
(0.160)
-1.775 ***
(0.164)
-1.819 ***
(0.168)
-1.903 ***
(0.176)
-1.960 ***
(0.206)
0.47
37,545
Yes

-1.164 ***
(0.125)
-1.536 ***
(0.133)
-1.642 ***
(0.142)
-1.699 ***
(0.144)
-1.790 ***
(0.150)
-1.858 ***
(0.162)
-2.000 ***
(0.179)
-2.072 ***
(0.197)
-2.281 ***
(0.219)
0.41
42,093
Yes

-1.156 ***
(0.136)
-1.374 ***
(0.137)
-1.573 ***
(0.152)
-1.594 ***
(0.149)
-1.566 ***
(0.149)
-1.598 ***
(0.143)
-1.654 ***
(0.151)
-1.780 ***
(0.161)
-1.785 ***
(0.187)
0.41
32,858
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

1

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Adjusted R2
Observations
Bond Characteristics
Fixed E↵ects
bond
year ⇥ month

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of the Gamma measure of bond illiquidity on 10
indicator variables that are based on bond price deciles, as well as a vector of bond characteristics that includes the issue size
and time since issuance. We run the regressions separately for each of the five maturity quintiles. Column 1 reports results
for bonds in Quintile 1 (short) and Column 5 reports results for bonds in Quintile 5 (long). All specification include bond and
year-by-month fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

49

Table 14: Bond Illiquidity, Price, and Equity Implied Volatility

Implied Vol Quintilest
2.

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

0.176
(0.475)
1.157*
(0.646)
4.964***
(0.773)
15.70***
(0.916)
-0.01*
(0.005)

0.268
(0.470)
0.972
(0.644)
4.024***
(0.744)
13.41***
(0.899)
-0.01*
(0.005)

0.518
(0.368)
0.919*
(0.416)
3.497***
(0.508)
11.76***
(0.621)
-0.054***
(0.004)

0.686*
(0.364)
0.721*
(0.412)
2.333***
(0.495)
9.089***
(0.623)
-0.054***
(0.004)

-0.00132
(0.00432)
-0.0101*
(0.006)
-0.0440***
(0.007)
-0.145***
(0.009)
0.36
92,898
Yes

0.00360
(0.00430)
-0.0110*
(0.006)
-0.0397***
(0.007)
-0.131***
(0.009)
0.39
92,898
Yes

-0.00428
(0.00342)
-0.00767**
(0.004)
-0.0305***
(0.005)
-0.108***
(0.006)
0.44
92,898
Yes

-0.00745**
(0.00338)
-0.00895**
(0.004)
-0.0249***
(0.005)
-0.0916***
(0.006)
0.47
92,898
Yes

Yes
No
Yes
No

Yes
No
No
Yes

No
Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
No
Yes

1

3.
4.
5.
Pricet

Gamma

1

Pricet 1
⇥ Implied Volatility Quintile 2.
⇥ Implied Volatility Quintile 3.
⇥ Implied Volatility Quintile 4.
⇥ Implied Volatility Quintile 5.
Adjusted R2
Observations
Bond Characteristics
Fixed E↵ects
firm
bond
year
year ⇥ month

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of Gamma measure of bond illiquidity on lagged
bond price, indicators variables defined from five quintiles of implied volatility, as well as the interactions between the implied
volatility quintiles and lagged price and a vector of bond characteristics that includes the issue size and time since issuance.
Specifications include firm, bond, and either year or year-by-month fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Table 15: Instrumental Variables Regressions of Illiquidity on Bond Prices
Gamma
Cumulative Stock
Return
Cumulative Industry
Return
Pricet 1
Adjusted R2
Observations
Estimation
Instrument
Fixed E↵ects
bond
year ⇥ month

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

-0.167 ***
(0.024)
0.22
175,244
2SLS
Industry

-0.270 ***
(0.0067)
0.106
175,244
2SLS
‘Strong’ Industry

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

-0.281 ***
(0.035)
-0.504 ***
(0.079)

0.37
176,527
OLS
-

0.37
176,169
OLS
-

-0.133 ***
(0.008)
0.24
175,598
2SLS
Stock

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of the Gamma measure of bond illiquidity on instrumental variables for bond prices. The instruments we use are: cumulative stock return (Columns 1 and 3); cumulative industry
return (Columns 2 and 4); and ‘strong’ industry returns (Column 5). The regressions are estimated with either OLS (Columns
1 and 2) or 2SLS (Columns 3-5). All specification include bond and year-by-month fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

50

Table 16: Large Stock Price Decline Instruments: Summary Statistics

Mean

Standard
Deviation

25th
Percentile

Median

75th
Percentile

Observations

Stock Returnt

1

-0.099

Stock Returnt 1  25th Percentile
0.076
-0.125
-0.080

-0.048

46,784

Stock Returnt

1

0.046

Stock Returnt 1 > 25th Percentile
0.087
-0.0003
0.031

0.072

131,853

Stock Returnt

1

-0.145

Stock Returnt 1  10th Percentile
0.089
-0.180
-0.123

-0.086

20,086

1

0.028

Stock Returnt 1 > 10th Percentile
0.091
-0.021
0.018

0.063

158,551

Stock Returnt

This table reports summary statistics for lagged large monthly stock returns. The first two rows of the table report summary
statistics for stock returns that are below or above the 25th percentile of monthly stock returns. The last two rows report
summary statistics for stock returns that are below or above the 10th percentile of monthly stock returns.

Table 17: Instrumental Variables Regressions of the E↵ect of Large Stock Price Declines on Bond
Illiquidity

Pricet

1

Adjusted R2
Observations
Estimation
Instrument
Fixed E↵ects
bond
year
year ⇥ month

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

Gamma

-0.276 ***
(0.011)
0.06
175,302
2SLS
Stock
Rt 1 <p25

-0.134 ***
(0.023)
0.24
175,302
2SLS
Stock
Rt 1 <p25

-0.261 ***
(0.011)
0.09
175,302
2SLS
Stock
Rt 1 <p10

-0.141 ***
(0.022)
0.23
175,302
2SLS
Stock
Rt 1 <p10

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of the Gamma measure of bond illiquidity on instrumental variables for bond prices. The instruments we use are: large stock returns declines that are below the 25th percentile of
the monthly stock return distribution (Columns 1 and 2) or below the 10th percentile of the monthly stock return distribution
(Columns 3 and 4). The regressions are estimated using 2SLS and specification include bond and either year or year-by-month
fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

51

Table 18: The E↵ect of Oil Price on the Illiquidity of Oil and Gas Bonds

log(Oil Pricet )
Leveraget

1

Leveraget

1 ⇥log(Oil

Adjusted R2
Observations
Number of bonds
Fixed E↵ects
bond
year

Gamma

Gamma

Amihud

Amihud

IRT

IRT

-3.160 ***
(0.229)

-0.014 ***
(0.001)

0.240
27,134
798

-0.005 ***
(0.002)
0.145 ***
(0.020)
-0.028 ***
(0.004)
0.251
25,966
745

-0.004 ***
(0.0002)

0.292
18,359
669

-0.522
(0.380)
42.766 ***
(5.315)
-8.836 ***
(1.164)
0.327
17,636
628

0.284
29,452
808

-0.001 ***
(0.0003)
0.041 ***
(0.004)
-0.008 ***
(0.0008)
0.303
28,120
753

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Pricet )

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from a regression of the three measures of bond
illiquidity on log oil price, firm leverage, and an interaction between log oil price and leverage. The regressions
are estimated for bonds issued by oil and gas companies. All specifications include bond and year-by-month
fixed e↵ects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by bond: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.

52

