                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             OBSTACLES TO INTERNATIONAL
                         MACROECONOMIC POLICY COORDINATION




                                 Jeffrey A. Frankel




                               Working Paper No. 2505




                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 1988




is  paper was begun when the author was a Consultant in the Research Department of
ne International Monetary Fund in the Fall of 1986, and an earlier version appears
s IMF Working Paper 87/29, April 1987.  He would like to thank Katharine Rockett
r  effective research assistance, and Malcolm Knight for suggestions.   Views expressed
re the authors. The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program
n International Studies.  Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
hose of the National Bureau of Economic Research.   Support from The Lynde and Harry
radley Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
                                                            NBER Working Paper #2505
                                                            February 1988




                        Obstacles to International
                    Macroeconomic Policy Coordination




                                   ABSTRACT


     Coordination    of macroeconomic      policies      among    countries     ia not na

straightforward    in practice as it appears in theory.              Thia paper discuases

three obstacles    to successful    international     coordination:       (1)    uncertainty

as to the correct initial position of the economy,                (2) uncertainty     as to

the correct objective, and (3) uncertainty as to the correct model linking

policy actions to their effects in the economy.                  Previous results     (NBER

Working   Paper No. 2059)      showed   that   coordination       under conditions     of

policy—maker    disagreement   about the correct model           could very well reduce

national welfare rather than raise it.          This paper extends those results to

allow for explicit policy—maker recognition           of uncertainty      regarding     the

correct model, as well as uncertointy          regarding    the model to which other

policy—makers    subscribe,    it also shows      that    the potential       gains   from

coordination,   even when positive, are usually small relative to the gains

from unilateral policy changes based on improved knowledge of the model.



                                                Jeffrey A. Frankel
                                                Department of Economics
                                                University of California
                                                Berkeley, CA 94720
                                                (/45) 642—8084
                 Obstacles   to International Macroeconomic
                             Policy Coordination

                              Jeffrey A. Frankel

1.   Introduction

      It is possible to define international macroeconomic    cooperation

quite broadly, to include for example the exchange of information among

policy makers.      But it is probably desirable to reserve for the term

international policy coordination the more precise definition that is

understood in the academic literature the agreement by two or more

countries to a cooperative set of policy changes where neither would

wish to undertake the policy change on its own, but where each expects

the package to leave it better off, relative to the Nash non—cooperative

equilibrium in which each sets its policies taking the other's as given. 1/

The gains are supposed to come specifically from externalities, or "spillover'

effects that one country's policies have on other countries' economies but

that the first country would have no incentive to take into account in the

absence of coordination.       If each country has well—defined objectives and




  1/ Other definitions of coordination are possible as well. For example,
under our definition, a switch from a floating exchange rate regime to a
fixed exchange rate regime would, if it improved welfare by avoiding com-
                                                      substitute for coor-
petitive appreciation or depreciation, be a practical
dination; but some authors choose to define such internationally—agreed
changes in regime to be a form of coordination (e.g., Melitz (1985)). For
a review of definitions of coordination and related concepts, see Masson
and Home (1986), chapter 13 to Corden (1985) or Kenen (1987). For an
introduction to the literature, see Oudiz and Sachs (1984), Cooper (1985)
or   Fischer (1987).
                                   —2—

knows the true model of the world mscroeconomy,   then it follows in genersl

that there will exist cooperative solutions that are Pareto—improving,

i.e., that do leave all countries better off. 1/    This theoretical proposi-

tion makes successful coordination sound straightforward, even easy.     But

when we visualize the practical process of coordinsted policy—making, we

can identify serious obstacles at each of three stages.

     At the first stage, each country must decide what specific policy

changes it would like to ask the other country, or countries, to undertake,

and what it would, for its part, be willing to give up to get them.     One

can think of this stage as taking place in internal deliberations in advance

of a c—s or Summit Meeting.   At the second stage, the two or more countries

must negotiate how the gains from coordination are to be distributed.     One

can think of this stage as constituting the actual bargaining.    The nego-

tiations might result in a set of agreed—upon target economic indicators.       2/

At the third stage, the agreement must be enforced, including a clear way
of verifying which countries are abiding by the agreement, in addition to a
       There are two important qualifications to the generality of the
standard proposition thst coordination improves welfare. The first is
that if policy—makers have enough independent instruments to reach their
optimum target goals regardless of each others' actions, then coordination
is moot. The second is that Rogoff (1985) has shown that if coordination
reduces governments' ability to precommit to snti—inflationsry policies,
credibly to their own peoples, then it can reduce welfare.
  2/ At the Tokyo Summit of May 1986, it was decided that the 0—5, or
henceforth the 0—7, would focus on a set of "objective indicators". At
the September 1986 IMF Annual Meetings, the use of these indicators was
publicly discussed. The indicators at this time had more the nature of
targets that each country hoped to attain using only its own policy instru-
ments, rather thsn targets that were set cooperatively.   Mevertheless,
these indicators might be viewed as prototypes for the variables that the
countries would bargain over  if coordination were to become more serious.
                                     -3—




specification   as to what should be done if the agreement is violated (for


example, whether penalties       should be imposed).


      From a reading of the existing literature, one might think that the only

obstacles to coordination occur at the latter two stages:            bargaining over

the gains from coordination and then enforcing the agreement.           But the

premise of this paper is that the problems that occur at the first stage

may be more serious.          It is not a trivial task to decide what

policy changes are in a country's interest.            If a country makes requests of

its neighbors   based on a misperception      of the spillover effects, the true

effect of coordination may be to reduce welfare, rather than improve it.

Furthermore,    the gains from convincing      trading partners to move their

policies in the desired direction,         even if they turn out to be positive,

may be dwarfed by the potential       gains from unilateral domestic changes of

policies based on a better understanding        of objectives or models.

      In this paper we consider difficulties at the first stage, uncertainty

as to what changes in foreign policies are in the home country's interest

(and what are the costs of domestic policy changes requested by the other

country).   We leave the later issues of bargaining and enforcement to other

authors.    There are three things that need to be known before the coordination

process can begin:      (1)    Where does the initial position of the domestic

country lie, relative to the optimum values of the target variables?

(2)   What are the correct weights to put on the various possible target

variables? 1/     (3)   What effect does each unit change in the domestic



  1/ This includes the question of which variables should be excluded
from consideration altogether, and which included.
                                                           —4—


macroeconomic policy variables (or the foreign) have on the target

variables; that is, what is the correct model of the economy?

        These three elements follow very simply from the algebraic expression

for the welfare function.                  We specify here a function of three target

variables, although we could as easily have more or fewer.


        (1)      W       1/2 y2 + 1/2              ux2 +    1/2       Cr112

        (1*)      W*       1/2      ,,*2   ÷   1/2       üx*2 +       1/2


where    W    is the quadratic loss to be minimized, y is output (expressed

relative to its optimum and in log form), x is the current account

(expressed as a percentage of GNP and again relative to its optimum),

IT   is the inflation rate,           u     is the relative welfare weight placed on the

current account,              is the relative weight placed on inflation, and an

asterisk (*) denotes the analogous variables for the foreign country. We

will refer to two policy instruments:                           the money supply, m (in log form),

and government expenditure, g (as a percentage of GNP).                          The marginal

welfare effects of changes in these policy variables are then given by


       (2)       dW/dm =          (y)y     + (x)xm          +


       (3)      dW/dg             (y)yg    +                +
                                               Wx(x)xg


       (4)      dW/dm*    =        (y)y*       + Cx(x)xm* +


       (5)      dW/dg*    =                    +                  +
                                   (y)yg*              Cw(x)sg*

                              =
       (2*)      dW*/dm             (y*)y          + C *(x*)x* +


       (3*)      dW*/dg                            +                  +
                                   (y*)yg                *()T*)
                                                   —5—

         (4*)       dW*/dm*         (y*)y* ÷       *(x*)x*,.,. +    w:*(1T*)1T*m*


         (5*)       dW*/dg*         (Y*)Yg*
                                              +
                                                   ***         +

where the        policy multiplier effect of money on output is given by Ym' the

effect of money on the current account by Xm, etc.                      If we wished to solve

for the optimum, we would set these derivatives equal to zero (with the

target variables (y), (x), etc., first expressed as linear functions of

the policy variables          in,   g, etc.).      In the Nash noncooperative equilibrium,

in which each country takes the other's policies as given, we would need

only equations (2), (3), (4*) and (5*) for the solution. Each country

ignores the effect that its policies have on the other country, so

equations (4), (5), (2*) and (3*) do not enter.                     Indeed this is precisely

the standard reason why the noncooperative equilibrium is sub—optimal.

These               effects enter only in the determination of the
         cross—country
cooperative solution.
         The    focus here is on the fact that the economy may not be at an

optimal point, either the constrained optimum of the Nash noncooperative

solution or the Pareto—improving move to the cooperative solution, due to

the policy—makers' lack of knowledge regarding the relevant parameters.

Equation (2), or any other of the eight equations above, neatly illustrates

the three kinds of uncertainty: uncertainty about the initial position,

y,   x   and    ,   about the welfare weights            and   r,   or about the

policy multipliers,           Y. Xm and           As we will see, the uncertainty

is so great that we typically cannot identify the sign of expressions (4)

and (5) with confidence i.e., the domestic country can't be sure whether

it should want to ask the foreign country to expand or contract its monetary

and fiscal policies in order to improve its own welfare.                       Similarly,   as we

can't be sure of the signs in expressions (2) and (3), the domestic country
                                    —   6—



doesn't know how to respond to foreign requests for changes in its policies.

This uncertainty is a serious stumbling block to any effort at coordination.

       One might reasonably argue that this uncertainty is no different

from the uncertainty that always plagues policy—making, and that the

implication for governments is simply that they should maximize expected

welfare. 1/    But international spillover effects, which are the essence of

international coordination, are more subject to uncertainty, particularly

with respect to their sign, than domestic effects.    One can argue in defense

of discretionary domestic policy (as opposed to rules of the monetarist type)

that a small policy change in the desired direction is better than none.

It is more difficult in the face of uncertainty to make the argument that

some internationnal coordination is better than none.

       Four conclusions emerge from this paper.   First, if policy—makers in

the l980s are serious about activist international coordination, they

should begin by specifying clearly in what direction they wish their partners

to move their policies,   and what they are willing to give up for it; other-

wise, vague calls for coordination must be considered political. Second,

we should recognize that the result from the theoretical literature, that

coordination necessarily improves welfare, is overly strong.     If policy—

makers are mistaken about their initial position, about the appropriate

weights on the targets, or about the policy multipliers, then coordination

may reduce welfare, instead of increasing it.     Third, even when it works

out that coordination improves welfare, the magnitude of the gains is so

small that it is usually dwarfed by the potential gains from unilateral

policy changes, except in the case when the authorities know the initial

position, target weights, and policy multipliers precisely.     Fourth,   gains


  1/    As in Brainard (1967).
                                    —7—

from exchange of information, for example regarding the multipliera,

offer an alternative rationale for international cooperation.

      The paper considera uncertainty regarding the initial poaition in

Section 2 and uncertainty regarding the welfare weighta in Section 3.

Section 4 reviewa some results on the implications of diaagreement over the

correct model, and section 5 presents new extensions of the analysia to

allow for policy—makers' recognition of the uncertainty over the model.

Section & considers the effects of unilateral policy changes based on the

use of better models and draws some conclusions.

2.    Uncertainty regarding the initial position

      It is clear from the above equations that uncertainty as to the initial

values of y, x, and it——output, the current account, and inflation——relative

to their optimums, translates into uncertainty as to the desirability of

various policy changes.   This type of uncertainty can, in turn, be broken

into three components.

      First is uncertainty as to the current value of the target variable in

question.   It is well known that GNP and the other variables are measured

with a lag, and are often revised subsequent to the initial estimates.

      In a recent study of U.S. GNP revisions, Mankiw and Shapiro (1986) find

that the standard deviation of the revision from the preliminary estimate

of the real growth rate to the final number is 2.2 percentage points. 1/

Some statistics are reported in Table 1.   Since the mean of the true growth

rate over the sample period was 2.4 percent per year (and the standard

deviation 4.6 percent) the revisions are very large.   Mankiw and Shapiro


 1/   See also Zsrnowitz (1982) and Zarnowitz and Moore (1982).
                                         —8—



point   out that when the preliminary estimate indicates no growth, the

probability that the final estimate will exceed 2.0 percent is 18 percent

(assuming a normal distribution),        Sometimes we don't know whether the

economy is currently in a boom or a recession, to within a 90 percent

confidence interval.    Even the preliminary estimate is available only

60 days after the midpoint of the quarter, not contemporaneously. 1/

Furthermore, there could be large errors in the final GNP numbers, due to

both conceptual and measurement problems.       The initial estimates of inflation

numbers also contain measurement efrors, and the trade statistics have

been notorious in recent years, both for undergoing large revisions in the

case of the United States, and for failing to satisfy "adding—up" constraints

across countries, which indicates the existence of large measurement errors.


             Table 1.   Final Revisions in U.S. GNP Growth Rates

                   (Estimation period:     1976:1 —   1982:IV)

                                              Nominal                 Real
                                         (current dollars)       (1972 dollars)


       Standard deviation of revision
         from flash estimate                   3.1                    2.2

       Standard deviation of revision
         from preliminary estimate             2.7                    2.2

    Mean of final growth rate                  9.9                    2.4

       Standard deviation of
         final growth rate                     5.7                    4.6

        Source:   Mankiw and Shapiro (1986), Tables 2 and 3.


  1/    Until 1985, a 'flash estimate      was available 30 days after the midpoint
of the quarter. Mankiw and Shapiro find that the revision from flash
estimate to final number also had a standard deviation of 2.2 percent. Note
that the revisions in nominal GNP are larger than in real GNP (because the true
variability of nominal GNP is larger).
                                                                               States). UnIted the and France mr (12 observationsannual 13 A/
                                                                                                Seveo). Summit for (12 observationsannual 15 3/
                                                                                                 Seven). Summit for (9 observationsannual 12   2/
                                                             Seven).     SummIt for 12 and Germany and France for (14 observationSannual 15 1/
                                                                                                                                           Source:
                                                                                        13. and 9 3, 1, Toblen (1986). Schwartz avd Keoen
                                                        2.972      5.083       4.009     3.105           error equated mean Root             4/ year current
                           13.962    3.430     7,967
                                                                                                             error absolute Mean                  dollars) of
                           10.667    2.485     6.2bl    2.592      4.000       2.917     2.308
                                                                                                            error algebraic Mean
                                                                   —0.785      —2.067    —0.354                                            (billions Balance
                           0.600     —1.531    —1.569   —0.454
                                                                               —1.400    —1.915   account    current actual Mean                 Account Current
                           —21.825   1.746     9.454    —2.24b     2.754
                                                                                         3.170           error equated mean Rout 2/ ahead year one
                  1.172    1,410     4.069     3.502    4.145      1,077       1,780
      1.634                                                                                                  error absolute Mean            Inflation
                           1.058     3.258     2.525    3.400      0.800       1.467     2.175
      1.161       1.044
                                                                                                         error squared       mean   Root
                                     2.016     2.242    2.738      0.687       1,155     2.407
      0.776       0.743    0,924                                                                             error      absolute Mean
                                     j.573     1.513    1.920      0.513       1.127     1.687
',O   0.573       0.608    0.713
                                     —0.640    —0.007   —1.080     0.153       —0.900    —0.900             error algebraic         Mean
      —0.293      —0.275   0.527                                                                                                             3/ year current
                                                                                                                                              deflator) (GNP
                                                                                                           inflation actual Mean                      Inflation
      7.200       6.558    6.687               5.800    14.633      4.580      9.480      8.067
                                                                    1.889      1.460     2.353           error   squared mean Root 3/ ahead year one
      1.629       1.198    2,031     1.911     3.683    2.661
                                                                               1.142     1.833                 error absolute Mean          growth Real
                  0.967    1.691     1.442     2.033    2.058       1.508
                                                                                          1.535          error    squared    mean   Root
                  0.173    1.314     1.143     2.221    1.722       1.319      0.781
       0.761                                                                                                    error absolute Mean
                           1.160     0.880     1.533    1.280       1.107      0.621      1.227
       0.647      0.658                                                                                        error algebraic Mean
                           0.240     —0.160    0.813    —0.253      0.480      0.164      0.067
       0.247
                                                                                                                                             !' year cutrent
                                               4.440     2.380      2.233      2.971      3.513           growth Clip actual Mean               growth COP Real
      2.833       3.150    2.667      1.907
                                                                  Cermany     France     Canada                         Statistic                       Variable
      Countries    Seven    Statea   Xingdom   Japan    Italy
         All      Summit    United    United
                                                                  leea   forecaat   ce seaaured (Rrror
                                                        actual)
                                               Coantrie Indvstrialin ForeCaata 1148 of Ana1yai            2.    Table
                                       —
                                           10 —




     Secondly to    uncertainty   over the current true values of the variables

in question is uncertaintyover how they are likely to move during the

forthcoming year or more in the absence of policy changes (the "baseline

forecast").    This information is relevant on the assumption that any policy

changes agreed upon will have their major impact beginning in a year or

more, rather than immediately.

     Kenen and Schwartz (1986) have studied the accuracy of current—year forecasts

by the IMF World Economic Outlook for the last fifteen years (1971—85).

These forecasts usually appear in April or May of the year in question,

and are based on information available through February or March.           His

results are summarized in Table 2.      The root mean squared error among the

Summit Seven countries     is 0.773 percentage    points for real growth and

0.743 percentage points for inflation.       These prediction errors, relatively

small, are in themselves large enough to reverse the signs of the derivatives

of the welfare function equations      (2)—(5).   Errors would presumably be much

larger for the horizons of two years or more that are probably most relevant

for policymaking.      Many major international econometric models show the

effects of monetary and fiscal policy peaking in the second year in the

case of output, and not reaching a peak within aix years in the case of the

price level or current account.
                                                                   -




     The forecasting     record of other agencies or private sector firms is

not noticeably better than that of the Fund. 1/        Such uncertainty need not

accrue to the discredit of the economics profession:                        future
                                                              forecasting

disturbances   is by its nature a near—impossible     task.


      See NcNeea (1979) and Zarnowitz (1985).
                                       —
                                           11 —



     The third component of uncertainty as to the initial position of the

economy relative to its optimum is the location of the optimum.        The

location of full employment and potential output can be given relatively

objective—sounding   definitions:     the nonaccelerating—inflation   rate of

unemployment,   and the level of output when the factors of production are

fully employed, respectively.       But estimates nevertheless   vary widely. 1/

Zero seems an obvious choice for the optimum value of inflation. 2/

Estimates   for the optimum current account are much more problematic.          Zero

again seems a natural choice, under the Polonius Principle of international

finance: "Neither a borrower nor a lender be." 3/        But estimates of optimal

current account balances can vary widely; theoretical analyses suggest that

the optimal rate of borrowing (or lending) can be quite large, to finance

either longer—term investment and growth or shorter—term shortfalls in

real income.


  1/ For example, as of 1986, James Tobin estimates the U.S. natural
rate of unemployment at about 5 3/4 percent and Herbert Stein at about
7 percent. Moreover, there is no particular reason why the natural rate
of unemployment or potential output should be the optimum value relative
to which society measures y in the objective function (1). The official
target for U.S. economic policy under the Humphrey—Hawkins Act is 3 per-
cent unemployment.
  2/ Though even here, Milton Friedman has argued that the optimum rate
of inflation might be less than zero (the negative of the real interest
rate, to equate rates of return on money and capital).
  3/ Dooley and Isard (1986) argue that whenever one country incurs sub-
stantial net indebtedness to another, it runs the risk that the debtor
will find irresistible the temptation either to default explicitly or to
impose other taxes on foreign holdings; this argument suggests that a zero
current account balance might be desirable.  Summers (1985) argues that
governments, for political reasons, do indeed seek current accounts of
zero.   (See also Shakespeare.)
                                      —   12 —




      The point is clear.           The policy—maker's estimates of the current

values of y, x and      ii   in   his country could easily be off by several
                                                                             percentage
points in either direction,           which would flip the signs of the three terms

——any one of which could change the sign of the derivative of the welfare

function ——   in   equations       (2)—(5).      Thus coordinated policy changes could
                                                      1/
move the economy in the wrong direction.

      To take an historical example, 1974 was a year of sharp recession in

the United States.           But because of misleading initial data (and because of

unfamiliarity      with the effects of an oil shock) President Ford declared

inflation   "Public Enemy Number One," even though we know in retrospect that

the recession had already begun.              He then had to reverse his policy priorities

and enact expansionary fiscal policies.                If the United States had asked

trading partners in 1974, as psrt of a coordination process, to adopt

measures that would have deflationary effects,                it would have been precisely

the opposite of what the United States wanted soon thereafter.

3.   Uncertainty regarding weights            Oil target   variables

      The issue of what relative weights                         to put on the target

vsrisbles   in the objective function (1) is even more subjective than the

issue of the optimal values of the target variables.




1/ Of course misperception of the baseline position relative to                the goal will
cause problems for uncoordinated policy—making as well. Hughes                 Hallett (1987)
argues that welfare in the coordinated policy—making equilibrium                may be
relatively more robust to such 'information errors" than in the                Nash non-
cooperative equilibrium.
                                     —   13 —




      Some would   argue   that   the only appropriate objective is to maximize

the value of income, or consumption, and that the correct weight on the

other variables is zero.          To be more correct theoretically,   it is the

present discounted value of consumption         that should be maximized.   One can

then view the inclusion of the current account in the one—period analysis

1/ as a shorthand for all the future periods:          if the country maximized

current consumption while running a large current account deficit, it would

have to undergo much lower consumption in the future to service the debt

incurred.   One can view the motivation for including inflation similarly.

If higher output could be attained with no welfare costs beyond the




  1/ The assumption that governments should seek to attain both "internal
balance' (full eoployment) and "external balance" (trade balance) is part
of the venerable Meade—Mundell framework of policymaking. See Obstfeld
(1986) regarding the appropriate definition of external balance.
                                 —14-




contemporaneous    resource loss from higher inflation,    then the cnst might he

viewed as negligible; but the true cost in fact includes a higher level of

inflation inheritsd    in the future, which will eventually necessitate a

recession to eliminate it. 1/     Thus a one—period objective function that

includes inflation and the current account in addition to output seems to

capture the relevant elements.

     The ultimate argument for putting weight on inflation and the current

account deficit comes not from theory but from consideration of the

economist's place in the policy—making process.       Snciety views these

variables as "bads", and can be said to have a utility function that

includes them in the same way as a consumer has a utility function for

the goods <and bads) he or she consumes.      An economist who maximizes a

theoretical welfare function that excludes such variables           is not solving

a problem to which society wsnts the answer.

     One wmy to obtsin estimates for the weights     tu,   and   oi,   is   to csrry

one step further the argument of accepting the choices of the politicsl

process on its own terms,     Oudiz and Sachs (1984) assume that governments

not only have the correct objective function but that as of 1984 they were

succeeding in optimizing it, in a Nash non—cooperative       equilibrium.          This

allows them to infer what the welfare weights must have been in order to

produce the outcomes for output, inflation and the current account actually

observed.

     Table 3 reports weights     a   and a5   estimated by Oudiz and Sachs for

three countries'    objective functions.   Some further assumptions, beyond the


  1/ One could make an analogous argument for doing what McKibbon and
Sachs (1986) do: include the budget deficit ss a fourth target variable.
                                     —   15 —




strong    assumption on which the methodology is based, are necessary to get

a specific answer; their calculations             feature two alternative sets of

weights.    1/   Other assumptions   could give very different estimates.




            Table 3.    Welfare Weights Estimated at Nash Equilibrium


                            Economic Planning
                               Agency Model                     Multicountry Model
                                            Current                         Current
Country                 Inflation        Account Ratio       Inflation   Account Ratio
                            UJ1
                                              u                  °            °
United States             —5.9                2.9              —4.5           0.0

Japan                     —2.9                4.6              —3.6           5.9

West Germany              —4.9                1.0              —3.0           1.9


Weights show the inflation and current account deviations that give the same
marginal utility as a GNP increase (relative to baseline) sustained for
three years. The Nash equilibrium is taken as the baseline in the Multi—
country model.

  Source:    Oudiz and Sachs (1984), Table 9.




  1/ Depending on which of two econometric models the governments are
assumed to have been using.
                                   —
                                       16—




      The preferences    of different actors vary widely.     Political   conser-

vatives tend to put heavy weight on inflation; their        w might be close to
infinite,     Political liberals tend to put higher weight on outpot; their w.

might be close to zsro.     Although it is difficult to generalize, it might be

said thst a central bank tends to have higher values of         w than the finance
mtnisc      or dheieè5   oUche   government.    (Similarly, Germany, Jdpan, and in

the early 1980s the United States, seem to have higher values of w than do
most smaller countries.) Tne question of how varying preferences of actors

within a country should be aggregated is one that i5 as difficult as it is
wellknown, and it is not addressed hers. Tne point here is only that, in a

society     where the weights of individual actors vary from zero to infinite,

the likelihood must be judged very high that any given government          is using

weights thst differ from the"corrsct" ones that would follow from any

given criterion.      One can see fron the equations    that putting insufficient

weight on fighting inflation, for example, can have the same effect as

overestimatingthe baseline inflation rate:          the policy maker in coordination

exercises may ask his trading partners to adopt expansionary         policies when

contractionarypolicies are in fact called for.          Indeed by 1980 many had

concluded     that precisely thIs mistake had been made by the United States

in the late l970s.

4.              intr      din    the   olicy rnultiyliers

      The polity multipliers, the derivatives in            'ye, etc.,iaequations
(2)-.(5*)    telling the effect of changes in the money supply and government

expenditure     on the target variables, should in theory be more susceptible

to measurement than subjective factors considered so far.          But in fact,
                                —   17 —




any given government is likely to be using policy        multipliers   that differ

substantially from the "true" ones, and that may even be incorrect in sign.

One way of seeing this is to note the tremendous variation in multipliers

according to different schools of thought, or even according to different

estimates in models of "mainstream" macro—economists, They cannot all be

correct, and it seems highly probable that no single model is In fact

exactly right.

     It is possible to illustrate the potential range of multiplier

estimates in some detail.     In a recent exercise conducted at the Brookings

Institute,   12 leading econometric models of the international macroeconomy

simulated the effects of specific policy changes in the United States and

In the rest of the OECD. 1/    The models participating were the Federal

Reserve's Multi—Country model (MCM), the European Economic Community's

Compact model (EEC), the Japanese Economic Planning Agency model (EPA),

Project Link (LINK), Patrick Minford's Liverpool model (LIVPL), the

Mckibbon—Sachs Global model (MSG), the Haas—Masson smaller approximation

of the MCM model (MINIMOD), the Sims—Litterman Vector Auto Regression

model (VAR), the OECD Interlink model (OECD), John Taylor's model (Taylor),

the Wharton Econometrics model      (Wharton),   and the Data Resources, Inc.,

model (DRI).   Table 4 summarizes the results for a change in government



  if See the volume edited by Bryant and Henderson (forthcoming),          for
example Frankel (1986).
                                 —   18 —




expenditure    and Table.5 for a change in the money supply.         All effects

are reported for the second year after the policy change.

     The range of estimates    is large.     The effect of fiscal or monetary

expansion on domestic output and inflation is usually at least of the

positive sign that one would expect.        Even here there are exceptions as

regards inflation:     the VAR, Wharton and Link models sometimes show

expansion   causing a reduction in the CPI, probably due to effects via

mark—up pricing.     But disagreement   among the models becomes much more

common when we turn to the international effects.

     The areas of greatest disagreement among the econometric models are

not the same as one might expect from the theoretical literature.            In the

literature there are two very common ambiguities.        (1)   The effects of a

fiscal expansion on the exchange rate:        is the incipient capital inflow

attracted by higher interest rates enough to offset the trade deficit due

to higher income1 and cause the currency to appreciate?        (2)    The effects of

a change in the exchange rate on income:       is the expansionary effect of a

depreciation on the trade balance enough to offset any contractionary

effects——via   real income, the real money supply, real wealth, imported—input

prices, or indexed wages——and cause income to rise?       A negative answer to

either of these questions could reverse, for example, the well—known Mundell—

Fleming conclusion that a domestic fiscal expansion is transmitted positively

to other countries via a shift in the trade balance.

     There is relatively little disagreement in the econometric models on

these questions,   as is suggested by Table 4.     A U.S. fiscal expansion is
                               —   19 —




transmitted   positively to the rest of the OECD in 10 out of 12 models, and

an expansion in the other countries is transmitted positively to the United

States in 10 out of 11 models.

    The greatest amount of disagreement occurs, rather, on a subject where

the standard theoretical literature is mostly unanimous:      the effect of a


monetary expansion on the domestic current account, and therefore on the

foreign current account and output level.     There are two conflicting effects.

On the one hand, the monetary expansion raises income and therefore imports.

On the other hand, it depreciates the currency, which tends to Improve the

trade balance.    In the Mundell—Fleming   model the net effect must be positive:

a reduction in interest rates causes a net capital outflow which, under a
                                                                   balance.
floating exchange rate, Implies an increase in the current account

(For example, many believe that the U.S. trade deficit began to deteriorate

as early as 1982 because a monetary contraction had raised real interest

rates and the real value of the dollar after 1980.)      It would then follow

that the foreign current account, and therefore     foreign income, move in the

opposite direction:    monetary policy is transmitted inversely in Mundell—

Fleming.   But Table 5 shows a U.S. monetary expansion worsening    the current

account in 8 out of 11 models, and a monetary expansion in the other OECD

countries worsening their current accounts in 5 out of 10 nodels.      In most

models the rest of the Mundell—Fleming     transmission mechanism is reversed

as well: the foreign current account and foreign incone rise rather than

fall.
                                  —   20   —




       Differing perceptions   of policy multipliers imply differing

perceptions of what policy changes are desirable, even in those cases

where there is no disagreement over objective      functions or initial

positions.      Perhaps the most enduring disagreement in OECD policy—tttaking

is the perception     by other countries that there is room for demand

expansion in the German economy (and often in the Japanese economy as

well), in contrast to the perception by the responsible policy—makers in

those countries that there is not.

       One could interpret the disagreement in terms of initial position

as   in section (the Germans seeing themselves as closer to the natural
                  2

rate of unemployment than others see them) or in terms of the objective
function as in section 3 (the Germans putting more weight on inflation
and   less on output than others); but it is perhaps most interesting to

interpret the disagreement in terms of models.       The Germans may believe

that their inflation—output     tradeoff is steeper than others believe it

to be.      This could happen, for example, if the German tradeoff is indeed

steeper than the U.S. tradeoff due to a greater degree of wage indexation,

and Americans lacking familiarity with other economies tend to
                                                               project
from their own economy. 1/      In the case of proposals   for German or

Japanese expansion via monetary policy, in particular as was urged in 1986—87

by   U.S.

  1/ Branson and Rotemberg (1980), attributing the idea to Herbert Giersch,
suggest that the difference in real wage rigidity, and therefore in the
slope of the Aggregate Supply curve, between the United States and Germany
may explain Germany's reluctance to accept U.S. urgings in 1977 to expand
under the "locomotive theory". However, there is nothing in that paper to
suggest that the Americans would not have been as aware of the difference
in structure as the Germans, in which case in urging German expansion they
would simply be making the sort of selfinterested proposal that is a common
part-of any bargaining process. This is different from the situation that
can arise when the policy—makers disagree about the.model and therefore
about whether the proposed policy change is in Germany's interest.
Treasury Secretary James Baker, we have just seen how reasonable     models

disagree about the implications    for the U.S. trade balance and output,

three of eleven econometric models and the Mundell—Fleining theory

implying a negative transmission because the trade balance is dominated

by the exchange rate effect rather than the income effect, but     eight   of

the eleven (and many alternative theoretical     models) implying positive

transmission.   The ambiguity about the sign of the transmission of

monetary policy is particularly damaging for international coordination,

because it means   that   even if the United States succeds in getting Germany

to agree that it should take measures that would stimulate the U.S. trade

balance and output, the two countries could still disagree over whether

this requires that German policy be more expansionary or less.1/

     What   happens   if United States, European and Japanese policy—makers

proceed with coordination efforts despite disagreements     such as these?

We can use the Brookings simulations to consider the possibilities

when they use conflicting models.      In the analysis that follows, the

optimal values of the target variables and the weights in the objective

function are taken from Oudiz and Sachs. 21


  1/ Almost all models would agree that if all countries expand monetary
policy simultaneously, the effect will be expansionary.   Thus Baker's 1986
proposal for simultaneous reductions in discount rates could be beneficial
even if the international transmission is negative (or, in any case, close
to zero) as in some of the models. But the implication would be that the
United States could reap the full benefits by reducing interest rates
unilaterally.  Thus the proposal would not be an example of coordination,
precisely defined.   It is possible that international fora provide a
means for generating necessary political momentum for policy changes, such
as changes in the monetary/fiscal mix to reduce real interest rates, that
could in theory be done unilaterally.
  2/ The remainder of this section draws on Frankel and Rockett (1988).
                                   —    22 —




     It     turns out that the countries will in general be able to find a

package of coordinated policy changes that each believes will leave it

better off, even though each has a different view of the effects and

thus may not understand why the other is willing to go along with the

package.     To take a typical outcome, if the United States monetary

authority believes in the NCM model and other countries'           monetary
authorities believe in the OECO model, then it turns out that they will

find the Nash noncooperativeequilibrium to be overly contractionary, each

country afraid of expanding on its own for fear of worsening its current

account balance.     They will consider a coordinated package under which each

undertakes    monetary expansion to be mutually beneficial, and will agree to

do so (provided any problems of bargaining and enforcement can be overcome).

This is the kind of coordinationurged by the United States.             But whether a

joint monetary expansion actually succeeds in improving their objective

functions depends on the true model.            If the true model is the MCM, then

the United States will indeed be better off; otherwise it would not have

agreed to the change.      Similarly,    if the true model is the OECD, then the

other countries will be better off.            But it turns out that if the LIVPL,

VAR or MSG models are the correct ones, then the coordinated monetary

expansion will not have the effects anticipated and will actually leave

both countries worse off.

     If we consider eight possible models, there are 512 combinations of

models that can be used to represent the beliefs of the U.S. policy—makers,

the beliefs of non—U.S. policy—makers, and reality.            We find that coordination

results in gains for the United States in 289 cases and no effect on the

objective    functions   (to four significant digits) in 17 cases; this is an

improvement    56 percent of the time.         Coordination results in gains for the
                                 —   23 —




rest   of the OECD countries in 297 cases, as against losses in 198 and no

effect in 17, for a 58 percent improvement rate.      (The statistics are

reported in row 1 of Table 6.) 1/

       If the countries are able to include fiscal policy along with monetary

policy in the bargaining package,    the odds turn out to improve a little

(for this particular combination of starting point and welfare weights).

To take an example, if the United States subscribes to LINK and the other

countries to LIVPL, the resulting package of coordinated policy changes

takes the form urged by many economists     in the 1980s:   a U.S. fiscal

contraction, accompanied by a fiscal expansion in Europe and Japan, and

monetary expansion all around.    The usual argument is that this will reduce

the value of the dollar, and therefore the U.S. trade deficit, without

causing a world recession.    Again, if the true model is different from

the one to which the policy—maker subscribes,     this change in monetary/fiscal

mix often turns Out to reduce welfare rather than improve it.       Out   of   all

512 combinations,   coordination turns out to raise U.S. welfare 55 percent

of the time and to raise non—U.S. welfare also 55 percent of the time.

5.     Extensions of the analysis of disagreement regarding multipliers

       Some readers have suggested that, in a world in which different models

abound, it is not sensible to assume that each policy—maker      acts as if he

knows with certainty what model his opponent subscribes     to (the opponent

having no incentive to reveal his beliefs in the absence of cooperation),
1/  These statistics in a sense are biased in favor of gains from coordina-
tion, because they include the one—eighth cases in which the policy—maker
turns out to have had the correct model so that coordination necessarily
improves his welfare.  Statistics that count only cases where the policy—
makers' models are different from the true one are reported in Frankel and
Rocktt (1988).
                                —   24 —




or   even what model he himself considers to be the correct one.-'We now

consider extensions in each of these two directions, in turn.

      To begin with, we retain the assumption that each policy—maker believes

in his own model with certainty, but we allow for uncertainty regarding the

other's model.   The policy—maker will set his policies so as to maximize

expected welfare, a weighted average of the economic consequences of each

of the policy—settings that the foreign government would choose under each

of the possible models to which it might subscribe. 2/

      Tables 7 to 9 report the effects on the United States and the rest of

the OECD, respectively,   of allowing for uncertainty regarding each other's

models, still under the Nash noncooperative equilibrium of monetary policies.

Each country is assumed to give equal weight to all of the possible models

to which the opponent can subscribe.       Table 7 reports the movement from the

baseline specified in the Brookings simulations to the Nash noncooperative

equilibrium, under 36 combinations (6 models subscribed to by the United

States and 6 by the other player). The changes in money supplies to get to

the equilibrium are usually quite close to what they were in the earlier

case where each knew the other's model. The effect of this movement,

depending on the true model, is reported in Table 8 for U.S. welfare and

in Table 9 for non—U.S. welfare.

      The interesting question is the effect of coordination, under the

assumption that each player averages to estimate the other's model.       Table 10


 1/ E.g. Hoitham and Hughes Hallett (1987).

2/ The algebra is spelled Out in Section 4 of Frankel and Rockett (1986).
The numerical results reported here are new.
                                  —   25 —



reports   how money supplies change, and with them perceived values of the

target variable and welfare, in the movement from the Nash noncooperative

point under averaging to the Nash cooperative point.       It is assumed that

part of the cooperation is that each reveals his model to the other.        One


country or   the other may lose bargaining power by having both their models

revealed.    For this reason, the "perceived gain" reported in the last two

lines of each cell in Table 10 is sometimes negative, even though the

perceived gain from coordination with no change in information must

necessarily be positive.

     The actual effect of coordination depends on the true model, as usual.

Table 11 reports the change in welfare for the United States and Table 12

for the non—U.S. countries, under each of the six alternative candidates

for the true model.      If we include all eight models,   coordination under

averaging improves U.S. welfare in 265 cases or 52 percent of the time, out

of the total of 512 combinations,      as against losses in 245, and improves

non—U.S. welfare in 264 cases, again 52 percent of the time as against

losses in 246.    As Table 6 shows, these odds are slightly worse than the

case where each knows the other's model with certainty. This may be because,

once the policy—makers    find Out each other's models in the Nash non-

cooperative equilibrium, there is less left to gain by coordinating.

     In the second extension, we relax the assumption that each policy—

maker acts as if he or she is certain as to the correct model.       We assune rather

that they assign weight to each of the possible models.        To preserve some

disagreement about models, we could assume that each puts primary weight on

a favorite model of his own, but is reasonable enough to put some weight
also in the other models (perhaps with larger weight on the favorite model

of the other player on the theory that he must have access to some

independent information.     Here we consider, instead, the simple case of
                              —   26 —




uniform weights.    As a result, each will be playing by the same "compromise"

model.

       When policy—makers act as if they believe in the "compromise" model

based on averaging the multipliers in the eight equilibrium models, the

Nash non—cooperative equilibrium implies a 6.97 percent U.S. monetary

expansion relative to the baseline, and a 3.81 percent contraction of the

money supplies in other countries.       According to most of the models (though

not the VAR, MSG or LIVPL), this would raise U.S.       income and lower non—U.S.

income,    The welfare effects of averaging models, as compared to the same

Nash noncooperative equilibrium when each policymaker acts upon a single

model held with certainty, are reported in Table 13 for U.S. welfare and

Table 14 for non—U.S. welfare. The six possibilities shown each for the

"model subscribed to by the U.S." and "model subscribed to by Europe" are

those that the respective policy—makers     give up if they move to the com-

promise model.    The move raises welfare relatively often.     When all eight

models are used, averaging raises U.S. welfare in 334 cases, as against

losses in 178, and raises non—U.S. welfare in 301, as against losses in

211.

       The probable reason that averaging usually raises welfare is the simple

statistical principle that the average of eight numbers is closer to the

individual numbers, on average, than the individual numbers are to each
                               —   27 —




other.    The principle does not apply directly, because each policy—maker

having a better estimate of the "tru&'    parameters does     not necessarily

imply that the Nash equilibrium will be better.         But it seems to work here.

     The next step is the move from the noncooperative equilibrium to the

cooperative equilibrium, while maintaining the assumption that each policy—

maker averages multiplier estimates. Based on the compromise model, a

move to the Nash bargaining point consists of a 3.87 percent reduction of

the U.S. money supply and a 5.11 percent increase in the non—U.S. money

supply.    The consequence, according to most of the models, is to lower U.S.

output and to raise non—U.S. output (with more divergence regarding the

current accounts, as noted earlier).      According to the compromise model, the

policy change lowers U.S. output by .60 percent, raises the U.S. current

account by .10 percent of CNP, raises non—U.S. output by 1.03 percent, and

raises the non—U.S.   current account by 0.11 percent of GNP. 1/       The key

question is whether this coordinated policy change improves welfare under

various candidates for the true model.      If the     OECD or LINK models are

Correct, then coordination does turn Out to improve welfare for both countries.

But some models give negative results.      Out   of   the eight, five show increases

in U.S. welfare and three show losses.      The same odds hold for non—U.S.

welfare. 2/    This represents a better case for coordination than prevailed

when each had his own model (63 percent against 56 or 58 percent), as can

be seen in Table 6.-"

   1/ One could attempt to rationalize the compromise model's prediction that
both the U.S. and non—U.S. OECD current accounts improve, by positing a
decline in prices of imports of oil and other commodities from less developed
countries. But the magnitudes of the current account effects are in any
case very small.
   2/ Note that when the policy—makers have the same compromise model, there
are only 8 possible outcomes, rather than 8.
  3/ Hoitham and Hughes Hallett (1987, p. 24), on the other hand, find that
 "There is no advantage in using a synthetic model, which averages the properties
 of competing models; they generate nearly as many losses as the worst of the
  'named' models."
                               —   28 —




        An alternative interpretation of the results on averaging        is that the

two policy makers retain their beliefs in one model or another, but that in

the interest of improving on the non—cooperative equilibrium, they agree to

an alternative kind of cooperation:        they bargain directly over the correct

model rather than just over policy—settings,and then they maximize joint

welfare gains, as in the Nash bargaining solution but using the compromise

model.     Line 6 in Table 6 reports the count for welfare gains from this

kind of cooperation: 317 or .62 percent for U.S. welfare and 296 or .58

percent for non U.S. welfare. 1/     As the results in Tables 13—16——or        the

overall counts in lines 4 or 7 of Table 6——show, most of these gains can be

reaped by averaging to get better model estimates alone, without a

simultaneous move from the noncooperative to the cooperative solution.

        The results reported here suggest the possibility that a type of

cooperation that includes compromises          on the model might raise true welfare

more often than simply trying to maximize perceived joint gains with each

going by his own model.     It offers some support for the conjecture that

ministers in G—5 and Summit Meetings might do better to discuss their

beliefs directly,    rather than simply telling each other how they should

adjust their policies.


  1/ Recall that in the experiment where each policy—maker believes in a
moel  with certainty, the statistics included the one—eighth cases in which
the policy—maker turned out to have had exactly the correct model, so that
the odds were biased in favor of coordination improving welfare. That is
not the case here. In the experiment where the models are averaged, as in
each of the    three last experiments in Table       6, none   of the cases of gains
represent cases where policy—making       is   based on exactly   the correct model,
under our.method of counting the possible outcomes.
 2/ Kenen (1987, p. 8—9) argues that the gains from consultation, swapping
information —— as opposed to coordination, defined in the first paragraph
of this paper —— have not been sufficiently often emphasized by academic
economists.
                                  —   29 —




6.   The gains from better informationon the model

      We have already established the perils of cooperative policy—making

when using the wrong model.      One might wonder about similar perils of

policy—making even without cooperation.        If the policy—maker is wrong

about the initial position, or about the welfare weights, or about the

multipliers, then he will not necessarily be able to attain the optimum

Nash non—cooperative equilibrium.        How much could policy—makers improve

welfare simply by discovering the true model?

      The last four tables show the effects, staying within the Nash

non—cooperativeequilibrium, if one policy—maker,         who may previously

have had the incorrect model, discovers the correct model.         Table 17

shows the effects on U.S. welfare of a model switch, for six possible

true models.     If the United States already has the correct model, the

gains of course are zero.      Otherwise,    the gains are often substantial.

For example, when the United States believes the MCM and the true model

is the Liverpool model, the gain to switching is 2.4091 (assuming the

other country is playing by the Liverpool model), which translated from

the terms of the quadratic welfare function,        is worth 1.55 per cent


(    /2.4091)   of GNP.   Similarly when the United States believes the Liverpool

model and the true model is MCM, the gain to switching is 8.0902 (assuming

the other country is playing by MCM), which is worth 2.84 per cent of CNP.

In occasional cases, the U.S. gains from switching to the correct model are

negative,   because there is a loss of bargaining power and the other country

moves in an undesirable direction. But the gains are usually positive and

often large.
                                     —   30 —




       One sense jn which the gains from unilateral moves can be seen to

be   "larget'    is to compare them to the potential gains from coordination.

In sections 4 and 5 we saw that the effect of a move from the Nash

non—cooperativeequilibrium to the cooperative equilibrium could easily

have a negative effect on welfare if the policy—makers are using the

wrong models.         But we now give coordination the benefit of the doubt.

We report in the first column of Table 17, for each of the six possible

models, the effect on U.S. welfare from coordination under the assumption

that both countries know the true model.          These six numbers are thus a

sort of upper bound on the gains from coordination.          In three casea

(the Liverpool, OECD and LINK models) the potential gain is about .013,

worth only 0.1 per cent of GNP.          The gain is even more negligible in

the case of the MCM, and is substantial only in the case of the MSG

model.

       Table 18 reports the effects on non—U.S. welfare of switching to

the correct model, as compared to the potential         gains from coordination.
Tables 19 and 20 report the same statistics,        U.S. and non—U.S. welfare

effects respectively,        for the experiment where the countries ate free

to vary their level of government expenditure as well as their money

supplies.       1/   It remains true that the gains from unilaterally switching

to the correct model are usually positive and often quite large, in

contrast to the potential gains from coordination,        which are always

small.



  1/ Although equations (2)—(5*) were presented in terms of two policy
instruments for each country, the preceding tables reported here have
referred to monetary policy alone. Frankel and Rockett (1986) report
further effects of coordination when both monetary and fiscal
                                                              policies
are used.
                                   —   31 —




      It   is not a new finding that the potential quantitative gains from

coordination,   even under the conventional assumption that they are

necessarily positive because the true model is known, are small.

Oudiz and Sachs, among others, found the same result, and attributed it

primarily to the small trade multipliers that in practice link the

United States with the rest of the OECD, let alone with individual

countrias./But it is interesting to see the magnitude of these

gains compared side—by—side    with the gains from unilateral improvements

in policy—making.

      In the context of U.S. policy in the 1980s, a commonly proposed policy

coordination package is a reduction in the U.S. budget deficit, accommodated

by a monetary policy of allowing interest rates to drop so as to maintain

nominal GNP growth, accompanied by expansion in Europe and Japan.           Some

economists have argued that most, if not all, of the gains from this

policy package could be accomplished if the United States policy—makers

were to do their part unilaterally. In 1983 and 1984, it seemed to some

that the obstacle was precisely the one on which we have focussed here,

that the U.S. Treasury was operating with the wrong model.        But one

could alternatively    interpret   the U.S. Administration as having failed as


yet to propose measures that would reduce the structural budget deficit for

reasons other than having an incorrect model.      One possibility is a

misperception of the initial conditions as in Section      2;   official forecasts

of the rate of growth have been too high and official      forecasts   of the

trade and budget deficits have been too low.       Another possibility is the



 1/   Carlozzi and Taylor (1985), Oudiz (1985), and Canzoneri and Minford
  (1986) also find that the quantitative gains are small.
                                    —   32 —




weights   in the objective function; many businessmen think the Administration

has put insufficient weight on the trade deficit, for example.              1/

     A    more sympathetic interpretation is that political constraints

prevent    the Administration from convincing the Congress or the Federal

Reserve to adopt the right policies.           Indeed,   it is possible,   as suggested

in an earlier footnote, that the real purpose behind Secretary 'aker's

efforts    to gather momentum in international meetings for worldwide interest

rate cuts is to overcome political obstacles to a switch in the monetary!

fiscal policy mix at home.       Another example of this phenomenon would be

when finance ministers of other countries, meeting at the OECD and elsewhere

in the late 1970s, "psyched themselves up" to return hone and push through

measures to reduce their countries'        budget deficits.

     While the results reported in this and preceding sections appear to

argue against coordination in the more precise definition of the term given

at the outset of this paper, from another perspective they provide evidence

in favor of coordination,      or "cooperation",     defined more broadly to include

the exchange of information. First, there are Sometimes             gains simply from

each country telling the other what model it is playing by, as compared

to the non—cooperative equilibrium in which each must guess the other's

model (Tables    7   and 8).   Secondly,   there are often gains from countries

pooling estimates as to the correct models (Tables 13 and 14), particularly

if done at the same time as coordinating to maximize joint perceived



  1/ The spirit of this paper is that it could alternatively be true that
the objective function, forecast, and model used by the Administration could
be correct and those of its critics incorrect.
                                —   33 —




welfare   gains (e.g., Tables 15 and 16).     Thirdly   if cooperative research

efforts could produce better estimates      of the true model, the gains might

be very large (Tables 17—20).    Finally, if discussions in international

fora allow finance ministers to gather political momentum behind measures

that they already know to be desirable, then the gains could again be

large.    Thus the scope for useful international cooperation remains wide,

provided it is defined more broadly than in the precise academic aense.
                                      —34—


          Table 4: Estimates of Fiscal Policy Multipliers


          SinulationEffect Sn Second Year of increase in Covernnent inoenditure              (1 Percent    of CNP)



                                                         S        Currency CA         CC
                                        0     Cli      (pta.)       Value  (Sb)      (Sb)
                                                                                                 j*
                                                                                               (pta.)      CPO       y
lineal Expansion in
  U.S. (—lix. I)                                    Effect Sn U.S.                           Effeer In One—VA.
       MCI                            +1.8%   +0.4%     +1.7                —16.5    +8.9       +0.4      +0.4%      +0.7%
                                                                   ;+2.5%
       EEC   j/                       +1.2%   +0.6%     +1.5        +0.6%   —11.6    +6.6       +0.3      +0.2%      +0.3%

       EPA    2/                      +1.7%   +0.9%     +2.2        +1.9%   —20.5    +9.3       +0.5      +0.3%      +0.9%
       LINK                           +1.2%   +0.5%     +0,2        —0.1%   —6.4     +1.9         NA      —0.0%      +0.1%

       Liverpool                      +0.6%   +0.2%     +0.4        +1.0%   —7.0     +3.4       +0.1      +0.6%      —0.0%

       NSC                            +0.9%   —0.1%     +0.9        +3.2%   —21.6 +22.7         +1.0      .0.5%      +0.3%

       MINiMOD                        41.0%   +0.3%     +1.1        +1.0%   —8.5     +5.5       +0.2      +0.1%      +0.3%

       VAR 3/                         +0.4%   —0.9%     +0.1        +1.2%   —0.5     —0.2       —0.0      —0.0%      —0.0%

       OECD                           +1.1%   +0.6%     +1.7        +0.4%   —14.2 +11.4         +0.7      +0.3%      +0,4%
       taylor 3/                      +0.6%   +0.5%     +0.3        +4.0%       NA      NA      +0.2      +0.4%      +0.4%

       Wharton                        +1.47   +0.3%     +1.1        —2.1%   —15.4    +5.3       +0.5      —0.1%      +0.2%
       DRS                            +2.1%   +0.4%     +1.6        +3,2%   —22.0     +0.8      +0.4      +0.3%      +0.7%


fiscal  Expansion in
   Non—U.S. Otto
   (Sia. C)                                     Effect On Non—U.S.                             Effect   Sn U.S.

       MCI                            +1.4%   +0.3%     +0.5        +0.3%    —7.2     +7,9      +0.5      +0.2%      +0,5%
       EEC                          • +1.3%   +0.8%     +0.4        —0,5%    —9.3     +3.0      +0.0      +0.1%      +0.2%
       EPA 2/                         +2.3%   +0.7%     +0.3        —0.7%   —13.1     +4.7      +0.5      +0.3%      +0.3%
       LInk                           +1,2%   +0.1%          NA     —0.1%    —6.1     +6.3      +0.0      +0.5%      +0.2%
       Liverpool                :     +0.3%   +0.8%     +0.0        +3,3%   +07.2    +11,9      +0.8      +3.1%      —0.5%

       NSC                            +1.1%   +0.1%     +8.4        +2.9%    —5.3    +10.5      +1.3      +0.6%      +0.4%
       MINIMOD                        +1.6%   +0.2%     +0.9        +0.6%    —2.2     +3.2      +0.3      +0.2%      +0.1%
       VAR    3/                      +0.5%   —0.3%     —0,2        —2.4%    +1.7     —2.6      +0.2      —0.1%      +0.3%
       OttO                           +1.5%   +0.7%     +1.9        +0.9%    —6.9     +3.3      +0.3      +0.2%      +0.1%
                                                                            -
       taylor 3/                      +1.6%   +1.2%     +0.6        +2.7%       NA      NA      +0.4      +0.9%      +0.6%
       Wharton                        +3.2%    0.8%     +0,8        —2.4%    —5.5     +4,7      +0.1      —0.0%      +0.0%
       lit                              NA      NA           NA       NA        NA      NA        NA        NA         NA
 !      Non—U.S.   soort—terx[KjjjjrateNA; long—tern repärted instead.
  2/    Non—U.S. current account is Japan, Cernany,     the United    Kingdom, and Canada.
  3/    Cli NA. CIP deflator reported instead.


Source:        Frankel (1986)
                                               —35—


                                 Table 5: Estimates of Monetary Policy Multipliers


                       StrulattonEffect in Second Year of Increase In Koney Suonly (4 Percent)



                                                              I        Currency    CA              CAa        1
                                           2      CP2        (pro.)     Value     (Sb)             (Sb)     (pEn.)        CPI         2°


Monetary Expanaion
  to U.S. (Sin. 0)                                      Effect In U.S.                         -
                                                                                                          Effect    In   Ion—U.S.

       9Q(                               +7..5%   +0.42      —2.2       —6.02      —3.2        —3.5          —0.5        —0.62       —0.72

       EEC      1/                       +1.02    +0.8%      —2.4       —&0Z       —2.8        .1.2          —0.5        —0.42       .0.22
       EPA      2/                       +1.22    +1.02      —2.2       —6.42      —1.6       —10.1          —0.6        —0.52       —0.42

       LINE                              +1.02    —0.42       —1.4      —2.32      '-5.9       +1.)            NA        -0.12       —0.1%

       Liverpool                         +0.1%    +3.7%       —0.3      —3.92     —13.0        +0.1          —0.1        —0,02       —0.02

       MSG                               +0.3%    +1.52       —0.8      —2.0%      +2.6            —4.4      —1.0        —0.1%       .0.4%

       MINIMOD                           +1.0%    +0.8%       —1.8      —5.7%      +2.8            —4.7      —0.1        —0.2%       —0.2%

       VAR      3!                       +3,0%    +0.4%      —1.9       —22.9%     +4.9            +5.1      +0.3        *0.11       +0.4%

       OECD                              +1.6%    .0.72       —0.8      —2.62      —8.6            +3.1      —0.1        —0.1%       .0.32

       Taylor 3/                         +0.6%    +1.22       —0.4      —4.9%        NA              NA      —0.1        —0.2%       —0.2%

       Wharton                           +0.7%    +0.02       —2.1      —1.02      —5.1            +5.3      —1.3        -0.1%       .0.42

       DP.I-,                            +1.5%    +0.42       —2.3      —14.62     —1.4       .14.5          —(.1        —1.32       —0.6%


Monetary Expansion
  in Non—U.S.          0ED
  (Ste. H)                                            Effect On Non—U.S.                                    Effect to U.S.

       MON                               +1.5%    +0.6%       —2.1      —5.4%      +3.5            +0.1      —0.2        —0.2%       —0.02

       c        1/                       +0.8%    +1.02       —1.0      —2.3%      —5.2            +1.9      +0.0        +0.12
                                                                                                                                 -

                                                                                                                                     +0.12
       EPA      2/                       +0.0%    +0.0%       —0.1      —0.12      —0.1            +0.1       0.Q        —0.02       +0.0%
       Lin4/                             +0.82     0.6%           NA     —2.3%     —1.4            +3.5      +0.0        —0.0%       +0.1%

       Liverpool                         +0.4%    +2.82       —0.9      —8.4%      +1.1            —8.2      —1.1        —3.4%       +1.62

       MSG                               +0.22    +1.52       —0.7       —1.42    —15.9       +12.0          —1.2        —0.6%       +0.3%

       MENIMOD                           +0.82    +0.2%       —1.8       —4.8%     +3.6            —1.4       —0.6       —0.5%       —0.32

       VAR      3/                       +0.72    —0.52       —3.0        5.51     +5.2       —10.0           +0.4       —0.72       +1.2%

       OECD                              +0.82    .0.3%       —1.3       —2.12     —1.6            +2.3       —0.2       —0.1%       +0.12

       Taylor 3/                          +0.81   +0.7%       —0.3       '-3.12         98.          NA       —0.2       —0.5%       —0.1%

       Wharton                           +0.2%    —0.1%       —0.8       +0.2%     +2.6            +0.5       +0.0       +0.0%       +0.0%

       DEE                                  NA        148.        NA       NA           NA           NA            NA       NA          NA
                                interest
                       obort—tera          rate NA;   loog—tera reported instead.
  !
  3! cpi
        Non—U.S. current account is Japan, Cernany, the United Etngdo. and Canada.
                 ON? deflator reported lnatead
                 NA.
  !'    Appreciation of non—U.S. currency NA; depreciation of dol3ar reported instead

  Source: Frankel (1986)
                             Table 6. Effects of Welfare of Changes in Honetary Policy




                                                         •                                  Non—U.S. Welfare
                                                           U.S. Welfare
                         -                     gains   losses    no     frequency   gains   lose8    no    frequency
                                                               effect   of gains                   effect    of gains


1. Cooperative solution
    compared to non—cooperative solution        289      206     17        .56       297     198     17        .58

2. Averaging to estimate opponent's model,
    compared to knowing it with certainty
    under the non—cooperative solution         261      251       0        .51       282     230      0        .55

3. Cooperative solution,
    compared to non—cooperative solution,      265      245       2        .52       264     246      2         .52
    while averaging to estimate opponent's
    model.

4. Averaging to estimate own model,
    compared to believing one with certainty   334      178       0        .65      301      211      0        .59
    under non—cooperative solution

5. Cooperative solution compared to non-
    cooperative solution, while averaging      320      192      0        .63       320      192      0        .63
    to estimate own model

6. Cooperative solution with averaging to
    estimate own model compared to             317      195      0        .62       296      216      0        .58
    noncooperative solution
    with model certainty.

7. Averaging to estimate own model,
    compared to believing one with             313      199      0        .62       297      221      0        .58
    certainty, under cooperative solution
       0.3824    0.3723    0,4071    —0,8623      0.4444     0,7405                                0.4.            0.0414    "3.0626   —2.5383 '4.3015      0,0002    —1,0064                             0.0.
       2.4663    1.1235    0.0254                 0.2500     0.0090                               OCCO             0.0600    1.0745    1.0030  5,3450       0.2161    0.2400                              OCCI
                                                                                   for; gale O'etcrlord                                                                                    for;   gale Pnronlood
       —2.500    2.146     0,030    —6.064        —2.329     0.629                          CA                     —2.763    —5.997    —5.702    0,702   —2,501   —4,147                    CO
       —2,900    3.637              —4.305        —0,725     2.058                                 6.3.
                                                                                             9                     504 —6.   11.042    10.495    —20.247 —5.604   5.926                      0 0.0.
       —0.705    —3.355    —2.250                 O.5a7      "0.065                         CA                     —0.448    —0.847    —1.323    7,693   0.342    —1.397
       —4.652                                                                                                                                                                               CC
                 —1.651    3.509                  —00.300    —9.535                          8    06C2             —00.962   —0.024    —0,063    —20,142 —00.306 1.056                       5 CCCI
                                                                  Iron target   of dooiotloo Poecolood                                                           goal Oroo begot ef deelatlee Perceived
       0.298    5.052      4,236                 0,517       3.524                          CA                     0.582     —3.251    —2.967    3.520   0.495    —2.002                    CA
       4.072    0.627               0.505        4.245       7.126                           0    0.2.             —0.354    16.612    15,445    —05.217 —2.634
       —0.644                                                                                                                                                     10.096                     5 1.0.
                0,107      0.469                 —0.240      —2.272                         CA                     0.599     —0,940    —0.434    —6.358 —0.045    0,276
                0,040      14.209                                                                                                                                                           CA
       5.820                        —9.331       —OnUS 0.065                    0 CCC5                             —01.262   00.316    9.697     —9.447  —0.408   01.656                     3 CCCI
                                                    bodice Iron begot cooldrelatl Perorlord                                                                  baaollor from target ol dcelatloo Pororiond
       t2.600   62.660     62.661   62.600        62.681     62.680                                Sij             1.585     0.595     7.585     7,585   2.585    0.565
      —8.000    52.877     47.586   '4a.881      —6.083      32,357                               Cuo              —0.410    52,017    41,568    —54.081 —6,203   351 32.                       8C00
                                                                            baroOloo froo OcclusIon                                                                                   6,tco100e   boo locUtion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   900
      —0.0866 0,5636       0.5254   —0,7064      —0.0542     0,5040                               0.0.            1.2728     0.2630    0.7064    —6.0234    1,4154    2,0270                              50.5.
      0.1316 0.0809       1,0406                 0.2749      0.2597                               CCCI            —2.5050    0.0357    —0,9170   4.2092     2.2si2    —3,0453                           OCCI
                                                                                   for;   0010   Prrroiecd                                                                                 torI   gale rerrelued
      —3.727 —2.365       —2,466    —4.773       —3.674     —2,059                                                1.260      —1,903
                                                                                           CA                                          —7,470    3.698      0,039     —0.879                        CA
      —3,847                        —5.009       —3.789     —2.828                          0     0.0,            —00.299    03.896    02.100    —26.809    360 —9.   6.000                          0    50.3.
      —0.525 —0.030                              0.555      —0.372                         CA                     1.201      —1.526    —2.730    —7.681     0.073     —0.609                        CA
      —10,507 —0,406      —0,782    —19.772                  0.500                          0     OCCI                       0.680                                    15.085
                                    —0,430
                                                               Ores             of deolotloo ferrelord
                                                                                                                  —10.978              —7.076    —20.043
                                                                                                                                                           ' —02.308 goal froc
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0    OCCO
                                                                                                                                                                                 target of droloitce PerorOocd
                                                 —0.339     0.526                          CO                     6.976      3.003     4.039     9,404      6.654     4.038                         CO
      1.125     2.635                            1.100      2.042                           0     0.3,            —5.329     10.866    17.071  —23.909 —4,390   12.976
      0.506                                                                                                                                                                                          0 52.5.
                —0.359    —0.390    —5.926                                                 CA                     2.202      —1.055    —1,601  —05.732 —0.704   0.994                               CA
                                    —9.072       —0.400     00.201                          0     CCCI            —0.270     02.360    3,624   —07,463 —0.400 25.605                                 3 CCCI
                                                    6,00elteo     lror          of 600tatloo PerceIved                                                     bauollnr Iron         cargct of dcolatloo Peroolocd
 I    5.332                         5,332        5.332      5.332                                                 —70.579    —70.579   —70,579 —00.579 —79.579 —70.519                                     Mon
',j   —8.410    52,077    47.560    —54.047      —6.063     32,357                                CU0             —8.410     52.077    47.568  —54.007 —6.003   32.351                                    moot
a                                                                           bacollre Iron        Deolotioe                                                                            baeelloo true      Irolunluc
                                                                                                          LOOK                                                                                               L10I'OOL
      —0.0259   0.4005    0.3015    —0.4629      —0.0064    0.2036                                0.0,            0.0567     0,1716    0.0700               0.0572
                                                                                                                                                 0.0450               0.1667                              0.0.
                                    5.2917       0.2752     0.2397                                CCCI            0.2226     1.0669    0.0749    5.0793     0.2732    0.0222                              OCCO
                                                                                  1cr; goOn      Perceived                                                                                icr; gale      Percelerd
      —3.425 —0.336       —0,662    107 —4.                                                CO                     —0.990  —2.850       —2.854    —0.920  —2.069   —2.8o4                     CA
      —3.370              —1.970                 —3.312     —2,351                          0     6.0.            '4.019 —1.019        —1.019    —1.019  —1.019   —1.019                      0           0.5.
      —0.511  —0.837      —1.271    2.037        0.352                              CA                            —0.432  —0.767       —1,165    2.740   0.370    —1.417                     CA
      —00.668 —0.390      —0.843                 —51.300 0.642                       0 DCCI                       —10.067 —0.540       —0.392    —19.052 —11.308 —0.410                       0          UCCO
                                                        gaol Iroo terget of dcolcslce Perceived                                                                  goal Iron forgot of toe deelas          Perooterd
      —f.36b    8.522     0.456     —1.049       —0.332  0.233                      CA                            —0.274     —0.175    —0.178    —0.344  —0.013   —0.096                     CA
      1.600     3.112     3.000     0.431                                                 1                       3,951                3.951     3.951   3.901
      1.132     —0.366    —0.352    —6.015
                                                                                                                             3.951                                3.951                       0           0.3.
                                                            6.249                        CA                       0.409      —0.316    —0.246    312 —5. —0.415   0.196                      CA
      0.032     10.302    9.857     —9.153                                                5 DCCI                  l.b33      10.152    10.308    —8.352  —1.618 10.290                        U           OCCO
                                                    baseline iron target     cM   deelotien Perleteed                                                        bonoilce free target el deeletiec           Perneterd
      4.525     4.525     4.525     4.323        4.525      4.525                                                 10.536     10.534    10.536    10.536  11.536   10.536
      —0.410    52.077    47.5MM    —34MM?       —6.083     32.357                               Mile             —8.410     52.07?    47.5MM    —54.117 —6.083   32.357                                 ttiIl
                                                                           hosellce Iron         ''ieiotioo
                                                                                                         Old
                                                                                                                                                                                 baseline iron           leviutice
      MIS       LINK     DCCI         CAR      LIOPOOL      ICC                                                    USC       LINK     DECO      YAM   LIOPOOL         SCM
                Europe by to                  CodeS                                Stoics United the by                      Europe by to Subscribed Model
                                                                                    to Subscribed Model                                                                                    Staten IlniSed the by
                                                                                                                                                                                            to Subscribed Model
                                       ninth.) nenntpp.           in pep eoi.b.n oth.r     Alt    ClIP. .1   tilt.is inept.Mi •nuand in     pppn.pi.4 pep pits. (W,Upr.
                                              —38—

              Table Effect of Averaging to Estimate Opponent's Model under
                      8.
                            Nash Noncooperative Solution
  True Gain for United States of Moving from Nash Noncooperative with Certainty
             (All rains exoressed in squared percentage points of GNP)


Model Subscribed to                                Model Subscribed to by Europe
                                        MCM     LIVPOOL   VAR      OECD     LINK      MSG
by the United States


MCM
  Model     representing reality:
      MCM                             —0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00    —0.00     0.00
      LIVPOOL                          0.29      0.00      0.86    —0,27    0.14      0.04
      VAR                              0.27     —0.00      0.43    —0.22    0.12     —0.03
      OECD                            —0.01      0.00      0.04     0.01    —0.00     0.01
      LINK                            —0.02      0.00      0.08     0.01    —0.01     0.07
      MSG                             —0,01      0.00      0.38    —0.01     0.01     0.07
LIVPOOL
  Model      representing reality:               —4.07     7.36    22.89     5.02     1.10
   MOM                                —3.29
      LIVPOOL                          0.07      —0.22    —8.05     7.01    —1.59    —1.15
      VAR                             —2.65     —16.28    —11.90   54.31    19.92    —5.72
      OECD                            —3.34      —4.76     6.98    26.14     6.06     0.82
                                      —1.16     —1.93      2.13    10.63     2.53     0.14
      LINK
      MSG                              1.16     —0.52     —6.08     0.46     0.58    —1.51
VAR
  Model representing reality:
    MCM                        0.15             —0.11       1.12    0.63     0.58    —0.11
    LIVPOOL                   —0.83              0.51       8.35   —0.34    —1.64     0.64
    VAR                       —0.41              —0.39    —3.08    —0.42    —1.18    —0.51
      OECD                             0.11      0.02       2.19    0.41     0.39     0.06
      LINK                             0.08      0.00       1.37    0.16     0.20    —0.07
      MSG                              0.07      —0.12      1.82    0.04    —0.02    —0.07
OECD
  Model representing       reality:
      MCM                              0.01      —0.01     —0.03    0.02     0.02    —0.01
      LIVPOOL                         —0.12       0.04      0.17    0.02    —0.16     0.03
      VAR                             —0.10      —0.03     —0.41   —0.06    —0.21    —0.04
      OECD                             0.00      —0.00      0.00   —0.01     0.00    —0.00
      LINK                             0.01      —0.00,     0.01   —0.00     0.00    —0.00
      MSG                              0.01      —0.01      0.00    0.00    —0.00    —0.02
LINK
  Model representing       reality:
    MCM                                 0.00     —0.00     —0.01    0.00     0.00    —0.00
    LIVPOOL                           —0.04       0.01      0.04     0.01   —0.04     0.01
      VAR                             —0.03      —0.01     —0.11   —0.02    —0.06    —0.01
      OECD                              0.00      0.00     —0.00   —0.00     0.00    —0.00
      LINK                              0.00     —0.00      0.00   —0.00     0.00    —0.00
      MSG                               0.00     —0.00     —0.00     0.00   —0.00    —0.01
MSG
  Model      representing reality:                                                   106.30
      MCM                              —3.78      9.55     92.01    —3.68    —3.62
      LIVPOOL                          —4.50      6.02     28.08    —7.80    —8.83    46.72
      VAR                             —21.39     37.68    213.26   —29.54   —31.31   319.68
      OECD                             —5.77     12.82    103.65    —6.20    —6.17   135.76
      LINK                             —2.30      5.15     41.87    —2.38    —2.33    56.47
      MSG                              —0.06     —0.11      1.43    —0.25    —0.36     2.77
                                               —   39 —

                Table 9.  Effect of Averaging to Estimate Opponent's Model Under
                                  Nash Noncooperative Solution
             True Gain for Europe of Moving from Nash Noncooperative with
                                                                           Certainty
                     (Gains expressed in souared percentage points of GNP)


Model Subscribed to                                  Model Subscribed    to by Europa
by the United States                     MCM   LIVPOOL       VAR        OECD     LINK     MSG

MCM
  Model representing       reality:
      MCM                              —0.01       0.01     1.15    —0.05        0.03    0.20
       LIVPOOL                          1.93   —0.00        3.47    —1.24        0.63    0.08
       VAR                              0.94   —0.02       —0.05    —0.70        0.35   —0.36
       OECD                            —0.02    0.00        0.38    —0.00        0.00    0.07
       LINK                            —0.04    0.00        0.40     0.01       —0.00    0.08
      MSG                               0.15   —0.00        0.32    —0.13        0.07   —0.00
LIVPOOL
  Model      representing reality:
      NC1f                            —2.21        0.07     2.85    20.61       —1.02    1.30
      LIVPOOL                         —10.51   —0.00        0.69    53.33      —11.34    5.06
      VAR                               0.36   —1.17      —13.84    —2.24       —2.21   —2.18
      OECO                              1.10   —0.68       —5.85        1.05     0.85   —1.51
      LINK                              0.68       0.01    —3.56        1.86    —0.01   —0.81
      MSG                             —0.34    —0.75       —3.17        3.84    —0.13   —0.47
VAR
  Model representing reality:
      11CM                            —0.01        0.44    15.44        0.78     0.21    0.79
      LIVPOOL                         —2.31        0.00    30.46        4.69   —2.24     0.09
      VAR                             —3.02        1.86     1.10    —3.37      —6.25     1.74
      OECD                             0.12    —0.17        1.61        0.11     0.10   —0.12
      LINK                             0.07     0.05        3.70        0.02     0.02    0.15
      MSG                             —0.23    —0.14        1.02        0.36   —0.31    —0.18
OECD
  Model      representing reality:
      MCM                             —0.00     0,03        0.39        0.05     0.01    0.02
      LIVPOOL                         —0.44     0.00        0.48        0.51   —0.28    —0.01
      VAR                             —0.43     0.13        0.05    —0.09      —0.57     0.17
      OECD                             0.01    —0.01      —0.01         0.01     0.00   —0.02
      LINK                             0.01     0.00        0.08    —0.00        0.00   —0.01
      MSG                             —0.05    —0.01      —0.03         0.05   —0.04    —0.01
LINK
  Model      representing reality:
      MCM                             —0.00     0.01        0.09     0.01       0.00    0.00
      LIVPOOL                         —0.13     0.00        0.10     0.15      —0.08    —0.00
      VAR                             —0.13     0.04        0.01    —0.02      —0.16     0.05
      OECD                             0.00    —0.00      —0.01         0.00    0.00    —0.01
      LINK                             0.00     0.00        0.02   —0.00        0.00    —0.00
      1SG                             —0.01    —0.00      —0.01         0.01   —0.01    —0.00
MSG
  Model      representing reality:
      MCII                            —1.10     4.97       83.06     0.31       0.53    95.59
      LIVPOOL                          3.78     0.01      236.94     1.16       —1.98   65.60
      VAR                            —19.52    22.91      —12.19   —33.77      —37.22   88.02
      OECD                             0.13    —0.21        3.85     0.14       0.08     3.74
      LINK                            —0.17    0.43        6.50      0.02       0.06    13.76
      MSG                             —0.11    0.27       17.62     —0.97      —1.43     1.11
                                                       Table 10. Offect of Coordinatien, While Averaging to Eatisate 01:paneni'a Model

                                          (Welfare gains royressed in squared yeroenrage points of COP. All other n,c..hs are nereefltaee saints.)


RoOd Sobacribcd        to                                                                              Model Subscribed to
by the   United Stasca                                Model   Uohncribed tobcEc.roc:ecroce             by Cho United States                           Hodej!(,nvribedtob.7!t5ye               —
                                          —                                                                                                                                       1.19K    HOC
                                           8100    LIVPOOL     OAR        OCCU       liNK      850                                       9CM      7.101001.    VAIl      CCCII



                                                                                                       C0
  Socgainivg chuoge in policy                                                                            Bargoining change in policy
                                          2.513    —0.067     —2.431      0.070      1.026     0.065           00                      —0.393      0.114      10.606     4.507    1.867    5.329
       TMEU4
                                         —0.131    "0.013     —0.470     —0.302      0.260     0.405           V                        1.173      0.059                          0.976    3.876
       TMo's
  Perceived cbaogc in targets                                                                            Perceived change in targets
       COO. S                             0.965    —0.007     —0.473      0.043      0.270     0.064           ERR. 1                   0.050      0.011       1.414              0.350    0.654
                Cu                        0.024    —0.216     —0.346      0.006 —0.009        —0.043                   CA               0.007      0.027       0.707    —0.074   —0.007
       0.0. 1                            —0.049    —0.00S     —0.179     0.143   0.101         0.152           (IS, 1                  —0.479       0.026     —1.5U4     0.715             1.604
                CA                        0.000     0.000      0.000     —0.000 —0.000        —0.000                   CA               0.057     —0.001       0.393 —0.074      —0.022   —0.130
  Pcrcclccd gain for:                                                                                    Perceived gain for:
      RiO.                               0.0075 0.0000 0.0521 0.0922                0.0004  0.0053           CUR.                      0.0010 —0.0001         (1.0672   0.00i9   0.OUUU   0.0406
       U.s.                              0.0006 —0.0000 —0.0009 —0.0002             0,0003 —0.0001             U.S.                    —0.0034     0.0011     0.0474    0.0180   0.0062   0.0244

LIV P001.                                                                                              LI7IK
                                                                                                                                                                                                    -N
  Br    ining    change in policy                                                                        Bargai040g change En policy
                                                                                                                                                                                                    C
                                        —32.015     7.343 100.020 —19.499 —2(1.072 25.819                      no                       0.746  0.164 24.361              0.190    3.476    7.186
       MI_Ui                                                                                                                                                                               7.465
                                         12.551    11.059 —20.607   56.675   1.249 —1.109                      87                      —1.300 —1.290 —16.971             4.779    6.2i2
       TMUS
  Perceived     change in rargccs                                                                        Perceieed change in targets
         Eli.   U                       —14.502     0.134     14,603      0.307     —4.126     1,176           tUg.    U                0.2i9       0.016      2.570     1.396    0.56i    l.iOh
                CA                       —0.407     0.360      0.580      1.172      0.769 —I.i96                      CA               0.313       0.035      0.922     0.037    0.UU9   —U.bii
     U.S. S                             —12.812     0.034 -39.293 —6.303            —0.157    10.299           U.S.    U               —0.331      —0.319     —3.633     1.325    1.155    2.046
           CA                             0.670    —1.057     —2.860 —3.600          0.970 —1.259                      CA               0.054       0.053      1.193    —0.045   —0.007   —0.122
  Perceivedgain        for:                                                                              Perceived gain for:
       EUR.                              2.2122 0.0009 13.0595           0.7105     0.0333    0.5607           EUR.                    0.0011      0.0003     0.3126    0.0140   0.0036   0.0626
         U.S.                           —0.0520    0.2356     8.1347 —0.6076        1.7877    1.1b71           U.S.                    0.0004      0.0006     0.1720    0.0256   0.0126   0.0538

VAR                                                                                                    HOC


  Bargaining        change In policy                                                                     Bargaining change in policy
         1EUR                            —6.116    —((.140    —6.007 —10.724        "5.0)7 —13.1107            (Is                      4.404      —0.999 234. 161 —I 7.695 —5.000 —20.901
                                         —6.996     7.909     20.950   0.691        —0.702   16.939                                    —46.403     36.045 —311.903 —26.352 —49.487  47.126
  Perceived change in targets                                                                            Perceived change in targcta
         RUB.   S                        —1.069    —0.014       1.030    —2.099     --0.076    1.041           COB.                      9.802     —0.091      9.UBU    —5.515    0.218    3.661
                CA                        0.000    —0.007       1.724     0.709     —0.020     0.620                                     0.456     —0.093     —0.563    —0.302   —0.371    U.590
         U.S.   U                        —7.002     5.090       3.000    —2.699     —7.600     0,797            U.S. A                  —3.144      2.690     —3.037    —3.303   —4.094    1.961
                CA                        0.770     0.254       1.026     0.721      0.027      .554                                   —0.429       0.544     12.810    —1.001   —7.217   —U.029
  Perceived gsln (or:                                                                                    Pctcciv:'d gale    icc.
       CUR.                              0.0741 —0,0026 —0,7699 —5.0514 -'0.274-1             0,2407         CUR.                        .1(199   --(1.0(102 11.1097    0.0076 —0.71450   ((.4432
       U.S.                              (2.4044   0.3001     3.5140      7.9002      .2705   0.bU59            U.S.                    0.0607     0.1167 —7.4(196      0.3265   0.3973 —0.3081


            — Ooney   sopply ci non—U.S. SCUD (''Ecropc'').
      0Mcceysopy1y cc United S eaten.
                                                   —   41   —




              Table 11. Effect of Coordination, Compared to Noncooperative
       Solution with Averaging: True Gains from Coordination for the Uatteo States
                  (Gains expressed in squared percentage points of CUP)


Model Subscribed to                                       Model Subscribed to by Europe
by   the      United   States               MCII       LIVPOOL    VAR      OECD     LIMO      'SaG



MCM
  Model        representing reality:
       MCII                                 0.00       —0.00     —0.00     —0.00     i.00   —0.00
       LIVPO0L                             —0.31       —0.00     —0.45     —0.05    —0.31   —J,02
       VAR                                 —0.27        0.00     —0.33     —0.10    —0.30   —0.01
       OECD                                 0.02       —0.00     —0.02     —3.01     0.00   —0.00
       LINK                                 0.03       —0.00     —0.04     —0.00     0.01    .0.00
       MSG                                  0.01       —0.00     —0.22     —0.00    —0.02    0.03
LIVP0OL
  Model        representing reality.                                        9.87     0.31
       11CM                                 2.98        2.83     —8.-+7                     —0.29
       LIVPOOL                             —0.05        0.24      8,13     —0.61     1.79    1.17
       VAR                                  1.52       11.53      7.85     25.64    —3.89    7.44
       OECD                                 2.98        3.33     —8.30     10.79     0.08    0.06
       LINK                                 1.01        1.36     —2.67      4.34    —0.05    0.20
       MSG                                 —1.18        0.40      6.00      0.27    —0.43    1,42
VAR
     Model     representing reality:                                        0.01             0.02
       MCII                                —0.25        0.11     —0.10              —0.30
       LIVPOOL                              1.21       —0.49     —1.77      1.57     1.69   —1.60
       VAR                                  0.44        0.39      3.51      1.00     1.28    0.61
       OECD                                —0.20       —0.01     —0.48     —0.07    —0.21   —0.39
    LINK                      —0.13                    —0.00     —0.29     —0.09    —0.13   —'0.29
    MSG                       —0.11                     0.11      0.07      0.02     0.03   —0.35
OECD
  Model representing reality:
    MCII                      —0,02                     0.00     —0.10      0.02     0.02    0.05
       LIVPOOL                              0.15       —0.00       1.96    —0.98    —0.46   —0.16
       VAR                                  0.15        0.00       0.00    —0.88    —0.44    0.10
       OECD                                —0.00        0.00       0.05     0.02     0.01    0.02
       LINK                                —0.01        0.00       0.15     0.04     0.02    0.06
       MSG                                 —0.01        0.01       0.74    —0.04    —0.02    0.27
LINK
  Model representing reality:
       MCII                                —0.02       —0.02      —0.66     0.04     0.04    j,03
       LIVPOOL                              0.10        0.08       4.19    —1.48    —1.14   —0.42
       AR                                   0.13       —0.07      —2.22    —1.77    —1.48   —0.12
       OECD                                 0.00       —0.00      —3.30    —0.04    —0.04   —0.05
       LINK                                 0.00        0.00       0.17     0.03     0.01    0.05
       MSC                                 —0.00       —0.01       1.43    —0.06    —0.06    0.39
1150
     Model     representing     reality:
                                                                            2.94     3.88
       MCII                                 3.85    —7.45        —92.83                     —10.23
       LIVPOOL                              5.13    —4.84        —27.95     6.79     7.78    —5,00
       VAR                                 22.57   —29.52       —215.91    22.10    28.87   —31.82
       OECD                                 5.91   —10.04       —104.66     4.27     6.07   —13.68
       LINK                                 2.34    —4.03        —42.28      1.53    2.30    —5.76
       MSG                                  0.06        0.12      —1.41.    0.33     0.38    —0.33
                                                —   42

                 Table 12. Effect oE Coordination, Compared to Noncooperative
               Solution with Averaging:   True Gains from Coordination for Europe
                      (Gains expressed in squared percentage points of UN?)


Model Subscribed to                               Model Subscribed    to by Europe
by the United States                    NCN    LIVPOOL     VAR        OECD     LINK      MEG


MCII
  Model representing reality:
    NCR                        0.01            —0.01       —0.57      0.00   —0.07      0.03
    LIVPOOL                    1.53             0.00       —1,87     —0.06   —1.29      0.01
    VAR                       —0.97             0.02        0.05     —0.21   —0.83     —0.20
       OECD                            0.02    —0.00       —0.22      0.00   —0.01      0,03
       LINR                            0,04    —0.00       —0.21      0.00    0.00      0.02
       MEG                            —0.17     0.00       —0.19     —0,01   —0.14      0.01
LIVPO0L
  Model       representing reality:
       NCN                             2,21    —0,03       —2.91      4.08    2.91     —0.90
       LIVPOOL                        10.49     0.01        0.26     12,37   14.68     —3.72
       VAR                            —0.38     0.99       13.86     —7.26    1.63      2.09
       OECG                           —1.13     0.51        5.72      0.72   —0.51      1.64
       LINK                           —0.67     0.02        3.55     —0.00    G.03      0.75
       MEG                             0.30     0,54        3.12      1.51    0.72      0.56
VAR
  Model       representing reality:
       MCII                            0.02    —0.43       —4.25      0.36    0.09     —2.97
       LIV?OOL                         3.37    —0.00       —4.61      7.93    4.43     —1.73
       VAR                             4.47    —1.76       —0.77      4.14    3.59     —0.99
       OECD                           —0.20     0.16        0.17     —0,05   —0.07     —0.28
       LINK                           —0.10    —0.05       —0.79     —0.08   —C.02     —0.83
       MEG                             0.32     0.14        0.43      0.80    0.50      0.24
OECG
  Model       reprssenting rsslity:
       NCR                             0.00     0,01        2.90     —0.19   —0.09      0.38
       LIVPOOL                         0.24    —0.00        7.05     —3.89   —1.70     —0.03
       VAR                             0.59    —0.04        0.06     —2.75   —1.30     —2.06
       OECD                           —0,02     0.01        0.71     0.00    —0.00      0.31
       LINK                           —0.01     0.01        0.92     0.01     0.00      0.23
       MEG                             0.03     0.00        0.51     —0.42   —0.19      0.04
LINK
  Model       representing reality:
       NUN                             0.00     0.09        6.53     —0.15   —0.09      0.39
       LIVPOOL                        —0.08     0.00       13.62     —4.54   —3.16     —0.15
       VAR                             0.45     0.25        0.31     —4.66   —3.68     —3.51
       CECG                           —0.01    —0.02        1.32     0.01     0.00      0.45
       LINK                            0.00     0.01        2.02     0.02     0.00      0.30
       MEG                            —0.01    —0.02        0.73     —0.53   —0.38      0.06
MEG
 Model       representing reality:
  NCR                                  1.11    —3.93      —82.17   —0.16     —0.01    —11.01
       LIVPOOL                        —2,41    —0.01     —235.85     12.60    4.99     —3.66
       VAR                            21.84   —18.50       12.19     25,66   31.56    —12.63
       OECD                           —0.17     0.21      —3.86      0.05     0.04     —0.31
       LINK                            0.15   —0.33       —6.48    —0.25     —0.05     —1.85
       MEG                             0.29   —0.20      —17.57      2.18     1.59      0.44
                                                —   43   —



              Table 13. Effect of Averaging to Estimate Own Model, hi1e Under
                  NoncooperativeSolution: True Gains for the United States
                    (Gains expressed in spuared nercentaze points of GNP)


Model Subscribed to                               Model Subscribed to by Europe
                                        MCM    LIVPOOL   VAR      02C3     L1Nr         MSG
by the United States


11CM
  Model representing reality:
       MCII                           —0.03    —0.02         —0.00    —0.03   —0.03   —0.02
       LIVPOOL                         2.69     0.26          6.00     4.44    5.68    0.34
       VAR                             2.85    —0.07          1.98     4.36   5.40    —0.15
       OECD                           —0.22     0.07          0.54    —0.28   —0.32    0.10
       LINK                           —0.41     0.05          0.85    —0.52   —0.58    0.10
       MSG                            —0.34     0.04          3.45    —0.81   —0.74    0.20
LIVPOOL
  Model       representing reality:
       11CM                            8.06     7.29         18.72    34.24   16.37   12.45
       LIVPOOL                        —2.41    —2.15         —1.68     5.77   —2.31   —2.87
       VAR                            29.88    28.11         52.53    83.1)   47.70   39.50
       OECD                            8.64     7.81         20.39    37.90   17.76   13.43
       LINK                            3.50     3.19          8.03    15.13    6.99    5.30
       MSG                              1.21    1.37          0.08     0.15    0.20    0.54
VAR
  Model representing reality:
       MCII                            0.24    —0.02          1.22     0.71    0.63   —3.02
       LIVPOOL                         0.74     0.21         13.27     3.43    2.94    0.40
       VAR                             1.10    —0.07          0.70     2.51    2.28   —0.15
       OECD                           —0.16     0.05          2.69     0.04   0.01     0.12
       LINK                           —0.32     0.04          2.14    —0.38   —0.39    0.11
       MSG                            —0.73     0.05          5.15    —0.76   —0.78    0.20
OECD
  Model representing reality:
       11CM                            0,03     0.02          0.02     0.04    0.04    0.02
       LIVPOOL                         1.71    —0.09          5.16     4.09    4.73   —0.04
       VAR                             1.65     0.05          2.54     3.31    3.75    0.05
       OECD                           —0.27     0.01          0.47    —0.38   —0.40    0.03
       LINK                           —0.40     0.03          0.77    —0.56   —0.59    0.06
       MSG                            —0.80     0.12          3.24    —0.80    0.77    0.21
LINK
  Model representing reality:
       MCII                            0.01     3.02          0.03     0.01    0.01    0.02
       LIVPOOL                         1.37    —0.07          5.04     4.16    4.93   —0.02
       VAR                             1.81     3.03          2.62     3.50    4.05    0.03
       OECD                           —0.27     0.01          0.46    —0.37   —0.40    0.03
       LINK                           —0.41     0.03          0.76    —0.56   —0.59    0.06
       MSG                            —0.81     0.11           3.22   —0.80   —0.76    0.21
MSG
   Model representing reality:
       MCII                            0.05    13.43          95.90    0.18    0.26   110.18
       LIVPOOL                         4.21    11.02          35.96    3.85    3.84    51.67
       VAR                             5.57    53.50         219.92    2.79    2.71   334.94
       OECD                            0.11    18.78         109.80   —0.34   —0.31   141.72
       LINK                           —0.33     7.54          44.96   —0.54   —0.53    58.85
       MSG                            —0.85    —0.61           3.24   —0.79   —0.78     2.34
                                               —44-
               Table 14.  Effect of Averaging to Estimate Own Model, While Under
                        Noncooperative Solution:  True Gains for Europe
                     (Gains expressed in squared percentage points of GNP)


Model Subscribed to                                Model Subscribed to by Europe
by the United States                    MCII    LIVPOOL   VAR     OECD      LINK      MSG


MCM
  Model representing reality:
       11CM                           —1.91     0.45     10.59   —1,72     —1.44     0.92
       LIVPOOL                        12.73    —0.04             20,88     26.60
                                                        21.65                        0.08
       VAR                            13,54     0.32    —5.91     18.56    21.78    —0.56
       OECD                           —1.04     0.03     3.47    —1.09    —1.07      0.20
       LINK                           —1.15     0.13     3.84    —1.27    —1.29      0.32
       MSG                             1.44    —0.07      1.77    2.31     2.92     —0.08
LIVPOOL
  Model representing reality:
   MCM                        —2.03            —1.97     4.01    22.84     1.93    —0.74
       LIVPOOL                         0.08    —0.06    19.79    74.41    13.52     5.09
       VAR                            —7.56    —7,43    —8.62    —9.03    —8.47    —8.13
       OECD                            1.75     1.88     0.91     1.27     0.98     1.21
       LINK                           —0.39    —0.21    —0.98     0.79    —1.04    —0.95
       MSG                             1.82     1.81     3.11     6.48     2.72      2.17
VAR
  Model representing reality:
       MCM                            —1.93     0.41    23.83    —0.73    —1.05     1.01
       LIVPOOL                         8.95    —0.04    48.74    26.70    23.62     0.09
       VAR                             6.14     0.15    —5.04    11.89    11.01    —0.42
       OECD                           —0.80     0.04     5.01    —0.92    —0.92     0.20
       LINK                           —1.06     0.12     7.04    —1.24    —1.25     0.34
       MSG                             1.04    —0.06     2.84     2.71     2.43    —0.10
OECD
  Model representing reality:
       MCM                            —1.92     0.14     9.12    —1.52    —1.33      0.39
       LIVPOOL                        10.85    —0.04    18.72    22.56    25.62    —0.01
       VAR                             9.83    —0.94    —6.03    16.46    18.03    —1.37
       OECD                           —0.94     0.14     3.29    —1.05    —1.04     0.23
    LINK                              —1.11     0.10     3.45    —1.27    —1.28     0.20
    MSG                                1.22     0.02     1.67     2.43     2.74     0.01
LINK
  Model representing reality:
      MCII                            —1.92     0.17     8.92    —1.57    —1.36     0.42
      LIVPOOL                         11.16    —0.04    18.34    22.21    25.83    —0.00
      VAR                             10.44    —0.85    —6.04    16.89    18.81    —1.32
      OECD                            —0.96     0.13     3.26    —1.06    —1.05     0.23
      LINK                            —1.12     0.10     3.40    —1.27    —1.28     0.21
      MSG                              1.26     0.01     1.65     2.40     2.78     0.01
MSG
 Model        representing reality:
      MCII                            —1.89     9.20    98.69    —1.31    —1.20    100.26
      LIVPOOL                         15.56    —0.01   254.60    23.89    24.66     65.59
      VAR                             19.25    41.26   —10.38    14.90    14.55    105.36
      OECD                            —1.14    —0.96     5.52    —1.01    —0.99      3.07
      LINK                            —2.21     0.87    10.56    —1.27    —1.27     14.34
      NSG                              1.81    —0.18    17.40     2.52     2.58      0.59
                                               -    45    —


              Table   15.  Effect of Averaging to Estimate Own Model, While Under
                      Cooperative Solution:   True Gain for the United States
                      (Gains expressed in sQuared percentase Doints of GNP)


Model Subscribed to                                Model Subscribed to by Europe
by the United States                    51CM   LIVPOOL    VAR      OECD     LINK         SISG



MCM
  Model representing reality:
      51CM                            —0.09    —0.J8           —0.06   —0.09   —0.09   —0.08
      LIVPOOL                          2.95        0.50         5.84    5.00    6.10    0.56
      VAR                              2.65    —0.27            1.68    4.49    5.38   —0.31
      OECD                            —0.17        0.11         0.56   —0.24   —0.27    0.13
      LINK                            —0.35        0.12         0.88   —0.46   —0.51    0.14
    MSG                               —0.68        0.20         3.45   —0.64   —0.57    0.27
LIVPOOL
  Model representing reality:
      51CM                             8.32        8.47        19.77    1.42   10.98   11.59
      LIVPOOL                         —2.18    —1.92           —1.52   —0.39   —2.26   —2.65
      VAR                             30.81    32.66           56.38    2.94   31.48   37.58
      OECD                             9.05        9.29        21.76    1.02   11.67   12.59
      LINK                             3.71        3.84         8.64    0.23    4.58    5.03
      MSG                              1.38        1.65         0.32   —0.42    0.21    0.79
VAR
 Model       representing reality:
      51CM                             0.28    —0.08            0.14    0.01    0.33    0.02
      LIVPOOL                          0.61        0.44         6.94    2.44    3.14    1.59
      VAR                              0.86    —0.27            0.07    1.74    1.98   —0.45
      OECD                            —0.02     0.09            1.03   —0.26   —0.14   0.49
      LINK                            —0.20     0.11            0.13   —0.33   —0.38   0.43
      MSG                             —0.52     0.22            3.41   —0.66   —0.64   0.78
OECD
 Model       representing reality:
      MCM                             —0.01    —0.03            0.09   —0.06   —0.05   —0.07
      LIVPOOL                          1.93     0.12            3.27    5.30    5.59    0.34
      VAR                              1.41    —0.12            2.75    4.05    4.19   —0.20
      OECD                            —0.23     0.06            0.47   —0.35   —0.36    0.05
      LINK                            —0.34     0.10            0.68   —0.52   —0.54    0.06
      MSG                             —0.64     0.28            2.66   —0.60   —0.58    0.11
LINK
 Model       representing reality:
      MCM                             —0.03    —0.02            0.63   —0.09   —0.09   —0.07
      LIVPOOL                          2.05     0.09            1.07    5.88    6.36    0.64
      VAR                              1.52    —0.08            4.76    5.08    5.39   —0.03
      OECD                            —0.23     0.06            0.82   —0.28   —0.31    0.13
      LINK                            —0.34     0.10            0.65   —0.51   —0.54    0.07
      MSG                             —0.65     0.29            1.95   —0.59   —0.55   —0.01
MSG
 Model representing        reality:
      MCM                             —0.04    11.27           96.67    0.87   —0.08   14.05
      LIVPOOL                          3.83    10.09           36.08    5.10    5.13   11.19
      VAR                              4.19    45.15          222.37   10.03    4.95   46.89
      OECD                             0.01    16.05          110.85    1.64   —0.16   19.69
      LINK                            —0.30     6.49           45.44    0.38   —0.43    8.25
      MSG                             —0.69    —0.45            3.38   —0.70   —0.64   0.06
                                                 —    46 —

                   Table   16. Effect of Averaging to Estiaate Own Model, Under
                             Cooperative Solution:  True Gain for Europe
                        (Gains exoressed in scuared oercentaEe ooints of ON?)


Model Subscribed to                                 Model Subscribed to by Europe
by the United States                      MOM    LIVPOOL VAR        OEOD     LINK       MSG


MOM
  Model representing         reality:
      MOM                                —1.20       1.16    10.72    —0.96   —0.70    1.40
      LIVP000                            12.43   —0.48       19.61    21.74   26.83   —0.46
       VAR                               13.19   —0.07       —6.31    19.09   21.87   —0.39
      OEOD                               —0.89    0.18        3.47    —0.94   —0.92    0.25
      LINK                               —0.89    0.39        3.92    —1.01   —1.02   0.48
      MS0                                 1.33   —0.19         1.52    2.34    2.88   —0.21
LIVPOOL
  Model tepresenting          reality:
      MOM                                —1.32   —1.30        4.79    —1.14    0.75   —0.43
       LIVPOOL                           —0.34   —0.51       18.39     8.27    9.73    3.31
       VAR                               —7.93   —7.64       —9.03     0.09   —8.27   —8.44
       OEOD                               1.93       2.21     1.20    —0.35    0.79    1.44
       LINK                              —0.14    0.02       —0.71    —0.80   —0.80   —0.62
       MSO                                1.75       1.90      3.04    1.01    2.01    1.97
VAR
  Model       representing    reality:
       MOM                               —1.22       1.11    13.35    —1.16   —0.64    3.89
       LIVPOOL                            7.45   —0.48       22.44    13.64   20.98    1.29
       VAR                                4.31   —0.34       —5.75    10.74   11.29   —1.56
       OEOD                              —0.57    0.21        3.38    —0.83   —0.81    0.75
       LINK                              —0.76    0.39        4.40    —0.92   —0.99    1.28
       MSO                                0.82   —0.17         1.28    1.43    2.12   —0.28
OEOD
  Model representing          reality:
       MOM                               —1.21    0.82         6.54   —0.66   —0.54    0.71
       LIVPOOL                           10.60   —0.48        10.76   25.49   27.16   —0.41
       VAR                                9.28   —1.42       —6.53    18.91   19.51    0.13
       OEOD                              —0.78    0.29         2.74   —0.90   —0.89    0.09
    LINK                                 —0.85    0.35         2.72   —1.02   —1.01    0.24
    MSO                                   1.12   —0.09         1.07    2.68    2.84   —0.11
LINK
  Model representing          reality:
       MOM                               —1.21    0.78         3.00   —0.72   —0.56    0.74
       LIVPOOL                           10.93   —0.48         4.18   26.16   28.62   —0.29
       VAR                                9.72   —1.53       —6.76    21.17   22.26    1.75
       OEOO                              —0.79       0.30      2.10   —0.92   —0.90   —0.06
       LINK                              —0.86    0.35         1.63   —1.02   —1.02    0.18
       1150                               1.16   —0.08         0.81    2.80    3.05   —0.17
MSO
  Model representing          reality:
       MOM                               —1.19       8.87     99.51   —0.75   —1.02   16.39
       LIVPOOL                           13.75   —0.45       253.07    9.69   21.21    3.22
       VAR                               16.54   36.47       —10.77   22.61   19.83   29.57
       OEOD                              —0.95   —0.80         5.68   —1.04   —0.96   —0.21
       LINK                              —0.92       1.04     10.80   —0.77   —1.01    2.68
       1150                               1.51   —0.38        17.23    1.19    2.31   —1.09
                                                —   47   —




        Table    17. Gains to Unilateral Switch to True Model for the UnIted States
                   Under Nash Noncooperative Solution (using monetary policy)
                  (All numbers expressed in sauared Dercentase oointS of GNP)


Model Subscribed to                                 Model Subscribed to by Europe
by the United States                    MOM    LIVPOOL     VAR     0000     010K        ESG


MOM
  Model      representing reality:
      MCM               (J000Q)*       0.00     0.00          0.00      .00   0.iO     0.00
      LIVPOOL           (0.0130)       5.11     2.41          7.68    —1.34   7.99     3.21
      VAR               (0.4349)       1.75     0.00          1.28     L.86   3.12     0.01
      OECD              (0.0128)       0.06     0.05          0.08     0.10   0.38     0.07
      LINK              (0.0133)      —0.00     0.02          0.09     ).04   0.32     0.04
      MSG               (2.4462)       0.01     0.65          0.21    —0.02   0.34    —2.14
LIVPOOL
  Model      representing reality:
      11CM              (0.0000)       8.09     7.30         13.73    34.27   16.40   12.47
      LIVPOOL           (0.0130)       0.00     0.00          0.00     0.00    0.0)    0.00
      VAR               (0.4349)      28.78    28.18         51.83    30.59   45.42   39.65
      OECD              (0.0128)       8.91     7.79         19.92    38.28   18.16   13.40
      LINK              (0.0133)       3.91     3.17          7.27    15.68    7.58    5.25
      MSG               (2.4462)       2.05     1.98         —3.17     0.94    0.98   —1.81
VAR
  Model      representing reality:
      MCM               (0.0000)       0.26     0.00          1.23     0.74   0.6      0.00
      LIVPOOL           (0.0130)       3.16     2.36         14.95    —2.34   5.25     3.27
      VAR               (0.4349)       0.00     0.00          0.00     0.00   0.30     0.00
      OECD              (0.0128)       0.12     0.04          2.22     0.42   0.39     0.09
      LINK              (0.0133)       0.09     0.01          1.38     0.17   0.20     0.05
      MSG               (2.4462)       0.12     0.66          0.91     0.03   —0.00   —2.14
OECD
  Model      representing reality:
      MCM               (0.0000)       0.06     0.04          0.02     0.07    0.07    0.04
      LIVPOOL           (0.0130)       4.12     2.06          6.83    —1.68    7.04    2.83
      VAR               (0.4349)       0.56     0.13          1.83     0.81    1.47    0.21
    OECD                (0.0128)       0.00     0.00          0.00     0.00    0.00    0.00
    LINK                (0.0133)       0.01     0.00          0.01    —0.00    0.00   —0.00
    MSC                 (2.4462)       0.05     0.72         —0.00    —0.01    0.31   —2.13
LINK
  Model representing reality:
    MCM             (0.0000)           0.04     0.04          0.03     0.04    0.04    0.04
      LIVPOOL           (0.0130)       4.28     2.09          6.72    —1.61    7.24    2.86
      VAR               (0.4349)       0.71     0.11          1.92     0.99    1.77    0.19
      OECD              (0.0128)      —0.00     0.00         —0.00     0.01    0.00    0.00
      LINK              (0.0133)       3.00     0.00          0.00     0.00    0.00    0.00
      ISO               (2.4462)       0.04     0.72         —0.03    —0.01    0.02   —2.13
MSG
  Model representing reality:
    MCM             (0.0000)           0.11     13.45         95.91    0.21    0.28   110.20
    LIVPOOL         (0.0130)           6.62     13.17         37.64   —1.92    6.15    54.54
    VAR             (0.4349)           4.48     53.58        219.22    0.29    0.44   335.10
    OECD            (0.0128)           0.38     18.77        109.33    0.04    0.09   141.69
    LINK            (0.0133)           0.08      7.51         44.20    0.01    0.06    58.83
    MSG             (2.4462)           0.00      0.00         0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00

  * Gains of coordination          to the United States assuming that all countries believe
the same, correct model.
                                                 —   48   —



             Table   18. Gains to Unilateral Switch to True Model for Europe Uoder
                      Nash Noncooperative Solution (using monetary policy)
                (All numbers expressed        in squared percentage    points of GNP)


Model Subscribed to                                  Model Subscribed to by Europe
                                                 LIVPOOL        VAR     OECD     LINK     MSG
by the United States                   11CM



MCM
  Model representing reality:
      11CM                 (0.0001)* 0.00         2.36        12.50     0.18     0.47    2.82
      LIVPO0L              (0.0010) 12.77         0.00        21.69    20.92    26.64    0.11
      VAR                  (0.3256) 19.46         6.23         0.00    24.47    27.69    5.36
      OECD                 (0.0079)  0.05         1.12         4.57     0.00     0.02    1.29
      LINK                 (0.0040)  0.13         1.42         5.13     0.02     0.00    1.61
      MSG                  (1.5561)  1.52         0.01         1.85     2.40     3.00    0.00
LIVP00L
  Model representing reality:
      11CM                 (0.0001)   0.00        0.06         6.04    24.86     3.96    1.28
      LIVPOOL              (0.0010)   0.15        0.00        19.85    74.47    13.58    5.15
      VAR                  (0.3256)    1.05       1.19         0.00    —0.41     0.15    0.48
      OECD                 (0.0079)    0.48       0.62        —0.36     0.00    —0.29   —0.05
      LINK                 (0.0040)    0.65       0.83         0.06     1.83     0.00    0,10
      MSG                  (1.5561)   —0.35      —0.37         0.94     4.31     0.54    0.00
VAR
  Model representing reality:
   MCM              (0.0001)           0.00       2.34        25.76     1.20     0.88    2.94
      LIVPOOL              (0.0010)    8.99       0.00        48.78    26.74    23.66    0.13
      VAR                  (0.3256)   11.18       5.19         0.00    16.93    16.05    4.62
      OECD                 (0.0079)    0.12       0.96         5.92     0.00    —0.01    1.11
      LINK                 (0.0040)    0.19       1.38         8.29     0.01     0.00    1.59
      MSC                  (1.5561)    1.13       0.04         2.94     2.81     2.53    0.00
OECD
  Model representing reality:
      11CM                 (0.0001)    0.00       2.06        11.04     0.40     0.59    2.31
      LIVPOOL              (0.0010)   10.89       0.00        18.76    22.60    25.66    0.04
      VAR                  (0.3256)   15.85       5.09         0.00    22.48    24.05    4.66
      OECD                 (0.0079)    0.11       1.18         4.33     0.00     0.01    1.28
      LINK                 (0.0040)    0.17       1.37         4.73     0.01     0.00    1.48
      MSG                  (1.5561)    1.21       0.00         1.65     2.41     2.72    0.00
LINK
  Model representing reality:
      11CM                 (0,0001)    0.00       2.08         10.84    0.35     0.56    2.34
      LIVPO0L              (0.0010)   11.20       0.00         18.38   22.25    25.87    0.04
      VAR                  (0.3256)   16.48       5.19         0.00    22.93    24.85    4.72
      OECD                 (0.0079)    0.10       1.18         4.32     0.00     0.01     1.29
      LINK                 (0.0040)    0.16       1.38         4.68     0.01     0.00     1.49
      MSG                  (1.5561)    1.25       0.00         1.65     2.40     2.77    0.00
MSG
  Model representing reality:
   MCM              (0.0001)           0.00      11.09        100.58    0.58     0.69   102.15
      LIVPOOL              (0.0010)   15.57       0.00        254.61   23.90    24.67    65.60
      VAR                  (0.3256)   29.63      51.64          0.00   25.28    24.93   115.74
      OECD                 (0.0079)   —0.13       0.05          6.53    0.00     0.01     4.07
      LINK                 (0.0040)    0.06       2.14         11.82   —0.00     0.00    15.60
      1ISG                 (1.5561)    1.22      —0.77         16.81     1.93    2.00     0.00
  * Gains of coordination         to Europe assuming that all countrIes believe the same
correct model.
                                              —   49 —

        Table 19.   Gains to Unilateral Switch to :rue iodel for the Untd States
           Under Nash Noncooperative Solution (using nonetary and fiscal policy>
                 (All abs xpressed    in scuared percentage points of GOP)


Model Subscribed to                          Nodel Subscribed to by Europe
by the United States              MOM   L1VP304     AR        OECD      4:4K             MSG


MOM
  Model representing reality:
    MCM            (0.0007)*     0.00    0.30              3.33      0.00     3.30       0.00
    LIVPOOL        (0.0000)     68.21   22.01              J.30    340.72     1.06     737.63
    VAR            (0.0001)     41.49    4.84             38.75    160.71     0.08    1673.07
    OECD           (0.0001)      3.33    2.5              —8.21     13.43     1.14     153.83
    LINK           (0.0001)      2.65    0.39             15.33     17.78     1.35     385.24
    MSG            (0.0001)     —1.31    6.09             YJ.37     48.32     1.19     738.71
LIVPOOL
  Model representing reality:
    MOM            (0.3007)     11.49    0.r2             21.63      62.36    3.35     18.41
    LIVPOOL        (0.0000>      0.00    J.Oj              3.00       O.)Q    0.30      0.00
    VAR             (0.0001>    13.32   :3.J2             4.94       32.56   11.37     34.51
    OECD           (0.0001)      4.52    2.23              6.48      44.48    3.33      7.94
    LINK            (0.0001)     4.23    2.37             32.66      37.o6    3.49     11.08
    MSG            (0.0001)     —7.83    5.51             -5.29     110.15    5.9      22.07
VAR
 Model representing reality:
   MOM            (0.0007)   70.66       o.02             338.24    53.29    —3.00      6.74
   LIVPOOL        (0.0000) 2103.28      54.35            2374.4o   639.62     2.25    229.58
   VAR             (0.0001>   0.00       i.   0             0.00     0.00     . 30      0.00
   OECD           (0.0001>   75.33      11.63             330.99    61.25     3.97     13.56
   LINK            (0.0001)  25.23       3.43             75e3      2o.57     1.72      3.40
   MSG            (0.0001)   99.16       9.23            593.77     o7.82     0.53     17.00
OECD
 Model representing reality:
   MCM            (0.0007)    4.11       4.99              33.17     14.39    4.56       2.61
   LIVPOOL        (0.0000)   65.17      80.46            5332.90   4449.42   116.29     12.37
   VAR             (0.0001>  22.33      53.72              71.76    139.67    29.84     36.16
   OECD           (0.0001)    0.00       0.40               0.00      0.00    0.00       0.00
   LINK            (0.0001)   3.21       5.17              —3.09      0.27    4.62       6.37
   MSG            (0.0001)   —5.03      44.96             189.50     83.33   39.24      30.25
LINK
  Model representing reality:
    MCM            (0.0007>     1.69     'J9           123.99        20.20    0.38      —1.19
    LIVPOOL         (0.0000)   73.80    55.23        :9177.32      5725.06   53.15      84.84
    VAR             (0.0001)    7.86     9.33          :18.09       155.34    6.64       8.45
    OECD            (0.0001>    3.66     2.38           31.10         0.96    2.j8       3.50
    LINK            (0.0001)    0.00     .3O             0.30         0.00    0.00       0.00
    MSG             (3.0001>   —0.49    11.37           92.24       129.16   15.60      17.76
MSG
  Model representing reality:
    MOM             (3.0007) 119.54      1.29               3.35      4.04     3.08      2.80
    LIVPOOL         (0.0000) 5205.14     1.55             201.97    480.72    10.16    109.42
    VAR             (0.0001) 933.11      5.33              33.98     49.44    0.29      27.63
    OECD            (0.0001) 211.19      1.36              —4.42     12.16     0.65      6.84
    LINK            (0.0001) 107.52      2.24               7.15      2.96     2.38      8.60
    MSG            (0.0001)     0.00     0.00               0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00

  * Gains of coordination to the United States assuming that all countries believe the
same, correct model.
                                                        —   50 -

                 Table  20. Gains to Unilateral Switch to True Model for Europe Under
                    Mash Noncooperative Solution (using monetary and fiscal policy)
                            (All gains expressed in squared percentaSe points of GNP)


Model Subscribed to                                        Model Subscribed to by Europe
by the United States                          11CM     LIVPO0L     VAR       OECD      LINK            USE


MCM
  Model representing reality:
      MCM                      (0.000l)*      0.00      2.70         74.82        0.34      7.31    1128.64
      LIV700L                  (0.0001)     674.53      0.00        195.68     2415.63     88.89    8371.36
      VAR                      (0.0002)      84.65     12.23           0.00     241.96      15.51    988.46
      OECD                     (0.0002)      —0.43      0.44         61.77        0.00       8.76    569.74
      LINK                     (0.0002)      27.83      2.80         19.46      133.52       0.00    742.96
      USC                      (0.0003)    —297.31   —385.00       —343.97     —101.18    —361.36      0.00
LIVPO0L
  Model representing reality:
                   (0.0001)                   0.00      4.76        163.04       36.30       0.02      9,38
    LIVPOOL        (0.0001)                  66.92     0.00          154.93     354.03     48.21     19.91
      VAR                      (0.0002)      19.84    12.27            0.00      71.53     17.14     24.15
      OECD                     (0.0002)     —21.26   —24.20           79.17        0.00   —22,42    —20.82
      LINK                     (0.0002)       0.11     1.41           14.15      64.74      0.00      0.73
     USC                       (0.0003)      —6.55   —15.94          147.48      66.34     —9.91      0.00
VAR
  Model representing reality:
    MOM            (0.0001)     0.00                    1.82          86.54      12.05      8,79       4.03
     LIVPOOL       (0.0001)   635.81                    0.00       10650.70     292.31     91.78      64.43
     VAR           (0.0002)    16.53                   11.94           0.00      40.30     16.37      10.00
     05CC          (0.0002)    52.41                   —3.73        1147.01       0.00      1.28      13.74
     LINK          (0,0002)    65.45                    5.27         506.61      44.04      0.00       7.74
    USC            (0.0003)   117.90                    1.05         836.78      98.53     28.67       3.00
OECD
  Model representing reality:
     MOM           (0.0001)     0.00                   37.52         13.49      111.34      8.98      15.68
     LIVPOOL       (0.0001)   398.60                    0.00       4361.00     6263.85     51.55      50.86
     VAR           (0,0002)    61.89                   35.02          0.00      262.29     32.69      41.34
     OECD          (0.0002)     2.73                    8.23        271.57        0.00      5.38       4.54
     LINK          (0.0002)    15.51                    1.32        183.10      275.93      0.00       3.01
     USC           (0.0003)    49.92                   21.04        ?99.18     1371.48     —0.65       0.00
LINK
  Idodel representing reality:
      MCII                     (0.0001)       0.00      5.72          39.70     156.79       0.01      0.89
      LIVPOOL                  (0.0001)      65.54      0.00       11889.57    7255.83      68.44     25.61
      VAR                      (0.0002)      25.43     19.13           0.00     276.35      26.24     21.48
      OECD                     (0.0002)       8.76      1.51         724.24       0.00       7.77      4.85
      LINK                     (0,0002)       0.06      2.20        469.92      314.17       0.00      0.63
      USC                      (0.0003)       2.38      2.64        1208.71    1698.34       3.90      0.00
USC
  Model      representing        reality:
      MCII                     (0.0001)     0.00       —9.79          27.75      —3.01     —0.26       6,06
      LIVPOOL                  (0.0001) 14682.06        0.00         532.65    1407.17     96.51     300.40
      VAR                      (0.0002)   475.02        6.49           0.00      84.93     13.14       0.24
      OECD                     (0.0002)   149.12        2.38          72.83       0.00     10.20      35.94
      LINK                     (0.0002)   897.37        3.49          35.55      50.29      0.00      25.87
      USC                      (0.0003) 1367.89         3.81            1.69    234.22     37.21       0.00

     Gains of coordination to Europe assuming that all countries believe the same,
correct model.
                                  —   51 —



                                   References



Brainard, William, 'Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy," American

  Economic Review (1967).

Branson, William and Julio Rotemberg, "International Adjustment with Real

  Wage Rigidity," European Economic Review 13, 3, May 1980, 309—337.

Bryant,   Ralph and Dale Henderson. Empirical Macroeconomics for

  dependent Economies. Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.

  (forthcoming).

Canzoreri, Matthew and Patrick Minford, "When Jnternational Policy Coordi-

  nation Matters: An Empirical Analysis," Centre for Economic Policy

  Research Discussion Paper No. 119, July 1986.

Carlozzi, Nicholas and John Taylor, "International Capital Mobility and the

  Coordination of Monetary Rules."       In Exchange Rate Management Under

  Uncertainty," edited by J. Bhandari.       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985.

Cooper, Richard, "Economic Interdependence and Coordination of Economic

  Policies."    In Handbook in   International Economics, Vol.   II, edited    by

  R. Jones and Peter Kenen,      Amsterdam: North Holland, 1985.

Corden, W. Max.    Inflation, Exchange Rates, and the World Economy.

  Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 3rd ed., 1986.

               "Fiscal Policies, Current Accounts and Real Exchange Rates:

  In Search of a Logic of International Policy Coordination," Weltwirt—

  schaftliches Archiv, 1986.

Dooley, Michael and Peter Isard, "Country Preferences and Exchange Rate

  Determination," Imternational Monetary Fund, September 1986.
                                 —   52 —



Fischer, Stanley,   "International Macroeccnomic Policy Coordination," NBER

  Wcrking Paper Mc. 2244, May 1987.     Forthccning in International Policy

  Coordination, edited by M. Feldstein. Chicago: University of Chicago

  Press.

Frankel, Jeffrey, "Ambiguous Macroecononic Policy Multipliers in Theory and

  in Twelve Econometric Models." Revised, International Monetary Fund,

  October 1986.   Forthcoming in Bryant and Henderson.

Frankel, Jeffrey and Rathsrine Rockett, "International Macroeconomic Policy

  Coordination When Policy—Makers Do Not Agree on the True Model," NBER

  Working Paper No. 2059, October 1986.     American Economic Review, 1988,

  forthcoming.

Holtham, Gerry and Andrew Hughes Hallett, "International Policy Cooperation

  and Model Uncertainty," Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion

  Paper No. 190, July 1987.

Hughes Hallett, Andrew, "Macroeconomic Policy Design with Incomplete Infor-

  mation:   A New Argument for Coordinating Economic Policies," Centre for

  Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper Mo. 151, January 1987.

Kenen, Petar, "Exchange Rates and Policy Coordination," Brookings

  Discussion Paper in International Economics No. 61, October 1987.

Kenen, Peter and Stephen Schwartz, "An Assessment of Macroeconomic Pore—

  casts in the International Monetary Fund's World Economic Outlook,"

 Working Paper in International Economics No. G—86—04, Princeton

 University, December 1986.

Mankiw, Gregory and Matthew Shapiro, "News or Noise:     An Analysis of GNP

 Revisions," Survey of Current Business, May 1986, 20—25.

Masson, Paul and Jocelyn Home, "Scope and Limits of International Economic

 Cooperation and Policy Coordination," IMF World Economic Outlook Staff

 Studies (forthcoming 1987).
                                  —   53 —




McKibbon, Warwick and Jeffrey     Sachs, "Coordination of Monetary and Fiscal

  Policies in the OECD," NBER Working Paper No. 1800.     Forthcoming in Jacob

  Frenkel, ed., International Aspects of Fiscal Policy, 1986.

McNees, Stephen, "The Forecasting Record of the 1970s," New England

  Economic Review, September/October 1979, 1—21.

Melitz, Jacques, "The Welfare Case for the European Monetary System,"

  Journal of International Money and Finance, 4, 1985, 485—506.

Obstfeld, Maurice, "International Finance," NBER Working Paper No. 2077,

  November 1986.   Forthcoming, The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics.

Oudiz, Gilles, "European Policy Coordination: An Evaluation," Centre for

  Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 81, October 1985.

Oudiz, Cilles and Jeffrey Sachs, "Macroeconomic Policy Coordination Among

  the Industrial Economies," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1984,

  1—7 6.

                                                                Be Counter-
Rogoff, Kenneth, "Can International Monetary Policy Cooperation

  productive?" Journal of International Economics 18, 199—217.

Summers, Larry, "Tax Policy and International Competitiveness," NBER

  Working Paper, March    1985.    In Jacob Frenkel, ed., International Aspects

  of Fiscal Policies.    Chicago: University of Chicago Press (forthcoming).

Zarnowitz, Victor, 'On Functions, Quality and Timeliness of Economic

  Information," Journal of Business, January 1982, 87—119.

              "The Accuracy of Individual and Group Forecasts from Business

   Outlook Surveys," Journal of Forecasting, January—March 1984, 11—26.
                                                              Recession and
 Zarnowitz, Victor and Geoffrey Moore, "Sequential Signals of

   Recovery," Journal of Business,     January 1982, 57—85.
