NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVENTIVE CAPABILITIES IN THE DIVISION OF INNOVATIVE LABOR
Ashish Arora
Wesley M. Cohen
Colleen M. Cunningham
Working Paper 25051
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25051

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

This research was funded in part by the NSF (grant #0830349) and the Kauffman Foundation. We
thank seminar attendees at Harvard Business School, INSEAD, IESE, and the Academy of
Management and Strategic Management Society annual conferences for helpful comments. We
also thank the U.S. Cluster Mapping Project for sharing cluster patent data The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ashish Arora, Wesley M. Cohen, and Colleen M. Cunningham. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Inventive Capabilities in the Division of Innovative Labor
Ashish Arora, Wesley M. Cohen, and Colleen M. Cunningham
NBER Working Paper No. 25051
September 2018
JEL No. O31,O32
ABSTRACT
We study how the inventive capability of a firm conditions its participation in a division of
innovative labor. Capable firms are, by definition, able to invent; for them, external inventions
substitute for their own R&D. However, external knowledge is an input into internal invention,
and thus, more valuable to firms with inventive capability. Using a simple model of innovation
and imitation, we explore how inventive capability affects a firm’s R&D investments, and thus
whether and how it innovates, imitates, or does neither. Further, we study how these outcomes are
conditioned by the supply of external knowledge as well as the supply of external inventions. In
an advance over the literature, we treat firm inventive capability as unobserved, and use a latent
class multinomial model to infer its value. Using a recent survey of product innovation and the
division of innovative labor among US manufacturing firms, we find that high capability firms
tend to use internal, rather than externally generated inventions, to innovate, and they use external
knowledge to enhance their internal inventive activity. By contrast, lower capability firms are
more likely to introduce “me-too” or imitative products, and when they innovate, are more likely
to rely on external sources of inventions. Our findings suggest the successful pursuit of R&D-led
growth depends both on firm inventive capability and the external knowledge environment.

Ashish Arora
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
ashish.arora@duke.edu
Wesley M. Cohen
The Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
wcohen@duke.edu

Colleen M. Cunningham
London Business School
Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
ccunningham@london.edu

1

Introduction

The large, technologically self-sufficient firm is no longer (and perhaps never was) the key
driver of economic growth. Indeed, recent evidence suggests that nearly half of the product
innovations introduced by American manufacturing firms originate from external sources,
Arora et al. (2016). If so, the innovative performance of the economy relies upon a “division
of innovative labor” (Jewkes et al., 1958; Cassiman & Veugelers, 2006; Arora et al., 2016).
In this division of labor, one can coarsely distinguish between two important stages. First,
an invention results in either a new product or an improvement upon an existing product.
Second, either the inventor or another firm will innovate, that is, commercialize the invention. These two stages involve different types of firm-capabilities, including inventive and
commercialization capabilities, where inventive capability can be thought of as the upstream
technical expertise and functions that allow firms to generate new products, or improve existing products.1 In this paper, we assess how innovators uses different forms of external
knowledge, and whether they compete on the basis of their own inventions or the use of
others’ inventions.
Our contributions to the literature are twofold. First, we advance understanding of the
role of firm capabilities in the innovation process by showing that firms’ inventive capabilities
complement externally available knowledge, but substitute for externally available inventions.
These findings rationalize the potentially conflicting findings in the innovation literature
around whether firm capabilities complement or substitute for external knowledge. The
key is to distinguish external raw knowledge from more fully formed inventions; external
knowledge inputs can therefore both substitute and complement the focal firm’s inventive
capability. We also find that firm size complements the innovative performance advantage
associated with inventive capability, which is consistent with size scaling the expected payoffs
to both innovation and imitation (Cohen & Klepper, 1996).
1
In contrast, a firm’s commercialization capability reflects its abilities to develop, manufacture, market
and sell the new products that derive from inventions.

2

Our second contribution is methodological. By applying a finite mixture model approach
to treat inventive capability as an unobserved, latent variable, we contribute to the strategy
and innovation literatures by obviating the concerns over endogeneity that have plagued the
empirical literature on the role of firm capabilities. Further, unlike most prior uses of finite
mixture models, we use our predictions about the interactions between capability, external
invention supply, and size to interpret our latent classes.
As a basis for our empirical analysis, we develop a simple model in which firms choose
whether to commercialize a new product (based either on an internally generated idea or
an external invention), or not. In a prior stage, firms choose their R&D investments, which
enhance the value of internally generated ideas. Some of the new products are new to
the market, and are innovative. Others are similar to existing products, and are perhaps
improvements or simply differentiated from them in some respects. We call these imitative.
Though both types can arise from internal R&D, we assume that innovations are more
responsive to R&D investments than are imitations. We model capability as reducing the
marginal cost of R&D, so that all else equal, high capability firms have higher R&D.
We distinguish two different forms of external innovation inputs: 1) external “raw” knowledge flows—that we will simply call “knowledge”—that increase the productivity of internal
R&D, and 2) externally available inventions that firms can acquire and commercialize. The
model implies that both high and low capability firms will innovate more when located in
environments rich in knowledge and inventions. The prediction differs, however, depending on whether the location is rich in inventions or rich in knowledge. In locations rich
in external inventions, low capability firms will innovate more than otherwise by acquiring
inventions. Firms with greater inventive capabilities, however, are less likely to capitalize
on such external inventions because they have a more attractive “inside option”. But in the
presence of more external knowledge, increased R&D efficiency disproportionately benefits
high capability firms, leading to greater internal invention.
Our model also yields more nuanced predictions that we empirically examine. For in3

stance, it suggests that size and inventive capability are complements, in that innovation
increases faster with size in higher capability firms. Further, the model suggests that because low capability firms do less R&D, their new product introductions (i.e., innovation
and imitation) is less responsive to external knowledge than is the case for high capability
firms. On the other hand, low capability firms are more responsive to the supply of external
ideas than are high capability firms.
Our empirical analysis uses a survey of U.S. manufacturing firms for the period 2007 to
2009 (Arora et al., 2016) that focuses on innovation and the division of innovative labor,
including the sourcing of invention. The survey samples all manufacturing firms, not just
those with prior R&D spending or patents, allowing us to explore innovation-related choices
for a wide spectrum of firms. Our sample distinguishes our research from much of the
literature that explores the use of external sources by innovators or R&D performing firms
as surveyed by Vivas & Barge-Gil (2015), or only firms in industries where innovation is
the basis of competition, e.g., pharmaceuticals or semiconductors (Ceccagnoli et al., 2010;
Fabrizio, 2009). We link the survey data to other datasets, including patent data, and to
measures of the local knowledge environment, and exploit geographic and industry-specific
variation to construct measures of the external supply of inventions and knowledge (Jaffe,
1986; Feldman, 1993; Delgado et al., 2014; Porter, 1998; Carlino & Kerr, 2015).
Note that we are not estimating the causal impact of external knowledge on innovation.
Instead, we seek to test whether the patterns of association between the external knowledge
environment and the rate and composition of innovation differ between high and low capability firms as predicted by our simple model. We do not directly measure inventive capability
using empirical proxies such as prior patents, R&D, innovation, or sales. Instead, we treat
firm capability as an unobserved latent variable by using a semi-parametric finite-mixture
model approach, more commonly used in the marketing literature (e.g., McLachlan & Peel
(2004); Kamakura & Russell (1989); Colombo & Morrison (1989)).2 We leverage theory to
2
FMM models are similar to some types of unsupervised machine learning. A multinomial logit relates
characteristics to outcomes, and the coefficients can differ for firms of different capabilities (latent types).

4

identify the latent class associated with higher inventive capability, and use the predicted
firm-specific probability of belonging to that latent class as a measure of the firm’s inventive
capability.
To prefigure our empirical results, we observe that firms with greater inventive capabilities
are more likely to both innovate and imitate.3 Consistent with prior findings, we find that
location in a rich knowledge environment—rich in either “raw” knowledge or more fully
developed inventions—has a positive relationship on average with innovation and imitation.4
But firms benefit in different ways depending on their inventive capability. Less capable firms
build on the inventions of others, often to imitate, whereas more capable firms use external
knowledge to enhance their internal inventions.
Section 2 below provides a brief discussion of the related literature. In section 3, we
develop our theoretical model and in section 4 analyze how firms’ inventive capabilities
condition their use of the external knowledge environment, and thereby shape the their innovative activity. Our data are described in section 5. In section 6 we use a finite-mixture
model to estimate our measure of inventive capability, and examine how the relationship
between the external knowledge environment and innovation differs by firm inventive capability. In section 7, we examine the relationship between inventive capability and the use
of outside knowledge and inventions. In section 8 we explore how capability is related to
performance. Section 9 summarizes our results, discusses their implications for the related
literature, and offers some practical implications for management.
Each observation is assigned a starting probability, sometimes called the prior probability, of originating from
a firm with a given capability level, which leads to a different set of coefficient estimates relating observable
characteristics such as age and size to outcomes such as innovation. Conditional on the actual outcome,
there is a posterior probability of a given observation originating from a firm with a particular capability
level. In turn, this posterior probability serves as the basis for the next round of estimates. The process
continues until the prior and posterior converge.
3
Some me-too products can be very profitable. Examples include Samsung’s introduction of its Galaxy
smartphone line subsequent to Apple’s introduction of the iPhone, or Warner Lambert’s development of
Lipitor (subsequently commercialized by Pfizer) after Merck’s commercial introduction of the first statin,
Mevacor (lovastatin).
4
This is consistent with findings both from the markets for technology literature (West & Bogers, 2014;
Arora et al., 2001a) that focuses on external sourcing of invention as the key driver, and findings from
geography of innovation literature (Audretsch & Feldman, 2004) that focuses on knowledge spillovers and
internal invention as the key driver.

5

2

Background

To understand the contribution of this paper to the literatures on innovation and firm strategy, consider that the literature on R&D spillovers and the literature on markets for technology largely posit opposite relationships between a firm’s internal capabilities and external
knowledge. When emphasizing the role of absorptive capacity, the literature on spillovers
highlights the complementarity between a firm’s capability and external knowledge: To use
external knowledge effectively, firms need to engage in internal invention. In contrast, the
literature on markets for technology argues that external inventions substitute for internal
capability. These findings lead to an apparent puzzle, that the firms with the most to gain
from participating in a division of innovative labor are also the least able to do so. They also
have very different predictions for competitive dynamics. If internal capability and external
knowledge are complements, then more capable firms’ use of external knowledge will reinforce their competitive advantage. If they are substitutes, then external knowledge will have
a leveling effect. While more apparent than real, this puzzle reflects a gap in our understanding of the relationship between capabilities and external knowledge. There are two reasons
for this gap. One is conceptual, reflecting a lack of specificity around characterization of
external knowledge. The other is methodological, reflecting the challenges associated with
the measurement of firm capabilities.
Scholars have typically not distinguished between the knowledge flows that provide the
grist for invention versus inventions themselves (Griliches, 1992; Arora et al., 2016), and have
implicitly focused on only one or the other form of external inputs to innovation. For example,
the literature on R&D spillovers and absorptive capacity (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990; Volberda
et al., 2010) and the related literature on the geography of innovation (Audretsch & Feldman,
2004; Feldman & Pentland, 2003; Feldman, 1993) have focused largely on the knowledge flows
that are inputs to firm R&D. In contrast, those studying markets for technology (Arora et al.,
2001a; Cassiman & Veugelers, 2006; Veugelers & Cassiman, 1999) have focused on external
inventions which can substitute for internal R&D. By not distinguishing between knowledge
6

flows and inventions, the literature also implicitly conflates different stages in the innovative
process. Whereas the literature on R&D spillovers has implicitly focused on invention, the
literature on markets for technology has focused on how inventions are commercialized. We
explicitly distinguish between knowledge and invention and empirically confirm that whereas
external knowledge complements inventive capability, external inventions substitute for it.
A second gap in the literature on the impact of firm capabilities on the use of external
knowledge concerns the measurement of firm capabilities themselves. Prior studies of the
effect of capabilities on the use of external knowledge have typically employed observables
such as R&D or patents as proxies for firms’ technical capabilities. This is a problem to the
extent that innovative activity such as R&D is itself endogenous with respect to the external
knowledge environment. Using patents or past innovation creates further potential biases.
While some firms may not innovate despite some underlying capability, others may innovate
in the absence of such capability. In this paper, we will treat capability as unobserved.
Specifically, we treat it as a latent variable with the use of a finite-mixture model, as described
below, and thus avoid the endogeneity tied to the use of R&D or patenting as measures of
inventive capability in studies of the effect of capability on innovative performance.

3

Model

To study the link between external supply of knowledge and inventions and inventive capability in firm innovation outcomes, we develop a simple model of invention and innovation.
Innovation is distinguished from imitation based on whether the product is new to the market
(an “innovation”) or simply new to the firm (an “imitation”). Further, we distinguish internal
and external sources of the idea or invention underpinning the innovation or imitation.
Suppose there are 5 outcomes, indexed by j, with corresponding payoffs:
1. internal innovation (new product based on an internally generated idea or invention),
denoted by subscript in: q(vin + in )
2. internal imitation (me-too product based on an internally generated idea or invention)
7

denoted by subscript im: q(vim + im )
3. external innovation (new product based on external idea or invention) denoted by
subscript xn: q(vxn + xn )
4. external imitation (me-too product based on external idea or invention) denoted by
subscript xm: q(vxm + xm )
5. none: q(vo + o )
Note that we have scaled the payoffs by firm size, q, which is consistent with the fixed cost
spreading logic of Cohen & Klepper (1996) whereby payoffs from innovation are proportional
to firm size. Thus vj + j can be interpreted as the unit payoff from the j th outcome. The
vj are the expected unit payoff associated with the j th outcome, and j , which represent
stochastic departures from the expected payoff are assumed to be iid with type 1 extreme
value distribution, with mean 0, and variance of j is π 2 /6.5 Each firm chooses the outcome
with the highest realized payoffs. In other words, in our model, scale does not directly affect
innovation outcomes. However, as we will show below, size affects the innovation outcome
through its effect on the choice of optimal internal R&D effort, R.
The firm maximizes Π−C(R; δ), where Π is the expectation of the best available outcome,
P
so that Π = E {M axj q{vj + j }} = qln j exp(vj ), and C(R; δ) is the cost of internal R&D,
which depends on inventive capability, δ, such that the marginal cost C 0 (R) =

∂C
,
∂R

decreases

with δ.
The first order condition for an interior maximum is:
∂Π
− C 0 (R) = 0
∂R
The probability of outcome i, is denoted by ψi =

Pexp(vi ) .
j exp(vj )

(1)

Note that ψi increases with

vi , and therefore anything that increases vi will also increase ψi .
5

For simplicity, we set the location parameter to 1 which gives us the variance as above.

8

Equation 1 can be rewritten as

q

X
j

ψj

∂vj
− C 0 (R) = 0
∂R

(2)

That is, the weighted average of the marginal product of R should be equal to its marginal
cost, where the weights are the shares of each outcome (i.e., the probability that each payoff
is realized). From now on, we normalize v0 = 0, so that payoffs are interpreted relative to
the payoff from doing nothing.
We assume that the second order condition for an interior maximum holds
∂ 2Π
00
−C <0
2
∂R

(3)

The payoffs of the innovation outcomes depend upon the firm’s characteristics, their
internal R&D effort R, and environmental factors such as the supply of external inventions,
s, and the stock of relevant knowledge, k. Specifically, we assume that
1. vin and vim increase with internal R&D effort R but are independent of the supply of
external inventions s;
2. vxn and vxm increase with the supply of external inventions s but are independent of
R.
3. Knowledge k reduces the marginal cost of R&D, i.e.,

∂C 0
∂k

< 0.

We further assume that internal R&D effort matters more for innovation than imitation.
Specifically, we assume that
∂vin
∂vim
≥
∂R
∂R
∂ln(vin )
∂ln(vim )
= βin >
= βim
∂ln(R)
∂ln(R)

(4)

These assumptions imply that internally generated ideas are more valuable if there is
9

higher R, especially for innovative products rather than imitative products. They further
imply that R is higher if the stock of knowledge, k, is higher. Finally, the payoff from
external ideas is greater if the quality and quantity of external ideas, s, is higher.

3.1

Optimal R&D effort

We now show that optimal internal R&D effort, R (i.e,. the R implied by [1]) increases with
capability, δ and with firm size q. First, we can show optimal R&D effort increases with
capability. From [2], we can see that
∂R
∂δ
which implies

∂R
∂δ

≥ 0 because

∂C 0
∂δ



∂ 2Π
00
−C
2
∂R

≤ 0 and

∂2Π
∂R2


=

∂C 0
∂δ

(5)

≤ 0.

Second, optimal R&D effort increases with firm size. From [2], we can see that


!

X ∂vj
∂ 2Π
00
− C dR = −
φj
dq
∂R2
∂R
j
C 0 (R)
∂R
=−
∂q
q

∂2Π
∂R2

(6)

1
 >0
− C 00

In addition, we assume that the elasticity of R with respect to q is constant. That is, we
assume that

q ∂R
R ∂q

is constant, i.e. θ. If θ = 1, it would imply a constant proportion of sales

are spent on internal R&D. A constant elasticity implies size-proportional R&D intensity,
which, comfortingly, matches with existing empirical findings (Cohen, 2010). Because of the
highly non-linear form of [6], this assumption simplifies our analyses.

10

Further, note that ψin increases with q. Formally,
exp(vin )
ψin = P
j exp(vj )


∂ψin
∂R
∂vin
∂vin
∂vim
=
ψin
− ψin
− ψim
∂q
∂q
∂R
∂R
∂R
∂R
∂vin
≥
ψin
(1 − ψin − ψim ) ≥ 0
∂q
∂R

4

Linking the model to the empirical analysis

In our data, we cannot empirically distinguish between internal and external sources for
imitation. Therefore we collapse our five innovation outcomes into three: innovation, imitation, and none. If the unit payoff associated with innovation is vn + n , then vn + n =
M ax{vin + in , vxn + xn }. Following from the IIA (independence of irrelevant alternatives)
property of the multinomial logit, vn = ln (exp(vin ) + exp(vxn )).6 We define the expected
unit payoff from imitation, vm analogously as vm = ln (exp(vim ) + exp(vxm )).

4.1

Innovation, Imitation, and Capability

We use the model to generate predictions about the relationship between innovation, imitation, and capability. More precisely, we analyze the effect of capability, size, external
invention, and knowledge, on the payoffs associated with innovation and imitation.

4.1.1

Innovation and capability

The average payoff from innovation, vn , is higher for high capability firms.
∂vin ∂R
∂vn
= tn δ
≥0
∂δ
∂R ∂δ
exp(vin )
where tn =
exp(vin ) + exp(vxn )

(7)

A related implication of the model is that the average payoff from imitation, vm , is higher
6

For formal proof, see Anderson et al. (1992), pages 58-62.

11

for high capability firms. Formally, let tm =

exp(vim )
.
exp(vim )+exp(vxm )

The derivative of vm w.r.t δ is

given by
∂R ∂vim
∂vm
= tm
≥0
∂δ
∂δ ∂R

(8)

We can summarize [8] and [7] in the following:
Proposition 1 Innovation and imitation are higher for high capability firms than low
capability firms

4.1.2

Innovation, Imitation and Capability

The relative share of innovation and imitation is given by
increases with R if

exp(vin )
exp(vim )

>

exp(vxn ) 7
.
exp(vxm )

Note that

exp(vin )
exp(vim )

ψn
ψm

=

exp(vin )+exp(vxn )
.
exp(vim )+exp(vxm )

This ratio

increases with R whereas

exp(vxn )
exp(vxm )

is independent of R. In other words, the higher the capability (and hence, the higher is R),
the more likely that increases in capability will increase the ratio of innovation to imitation.
Intuitively, as capability increases, the value of internal innovation increases faster than
imitation. What we then expect is that high capability firms will use internal inventions and
innovate. Low capability firms, on the other hand, will largely rely on external sources, and
more typically to imitate rather than innovate. This illuminates a core feature of a division
of innovative labor: capabilities condition not just whether a firm will source externally but
also if they innovate or imitate (or do not introduce new products at all). While we cannot
fully test this since we don’t know the source of invention underpinning imitation, our theory
illuminates this feature of the division of innovative labor, which has not been discussed in
prior literature.

4.2

Capability and innovation response to size

The foregoing propositions are quite straightforward and intuitive: more capable firms are
more likely to innovate or imitate than not commercialize a new product even when allowing
7

The condition is sufficient for the result to hold.

12

for externally sourced inventions. However, our next prediction provides some nuanced logic
that emerges from the model and is less obvious without the formal structure of the model.
Recalling that tn =

exp(vin )
exp(vin )+exp(vxn )

is the share of innovations based on internal inventions,

the impact of firm size q on the payoff from innovation is given by:
∂vin ∂R
∂vn
= tn
∂q
∂R ∂q
vin
= tn βin θ
q

(9)

This implies that size increases the likelihood of innovation. A analogous result holds for
imitation. How does this result differ across firms of different inventive capability? First,
note that as δ increases, this results in higher R, thereby increasing vin , which will also imply
an increase in tn , the share of innovations based on internal inventions. It follows that

∂vn
∂q

is higher for higher δ. More formally, the impact of capability on the relationship between
size and innovation is given by :
βin θ
∂ 2 vn
=
∂q∂δ
q



∂vin ∂R
∂tn ∂R
+ vin
tn
∂R ∂δ
∂R ∂δ


>0

(10)

where βin is the elasticity of the internal innovation payoff vin with respect to R
An analogous argument establishes that the response of vm to an increase in q is greater
for higher capability firms. Proposition 2 below summarizes this.
Proposition 2 : Innovation and imitation increase more quickly with size for high capability than low capability firms.

4.3

Capability and response to supply of external inventions, s

We next examine how capability interacts with the supply of external invention. Note that
external inventions increase the payoff from innovation. Formally
∂vn
=
∂s



∂vin
∂vxn
tn
+ (1 − tn )
∂s
∂s
13


= (1 − tn )

∂vxn
≥0
∂s

(11)

Using a similar logic, the imitation payoff also increases with the supply of external
inventions. In [11] the higher is the share of innovation based on internal inventions, the
lower is 1−tn . Therefore, innovation by low capability firms is more responsive to the supply
of external inventions. Intuitively, higher capability firms rely more on internally generated
inventions, which substitute for external ones. Formally:
∂ 2 vn
=−
∂s∂δ



∂tn ∂R
∂R ∂δ



∂vxn
<0
∂s

(12)

A similar argument yields the result that imitation by high capability firms is less responsive to the supply of external inventions than imitation by high capability firms.
Proposition 3: Innovation and imitation increase more quickly with the supply of external
inventions for low than high capability firms.

4.4

Capability and response to knowledge k

Capability also conditions the response to external knowledge. An increase in the supply of
knowledge increases R and hence increases the payoff from internally generated inventions.
This implies that a higher k will lead to more innovation and imitation.
∂vn
∂R
=
∂k
∂k



∂vxn
∂vin
+ (1 − tn )
tn
∂R
∂R


= tn

∂vin ∂R
≥0
∂R ∂k

(13)

If, in addition, we assume that capability and external knowledge are complements, in the
sense that the elasticity of R&D with respect to capability (weakly) increases with external
knowledge, i.e., θi ≡

∂Ln(R)
∂Ln(δ)

increases with k, then, innovation and imitation by higher

capability firms will be more responsive to external knowledge than lower capability firms.
To see this, recall from equation [7] that
∂vn
∂vin ∂R
= tn δ
∂δ
∂R ∂δ
= tn vin βin θi
14

(14)

where βin is the elasticity of vin with respect to R.
Note that tn increases with k. Further, vin increases with R and therefore, increases with
k. As long as θi does not decrease with k, it is sufficient to yield the result that

∂ 2 vn
∂δ∂k

≥ 0.

A similar argument implies that imitation by high capability firms is more responsive to the
supply of external knowledge than imitation by low capability firms. Concretely,
∂vm
= tm vim βim θi
∂δ

(15)

Similar to [14], tm increases with k, vim increases with R and therefore with k, and θi
does not decrease with k, which is sufficient for the result:

∂ 2 vm
∂δ∂k

≥ 0.

Proposition 4: Innovation and imitation increase more quickly with the supply of external
knowledge for high than low capability firms.
In sum, we expect that: high capability firms innovate and imitate more than low capability firms; size will increase innovation and imitation more quickly for higher capability
firms; external supply of inventions will increase innovation and imitation more for low capability firms; and external supply of knowledge will affect innovation and imitation positively
for both high and low capability firms. We will use these predictions to interpret our latent
class analyses below.

4.5

Capability and external invention supply

For innovating firms, the share of innovation from internal inventions is tn . This share
increases with δ:
exp(vin )exp(vxn ) ∂vin
∂tn
=
∂δ
(exp(vxn ) + exp(vin ))2 ∂δ
∂vin
= t(1 − t)
≥0
∂δ

(16)

Further, and unsurprisingly, the share of innovation from internal inventions tn decreases
with s.
15

exp(vin )exp(vxn ) ∂vxn
∂tn
=−
∂s
(exp(vxn ) + exp(vin ))2 ∂s
∂vxn
= −t(1 − t)
≤0
∂s

(17)

Proposition 5: The share of external invention increases with s and will be higher for
lower capability firms than high capability firms.

4.6

Size, capability, and the source of inventions for innovation

For innovating firms, the share of internal inventions increases with size, q:
∂tn
exp(vin )exp(vxn ) ∂vin ∂R
=
∂q
(exp(vxn ) + exp(vin ))2 ∂R ∂q
∂vin ∂R
≥0
= tn (1 − tn )
∂R ∂q

(18)

In other words, the share of external inventions should decrease with size. Note also that
∂ 2 tn
∂vin ∂R ∂tn
∂vin ∂R ∂R
= (2tn − 1)
+ tn (1 − tn )
∂q∂δ
∂R ∂q ∂δ
∂R ∂q ∂δ
∂ 2 tn
1
=⇒
≥0
tn >
2
∂q∂δ

(19)

In other words, if the share of internal inventions among innovating firms is larger than
half, size increases the use of internal inventions (or decreases the use of external), and has
a differential effect on the use of internal inventions for firms of different capabilities.8
Proposition 6: The share of external inventions will decrease with size. Moreover, the
share of external invention will decrease with size more quickly for high capability firms than
low capability firms.
8

We verify that empirically, the share of internal inventions is greater than half in the sample.

16

5

Data

We base our empirical analysis on the “division of innovative labor” (DoIL) survey of firms
in U.S. manufacturing sector (Arora et al., 2016). Administered in 2010, the DOIL survey
collected data on new product introductions at the level of the business unit within firms, for
2007 through 2009. The sample frame for this survey was the Dun and Bradstreet Selectory
database, the most complete publicly available frame for the United States at the time.
The survey sampled all American manufacturing firms, not just R&D performers, unlike
prior innovation-related surveys (e.g., Cohen et al. (2000); Levin et al. (1987)). Such a
sample is key for the present exercise because it both allows construction of a measure of
inventive capability that is not conditioned on endogenous innovation inputs (e.g., R&D) or
outcomes (e.g., patents), and enables observation of the relationship between external supply
of inventions and that of raw knowledge, respectively, and innovation for all types of firms.
Sampling was stratified along multiple dimensions, including industry (at the 4 digit
NAICS level), and size (categories: Fortune 500, over 1000 employees but not F500, 500 to
1000 employees, 100 to 499 employees, and 10 to 99 employees, and less than 10 employees).
For Fortune 500 firms, the sampling unit was the firm’s activity within a NAICS; for other
firms it was based on primary NAICS. The initial sample was 28,709. Initial screening (for
out-of-business or out-of-population) left a final sample of 22,034. The final respondent
count was 6,685 or an adjusted response rate of 30.3%. A more detailed description of
the sampling process and complete description of the phone survey procedures, along with
tables of response rates across industries, detailed tests of response bias, and other related
information are outlined in Arora et al. (2016).
The survey asked responding firms about whether they had introduced a new product in
the previous three years, and if so, whether the product was new to the market or merely new
to the firm.9 We describe firms that had introduced a product that was new to the market
9

More precisely, of all the new products introduced, firms were asked to answer with respect to the most
significant product, that which accounted for the largest share of revenues.

17

as innovators, and firms that introduced a product that was only new to the firm itself
(i.e., not to the market) as imitators. Innovating firms were further asked whether they had
acquired the key invention underlying their product innovation from an external source, such
as a customer, a supplier, another firm in the industry, an independent inventor, an R&D
contractor or university. To supplement the DoIL data, we matched each respondent to a
location, and use the the relative incidence of R&D specialist firms in the region as a measure
of the external supply of inventions, and proximate, relevant university R&D spending as a
measure of the supply of external knowledge. Data sources for both are described below.
In the present study, we use businesses operating across all manufacturing industries
(NAICS 31-33) with 10 or more employees, or 5,175 respondents. Because of item nonresponse on key variables (e.g., business unit size), our final sample for our latent class analysis
is 4,692, out of which there are 1,124 innovators.
In all analyses we use survey sample weights, constructed using Census data on the
population of firms stratified by industry, size strata, and age to correct for non-response
bias.10 We link the survey data outside datasets at the level of respondent (using Duns
number or other firm identifiers), industry (NAICS 3 or 4 digit level), and location (county
or metropolitan statistical area). Descriptions of the relevant additional datasets are listed
below along with variable descriptions.

6

Latent class model

In this section, we provide a brief overview of the finite-mixture model approach we use to
infer firms’ inventive capabilities. Instead of using past behavior, e.g., patenting or R&D
spending, to infer inventive capability, we use latent discrete choice models to generate a
measure of capability. Latent class discrete choice models are a special case of finite-mixture
models, which assume that the data generated are from a mixture of two (or more) distri10

We constructed a matrix of these three dimensions of stratification (industry, size, and age) from a
custom report provided by the U.S. Bureau of the Census. We thank Ron Jarmin and his team at the U.S.
Bureau of the Census for providing this report.

18

butions, with different, unknown means. Each data point or observation has an unknown
probability of belonging to one of the distributions (in latent class models, each distribution is a latent class). These (unknown) probabilities, along with the parameters of the
distribution—that is, the set of coefficients from the model predicting innovation outcomes
for each distribution—are jointly estimated.
Latent class models have been widely used in marketing to categorize consumers by their
revealed preferences (Bordley, 1989; Boxall & Adamowicz, 2002; Bucklin & Gupta, 1992;
Colombo & Morrison, 1989; Kamakura & Russell, 1989; Kamakura et al., 1996). These
models allow for the attributes of various choices (e.g., price) and characteristics of the
choosers (e.g., income) to differentially shape choices across endogenously determined preference groups or consumer types. For example, Kamakura et al. (1996) predict consumers
choice of peanut butter, segmenting those insensitive to price (i.e., brand loyalists) from
those who make choices based on price.
In our setting, we use latent class models to distinguish firm types by their underlying
inventive capability, allowing business unit size and the external supply of inventions and
knowledge to differentially shape innovation outcomes. As noted above, there are three
potential innovation outcomes: (1) innovation, (2) imitation, or (3) no new product, here
indexed by j. The probability of each outcome is: Pi (j) = P rob(yi = j), representing
the class-specific estimates of the propensity to innovate, imitate, or do nothing or, in the
multinomial logit formulation:
e xi β j
Pi (j) = P3
xi βj
j=1 e

(20)

where xi are the observed characteristics of firm i, and βj are the coefficients associated with
the j th outcome.
If we allow these probabilities to vary across latent classes (hereafter q), the class conditional probabilities are Pi|q (j) = P rob(yi = j|class = q) or, in the multinomial logit
19

formulation:
exi βqj
Pi|q (j) = P3
xi βqj
j=1 e

(21)

We do not directly observe membership in latent classes, and therefore it must be estimated. The estimation of class membership (i.e., probability of being in a class q) and the
corresponding class-specific coefficients (βqj ) is an iterative process.
To estimate a latent class model, an analyst must first choose the number of classes q.
To inform this choice, following prior literature (Greene & Hensher, 2003; Grimpe & Sofka,
2009; Roeder et al., 1999), we used the Akaike and Bayesian Information Criteria (AIC and
BIC) as well as R2 values. Table 3 highlights that the fit is greatly increased for our data in
two classes versus one, and only increases slightly with 3 classes. Trading off interpretability
(and thus fewer classes) against the additional fit from a higher number of classes, we choose
two classes.
Latent class models simultaneously estimate class probabilities for each observation, class
conditional probabilities of the various innovation outcomes, and class-specific coefficients.
This means, for example, the effect of size on innovation outcomes is allowed to vary by class.
Letting Hiq denote the prior probability of being in class q for firm i, z be a set of observable
characteristics, and φ the corresponding coefficients. In our analysis, we use industry fixed
effects in the estimation of initial latent class probabilities, i.e. as z.
0

ezi φq

Hiq = PQ

q=1

0

ezi φq

where φq = 0

(22)

The choice probability for respondent i is the sum of the class-level probabilities weighted
P
by class probabilities, or: Pi = Q
q=1 Hiq Pi|q .
After obtaining estimates of φq from the two class model, the latent class routine then
computes choice probabilities and posterior estimates of the firm-specific class probabilities

20

conditional on choice probabilities via Bayes theorem:
P̂i|q Ĥiq
Ĥq|i = PQ
q=1 P̂i|q Ĥiq

(23)

These steps are repeated until the process converges. In the end, this analysis produces firmspecific estimates of latent class probabilities (Ĥq|i ), class-specific estimates of the propensity
to innovate, imitate, or do nothing (P̂i|q ), and class-specific coefficients for our predictor
variables (β̂jq ).11 For comparison, as shown in Tables 1 and 4 discussed below, we also
estimated the standard Multinomial logit (MNL) model that implicitly assumes there to be
one latent class.

7

Analysis

Our analysis proceeds in two steps. Both follow from our theoretical predictions about
innovation choices and sourcing by innovators. First, we analyze the likelihood of innovation,
imitation, or not commercializing a new product. We use latent class discrete choice methods
to simultaneously develop a measure of a firm’s latent inventive capability and explore how
inventive capability–along with measures of the external knowledge environment, business
unit size, and other firm and industry characteristics–shape the choice to innovate, imitate, or
not commercialize a new product. Second, we use our measure of latent inventive capability
derived from our application of the finite mixture model approach subsequently examine if
the patterns of association between firms’ reliance on external invention, capability and firm
size confirm the predictions of our model.
11

The above steps were performed in NLOGIT 5 using LCLOGIT routines and in STATA 15 using the
FMM module.

21

7.1
7.1.1

Analysis: Innovation, Imitation, and inventive capability
Outcome variable

We categorize business units as innovators if they earned revenue from a “new-to-the-market”
product launched from 2007 to 2009. If the business unit earned revenue from a “new-to-thefirm” product launched over the same period that was not new-to-the-market, we categorized
them as imitators. Those that did neither are categorized as none.

7.1.2

Discriminating variables

In our latent class regressions, we include a set of variables intended to discriminate between
high and low capability firms. Our criteria for including regressors are notably different than
in a typical regression with “explanatory” variables: we instead include regressors to help us
to estimate and distinguish latent classes of firms. Building from our theory, we include a
select set of variables that we expect will have differential relationships with our outcomes
for high versus low capability firms.
Our theory emphasizes a distinction between two types of external inputs—external inventions and knowledge—which have different effects on innovation depending on firm inventive capability. We use the (log) count of R&D specialist firms in the MSA (Metropolitan
Statistical Area) of the respondent business unit weighted by use of such services in the
industry of the respondent as a measure of external invention supply. The measure therefore
varies by region and industry.12

13

12
Specialist R&D suppliers consist of suppliers of Architectural, Engineering, and Related Services (5413),
suppliers of Specialized Design Services (5414), Computer Systems Design and Related Services (5415),
Management, Scientific, and Technical Consulting Services (5416), and Scientific Research and Development
Services (5417). For our measure, we take a log of the count the number of large establishments (>100
employees) in NAICS 5413-5417 in the relevant MSA according the the US Census County Business Patterns
data for 2007. For the industry weights, we use Bureau of Economic Analysis input-output tables to get the
share of inputs coming from R&D specialists in each industry.
13
Along with being sources of external inventions (Arora et al., 2001b) R&D specialists may also, however,
diffuse knowledge inputs to internal invention. To examine the robustness of our results that employ this
measure, we also ran our analyses using counts of relevant patents in the region of the respondent as defined
by the Cluster mapping project (Delgado et al., 2014). The results using these cluster-based patents are
qualitatively similar to our R&D specialist measure.

22

As our measure of external knowledge supply, we use proximate, relevant university R&D
spending (within a 100 mile radius of the focal firm). To construct this measure, we used
the NSF data on university R&D expenditures for 2004 through 2006. We count only R&D
spending for research fields related to the industry of the respondent firm, and categorized
relatedness based on whether R&D labs in the industry listed the field as relevant for research
in a prior survey (Cohen et al., 2000).14
While we model external knowledge supply and external invention supply as separate
parameters (k and s), they are difficult to separate empirically. Any measure of invention
supply will also likely capture some element of knowledge supply. Further, even with separate
measures of external invention supply and external knowledge supply for the local area of each
respondent firm, areas rich in knowledge tend to be co-located with areas rich in inventions.
Indeed, our two measures are strongly correlated (0.56). Given the collinearity between the
two constructs, we conduct separate analyses below (Tables 1 and 4) to explore the potential
differences in outcomes and behaviors associated with the external supply of knowledge as
compared to those related to the external supply of invention.
Our theoretical analysis suggests that firm size, external knowledge supply and external
invention supply should differentiate the innovative behavior of more capable from less capable firms. We measure size as the logged number of employees of the business unit. We
also include several variables to control for differences across firms to isolate the theorized
relationships. First, we include an indicator for whether or not the business unit is multiproduct (where multiproduct = 1 if the business unit has more than one associated 6-digit
NAICS) since the scope of related firm activities has been found to be positively associated
with invention and innovative success (Cockburn & Henderson, 2001; Henderson & Cockburn, 1996). We also include an indicator for whether the business unit is part of a larger
firm or is a standalone company, and for firm age.
14

In addition to providing a measure of externally available knowledge, proximate relevant university
research activity may also, however, reflect inventions or capture the supply of trained personnel, an internal
input into invention. Inventions resulting from university research constitute, however, only a very small
share of the external inventions employed by firms.(Arora et al., 2016).

23

At the industry level, we include a dummy for whether or not the respondent is in a high
tech industry, which is defined as whether the share of firms in the industry of the business
unit that perform R&D is above the median (high tech = 1). On average, we expect firms
in high tech industries to be more likely to innovate. We also control for whether or not
the business unit is in a homogeneous market, that is, whether the market for the firm’s
innovation is relatively homogeneous (Sutton, 1998). Homogeneity is based on the share of
total industry-level sales (4 digit NAICS) made up by the largest 7 digit NAICS category
within the industry. We use total shipment values at the 4 and 7-digit NAICS level from the
2002 US Economic Census (homogeneous =1 for above median industries). Homogeneity
should have competing effects on the choice between innovation and imitation.

7.2

Results: Innovation, Imitation, and inventive capability

Table 1 presents the results from simple multinomial logit (or single class) and latent class
multinomial logit models (Appendix table A1 shows the posterior probabilities of being high
capability across various industries). Table 2 includes the corresponding marginal effect
estimates and average probability of each outcome for all three models. The best fit is
provided by a model with two, rather than more or fewer latents classes. The fit statistics
are outlined and described in Table 3.
We expect that one of the latent classes will be comprised of those with high inventive
capability, and be characterized by higher innovation and imitation rates.That is, one class—
which we label high capability—should be much more likely to have commercialized products
via innovation and imitation than the other class of firms (Proposition 1). Further, the size
of firms in the high capability class should have a larger, positive association with innovation
and imitation as compared to that of low capability firms (Proposition 2). Finally, innovation
and imitation by less capable firms should increase with external invention supply more than
innovation and imitation by more capable firms (Proposition 3), and the reverse should be
true for external knowledge (Proposition 4).
24

Across all firms, the average rate of innovation is 17%, of imitation is 25%, and 58% of
firms did not commercialize a new product at all over the three year sample period, 2007
to 2009. As described above, each respondent is assigned a probability of belonging to each
of the two latent classes.15 For class 1, the predicted probability of innovation is 35%, of
imitation 40%, and of no new product 24%. For latent class 2, the corresponding probabilities
are 8% innovation, 16% imitation, and 76% none. Clearly, both innovation and imitation are,
on average, much more likely for those that have a higher probability of being in latent class
1.16 Henceforth, we refer to latent class 1 as “high capability”, and use the likelihood that a
respondent belongs to latent class 1 as a continuous measure of the inventive capability of the
firm. Figure 1 highlights in more detail how the predicted probability of innovation, imitation
and none changes as the firm’s inventive capability increases. Consistent with Proposition
1, the share of innovation increase with capability, while the share imitation increases then
declines with capability, per a similar discussion below regarding the relationship with size.

Figure 1: Likelihood of Innovation, Imitation and No New Product, by probability of belonging to latent class 1 (high capability)
Table 1 (Columns 4-9) shows that business unit size increases the payoff to innovation
15

The average probability of an observation belonging to latent class 1 is 35%, and to latent class 2 is 65%.
These outcome probabilities were generated using the full sample, using the probability associated with
being in each class as weights. If, instead, we assign each respondent to a single class based on whether its
probability of belonging to that class exceeds 0.5, we get: class 1 innovation is 45%, of imitation 53%, and
of no new product 2%. For latent class 2, the breakdown is 4% innovation, 12% imitation, and 84% none.
16

25

and imitation for all firms. Figure 2, however, shows that the probability of imitation first
increases and then decreases with size for high capability firms. For high capability firms,
likelihood of imitation is the highest for mid-sized business units.17 To better understand
the size results (Figure 2), recall that firms have three options: innovate, imitate, or not
commercialize new products. Loosely speaking, high capability firms choose between innovation and imitation. However low capability firms have much lower rates of substitution
between innovation and imitation. Put differently, as firm size increases, the attractiveness
of doing nothing falls for all firms. But for high capability firms, as size increases the relative
attractiveness of innovation rises faster than imitation, because R increases with size, and
the innovation payoff is more responsive to R than is the imitation payoff. Therefore the
likelihood of innovating increases with size, whereas the likelihood of imitating is maximized
at an intermediate size level. However, for low capability firms, the default outcome is not
to do anything, and internal R&D is low. Thus, increases in size results in a monotonic
increase in innovation and imitation.

(a) Imitation

(b) Innovation

Figure 2: Likelihood of Innovation and Imitation, by Business Unit Size for High and Low
Capability firms

Propositions 3 and 4 from our theory suggest that the rates of innovation and imitation
17

Other results are consistent with latent class 1 representing “high capability” firms (although such results
are not part of our theory): (1) for latent class 1, being in a high tech industry is also positively associated
with innovation, having a large effect (+20%), compared to latent class 2, where being in a high tech industry
increases the probability of imitation by 5%; (2) for latent class 1, being in a more homogeneous market
increases the likelihood of innovation by 11%, and of doing nothing by 20%, compared to latent class 2,
where being in a more homogeneous market increases the likelihood of imitation by 13%.

26

of firms with more inventive capability will be: 1) less responsive to the external supply of
inventions than firms with less inventive capability (Proposition 3); and 2) more responsive
to a greater supply of external knowledge than firms with less inventive capability (Proposition 4). As shown in Table 1 consistent with Proposition 3, innovation and imitation by low
capability firms (latent class 2) indeed appear more responsive to the supply of inventions
than high capability firms. Figure 3 shows negligible difference in the probability of innovation or imitation across the range of external invention supply for high capability firms,
and an increase of approximately 10% in imitation and 15% in innovation across the range
of invention supply for low capability firms.

(a) Imitation

(b) Innovation

Figure 3: Likelihood of Innovation and Imitation, by External Supply of Invention (R&D
specialists) for High and Low Capability firms
In Table 4, to investigate Proposition 4 (the relationship between external knowledge
supply, capability, and innovation/imitation/none), we duplicate our analysis from Table 1,
but look at external knowledge supply (measured using university R&D spending) instead
of invention supply. Here, we see that high inventive capability firms innovate more in the
presence of external knowledge supply, while low capability firms do not innovate more but do
imitate at higher rates.18 The former point reflects our arguments that high capability firms
mainly extract raw knowledge inputs from the outside. Although our model also predicts
18

The increased likelihood of imitation by low capability firms when they are exposed to greater knowledge
supply is predicted by our model. Taken together with the findings on innovation, one possible explanation for
the increases in imitation by low capability firms is that more knowledge, by allowing for greater innovation
rates by more capable firms, may also yield more innovations for low capability firms to imitate.

27

that innovation should increase with external knowledge supply for low capability firms, we
do not find this to be the case.
The divergent results between inventive capability and the external supply of, respectively, inventions and knowledge highlight a key point of our paper: firms of high and low
inventive capability capitalize upon the different forms of knowledge that are available externally. Low capability firms seek external inventions—their main source of invention and, in
turn, innovation. Thus, for low capability capability firms, external inventions are a substitute for internal inventive efforts. However, the internal inventive efforts of high capability
firms benefit from their external environment via more upstream knowledge inputs (i.e.,
ideas, findings, etc.). To put it starkly, low capability firms are less capable of introducing
new products without the help of external inventors, but high capability firms can. Moreover, high capability firms are more likely than low capability firms to use raw knowledge
from their external environment.
Given that Tables 1 and 4 generate, for each observation, a measure of the probability
that that a firm belongs to the high capability class, this raises the question whether the two
generated sets of measures reflect the same underlying construct. To address the question, we
correlate the two sets of estimates. As Table 5 shows, both result in very similar assignments
of firms to high and low capability classes, with a correlation of 0.89.

7.3

Inventive Capability and External Sourcing

Given our findings on inventive capability in Tables 1 and 4, we turn to examining how the
use of external inventions differs across firms of varying capability and size. From Propositions 5 and 6 above, we expect the conditional (on innovation) probability of using external
inventions among innovators to be lower for both high capability firms and larger firms. We
approach this question non-parametrically since a more complete model of the determinants
of the use of external inventions is beyond the scope of this paper. Accordingly, we run a simple cross tab on our sample of innovating firms, where firms are distinguished by size (large
28

and small) and inventive capability (high and low). For our measure of inventive capability,
we use our estimate of the probability that the firm has high inventive capability, estimated
via the latent class regression in Table 1, and split firms into high and low capability on the
basis of the median value. To distinguish small from large business units, we split at 500
employees.
We construct our measure of whether innovating firms acquire the underlying inventions
externally or generate them internally from responses to the DoIL survey (Arora et al., 2016),
discussed above. We identify the source of the invention to be external if the respondent
said one or more of the following was the main source of the overall concept, prototype or
design underlying its innovation (i.e., new product): a supplier; a customer; another firm in
the industry; a consultant, commercial lab, or engineering service provider; an independent
inventor; or a university or government lab. The alternative was that the innovation was
based on an internal invention.
The results from our cross tab are presented in Table 6. Proposition 5 above suggests that
less capable firms should be less likely to rely more on external inventions, and Proposition
6 suggests that larger firms should be less likely to rely upon an external inventions. The
results presented in Table 6 accord with both predictions, with the percentage of smaller firms
acquiring their inventions from an outside source exceeding that of larger firms by about four
percent, and the percentage of less capable firms doing so exceeding that of more capable
firms by just over a percent. Moreover we see a greater drop associated with greater capability
among larger firms, where the drop is almost six percent. If we compare small, less capable
firms with larger, more capable firms, the former’s reliance upon external invention, 49.3%,
exceeds that of the latter by nine percentage points, representing a difference of almost one
quarter of the 40.3% of larger, more capable firms’ that rely upon external inventions. These
results add nuance to our discussion of the Table 1 and 4 results above. First, more capable,
larger firms acquire inventions; they do not rely exclusively upon external knowledge for their
new products. The results are also consistent, however, with one of our main points: that
29

whereas small, low capability firms innovate mainly by commercializing inventions made
by others, large, high capability firms rely mainly upon internal inventions for their new
products.
In our original characterization of “inventive capability” above, we suggested that this
capability was largely technical. What this would suggest is that firms with less inventive
capability would be more likely to access inventions with less technical content. To probe
this conjecture, we take advantage of the DoIL data that distinguishes externally acquired
inventions by source. We conjecture that inventions originating from customers will have
less technical content on average as compared to inventions originating from universities,
R&D service contractors, and startups. As a consequence, the acquisition of inventions
from customers should require less technical inventive capability as compared to acquisitions
from other external sources. Exploring this conjecture, Table 7 presents the results of a
multinomial logit where the reference category is internal invention and column (1) presents
the predicted likelihood of using an invention from a non-customer source versus an internal
invention, and column (2) presents the predicted likelihood of using a customer-sourced
invention relative to internal invention. Confirming our prior, the results in column (2)
show that, as inventive capability increases, innovating firms are less likely to rely upon
a customer-sourced invention as compared to internal invention. In addition to providing
suggestive evidence that our capability measure reflects a technical capability, this result
also highlights the broader point that external inventions may differ from one another in
systematic ways, and that those differences have implications the role of inventive capability
in affecting their acquisition. A second result in Table 7 should, however, give us pause.
The coefficient on inventive capability in column (1) is essentially zero. In other words, high
capability firms derive the same payoff from non-customer sources of inventions as internally
generated inventions. This result is inconsistent with our theory. But, in our view, what it
highlights is the starkness of our model: To the degree that external inventions have greater
technical content, internal inventive capability may play a role not only in internal invention,
30

but also in the acquisition of more technical inventions.

7.3.1

Validating our Capability Measure

We are interpreting the above results on the premise that the capability that we are measuring using our finite mixture empirical model is indeed inventive capability rather than,
for example, the more downstream capability to commercialize new products. Indeed, our
findings that more capable firms are more likely to exploit external knowledge and not use
external inventions, while less capable firms are more likely to exploit external inventions, is
certainly consistent with this interpretation. Nonetheless, we performed additional analyses
to both confirm our view of what we are measuring and investigate the robustness of our
capability measure.
First, we examined the association between our measure of inventive capability and two
key measures of inventive activity, namely R&D investment and past patenting (for the
period 2002 to 2006). Controlling for industry, high capability firms are 38% more likely to
have performed R&D (54% versus 15%) and almost twice as likely to have filed for a patent
(9% versus 5%) over a three year period.
For another source of confirmation that we are measuring inventive capability, we also
examined the association between our measure and a measure drawn from the DoIL survey
where respondents reported not only whether they commercialized a new product, but also
developed or licensed out a technology to another firm. We suggest that such a practice
would more commonly apply to firms that possess inventive capability, and thus have internal
inventions available for sale or licensing. And, indeed, we find, controlling for industry, high
capability firms are two and a half times more likely to have been a technology supplier (23%
versus 9%) in the past three years.
Collectively, these associations provide additional support for our interpretation of our
latent variable measure as reflecting “inventive capability.”

31

8

Inventive Capability and Performance

In this section, we explore the relationship between inventive capability and business unit
performance. Obviously the question of the determinants of firm performance is a big one.
Here our ambitions are modest—to simply consider whether the patterns of association between our measure of inventive capability and performance are consistent with our conception
of the role and impact of inventive capability as presented in our model.
Drawn from the DoIL survey (Arora et al., 2016), our measure of business unit performance is whether a business unit experienced market share growth between 2008 and 2009,
the end of our sample period. Our sample for this analysis is the full set of survey respondents regardless of outcome, and our measure of inventive capability here is continuous, i.e.
the likelihood of being high capability. It is important to remember that, having constructed
our measure of inventive capability from the latent class model, firms with high inventive
capability do not necessarily innovate; they may imitate or even do nothing.
Table 8 reports the results of a linear probability model on the likelihood of market share
growth. The column (1) result shows a positive significant relationship between inventive
capability and market share increase, as expected. Per our model, inventive capability affects
performance through the payoff from innovating or from imitating (using internal sources),
and therefore, also on whether the firm innovates or imitates (as opposed to not introducing
any new product to the market place). In column (2), along with inventive capability, we
thus include our outcome measures, innovate and imitate. Given that our model would
suggest that inventive capability should benefit the firms’ performance through one of these
two outcomes, one would expect the relationship between inventive capability and market
share to weaken. Instead, the outcomes should be directly related to performance. Indeed,
this is exactly what we see in column (2).19
19
Our model can be applied more formally to guide our expectations about performance. Let Y =
performance such that: Y = E(Vj + j |j is chosen), j ∈ {innovate, imitate, none}. Then, the simple effect of
∂Vim
in
capability on Y is approximately ∂V
∂δ tn ψn + ∂δ tm ψm > 0, where tn is the share of innovations based on
internal inventions and ψn is the share of innovating firms, and tm and ψm are defined analogously. Also,
∂Vin ∂R
∂Vim
in
note that ∂V
∂δ = ∂R ∂δ > ∂δ > 0. In short, the main effect of capability on performance (conditional

32

In our model, inventive capability increases R&D effort and the relative impact of R&D
is greater for the payoff from innovation than for imitation. Thus, if the firm actually
innovates, one would expect capability to have a bigger impact on performance than if the
firm imitates. To test this, column (3) in table 8 includes interactions between inventive
capability and the two outcomes of imitate and innovate. The results are again consistent
with our theory, suggesting that if firms have applied their inventive capability to innovating
rather than imitating, the likelihood of increasing their market share should increase, which
we observe by comparing the interactions of capability with innovation and imitation.
As a side note, it is also interesting to see that business unit size is associated with
an increase in market share in column (1), but once we control for whether the firm has
innovated or imitated, the effect of business unit size dissipates, which is consistent with
the notion that the impact of business unit size on market share works through its effect on
decisions to innovate and imitate.

9

Discussion and Conclusions

Using a model of firms’ decisions to innovate and data for the U.S. manufacturing sector, we
explore the relationships that link firms’ innovative activities, their inventive capabilities, and
the supply of external knowledge. We develop a simple theoretical model of the relationship
between a firm’s inventive capability and the three innovation outcomes (innovate, imitate, or
neither), and how that relationship is conditioned by the supply of the two forms of external
knowledge as well as firm size. Guided by the theory, we employ a finite-mixture model that
on choice of outcome) should be positive. Our model also has implications for the relationship between
capability and performance across different outcomes. Intuitively, the coefficient of the interaction between
in
capability and innovation represents ∂V
∂δ tn , and analogously, the coefficient of the interaction between
∂Vim
capability and imitation represents ∂δ tm . We would expect both are positive. In terms of relative size,
since innovation is more responsive to R&D and hence to capability than is imitation, provided the share
of imitation from internal R&D is smaller than the share of innovation based on internal R&D, or at least,
the difference in shares is not large enough to outweigh the differential responsiveness to R&D, we would
expect the interaction between capability and imitation to be much smaller than that between capability
and innovation.

33

simultaneously assigns firms to an “inventive capability” class (i.e., high or low), and estimates
how the relationship between the supply of external knowledge (i.e., either “raw” knowledge
or inventions) and firms’ innovative activities is conditioned by that capability. We then
explore how firms’ use of external inventions is conditioned by their inventive capabilities
and size. In our final step, we examine the relationship between inventive capabilities and
firms’ market performance, measured in terms of increases in market share.
Perhaps the most striking finding from our analysis is that increasing the external supply
of inventions contributes more to the innovative activity of less capable firms, and less to
that of the more capable. In this sense, a greater supply of invention helps less capable firms
compete. The innovative activity of more capable firms does increase with greater knowledge
flows, while such knowledge flows have little association with the innovations of less capable
firms. Thus, we document two effects: more innovation on the part of less capable (versus
more capable) firms when exposed to more external inventions, and more innovation on the
part of more capable firms when exposed to a greater supply of knowledge. Our argument is
essentially that external inventions can substitute—and thus compensate—for the inability of
firms to invent. In contrast, external knowledge complements inventive capability, enabling
greater innovation on the part of more capable firms. Concretely, increasing the supply of
external invention, for instance by thickening technology markets, strengthens the ability
of less capable firms to innovate, and, thus compete. At the same time, however, more
capable firms are able to capitalize on greater external supply of raw knowledge—such as
that which may originate from universities or R&D spillovers from rivals—to innovate more.
We also try to address the question of why and how inventive capability may matter for
firm performance. Our measure of performance, market share, is of course limited, and our
analysis is strictly correlational. Nonetheless, our findings are consistent with the notion that
inventive capability matters, and that, while it works through its effect on both innovation
and imitation, it matters more when the channel is innovation.
To come to these conclusions, we have bridged several literatures that focus on the di34

vision of innovative labor, each of which emphasize only one form of external knowledge.
The literature on R&D spillovers, geography and absorptive capacity focuses largely on raw
knowledge, while the literature on markets for technology tends to focus only on the movement of inventions across organizations. As noted above, our finding that local knowledge
flows have a positive relationship with innovation is consistent with prior findings on the
geography of innovation, which typically argues that agglomeration allows firms to access to
knowledge spillovers that help firms to generate inventions. Our findings, however, suggest
that high capability firms are more likely to use knowledge spillovers to innovate. In contrast,
to the extent that less capable firms benefit from a propitious location, our findings suggest
that the result is not due as much to the flow of knowledge as to the external inventions that
other firms generate.
In addition to our substantive findings, our study contributes methodologically to the
study of firm capabilities. We generate a measure of latent inventive capability that correlates
with, but is not determined by, prior invention inputs like R&D, or prior invention outcomes
like patenting. Latent measures of inventive capability provide a way to measure capabilities
in industries where patenting is uncommon, and for firms for whom R&D data may not be
systematically available, such as private firms. Our measure also does not involve detailed
measurement of distance to the cutting edge of the technological trajectory within an industry
(as in e.g., Franco et al. (2009)) and is therefore measurable and potentially applicable for
cross-industry studies. Finally, firms can have high inventive capability and not innovate, or
have low inventive capability and innovate. A potential extension of this method would be to
use new product introductions, perhaps measured using trademarks, alongside firm, industry,
and other characteristic variables to similarly estimate commercialization capability, and
explore the development and influence of both inventive capability and commercialization
capability over time.
Our study also offers several practical implications. For managers seeking growth, an
important question is whether or not to invest substantial resources in R&D expenditure
35

or to pursue a different strategy. Our findings suggest this will depend on both their existing capabilities and the availability of inventions and knowledge. Specifically, for high
capability firms, investing in R&D will help them to invent and enable access to external
knowledge inputs. However, while we do not address it in our paper, high capability firms
in rich environments are also at a greater risk of being imitated (Alcácer & Chung, 2007;
Giarratana & Mariani, 2014). In contrast, investing in R&D may not help low capability
firms for whom innovation is more about sourcing external invention. Instead, investing in
complementary commercialization resources may be more advisable if external inventions
are plentiful. Moreover, an obvious implication for less capable firms is to locate either in
markets or geographies with strong supply of inventions.
Our conclusions require a number of qualifications. We only take one step in probing
the relationship between firm capabilities and the division of innovative labor. Due largely
to data limitations, we study the role of inventive capability in innovation, not firms’ commercialization capabilities such as manufacturing, marketing and sales. Our data are survey
based, and therefore are subject to the caveats associated with such data. The cross-sectional
nature of our data prevent us from exploring dynamic relationships between capability, innovation, and performance. Finally, we have to assume that the supply of knowledge and
inventions is exogenous. Concretely, this would imply, for example, that firm location in a
rich or poor external knowledge environment is exogenous. Instead, firms may choose their
location in part to access external inventions or knowledge.
Our theory is stark in its assumptions, including, for example, that inventive capability
does not affect the payoffs from using external inventions. Our results in Tables 6 and 7
suggest the reality is more complex. We suggest, however, that distinguishing between inventive capability and commercialization, and between knowledge and invention as inputs
into innovation, enables us to clarify the confusion and seeming contradiction between literatures on their view of whether external knowledge complements or substitutes for the firm’s
own capabilities. While we make an important methodological contribution by measuring a
36

particular type of capability at a point in time, capabilities are clearly cumulative, shaped
by prior experience and learning. We hope future research continues to develop measures of
latent capability.

37

38
4692
-3671.69

imi
vs none
(2)
0.16
(0.14)
-0.06
(0.08)
0.66***
(0.07)
-0.003*
(0.00)
0.31***
(0.09)
-0.01
(0.09)
0.11***
(0.04)
-2.04***
(0.21)

inno
vs imi
(3)
-0.07
(0.16)
0.27**
(0.11)
0.35***
(0.07)
-0.001
(0.00)
0.70***
(0.11)
0.07
(0.11)
0.02
(0.05)
-1.33***
(0.25)

Latent Class Logit: 2 classes
Latent class 1
Latent class 2
inno
imi
inno
inno
imi
inno
vs none vs none
vs imi
vs none vs none
vs imi
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
-2.37
-3.43*
1.06
-0.71
0.97*
-1.69*
(1.99)
(1.90)
(0.88)
(0.46)
(0.56)
(0.88)
-0.25
-0.29
0.04
0.71**
-0.07
0.78*
(0.43)
(0.39)
(0.32)
(0.34)
(0.22)
(0.43)
4.25*** 3.29*** 0.96*** 0.80*** 0.80***
-0.01
(0.89)
(0.78)
(0.34)
(0.22)
(0.13)
(0.27)
-0.05*** -0.02*** -0.02***
0.02**
-0.01
0.02***
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
1.93***
0.81
1.12***
0.41
0.39
0.02
(0.50)
(0.53)
(0.35)
(0.35)
(0.25)
(0.48)
-1.01*
-2.31*** 1.30***
-0.77
1.01*** -1.79***
(0.54)
(0.79)
(0.49)
(0.50)
(0.32)
(0.64)
-0.23
-0.24
0.01
0.37**
0.24**
0.13
(0.21)
(0.24)
(0.14)
(0.17)
(0.11)
(0.20)
-1.4
1.37
-2.77** -4.29*** -4.15***
-0.14
(2.05)
(1.74)
(1.22)
(1.17)
(0.81)
(1.59)
0.35
0.65
4692
-3616.66

Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1
These regressions predict the likelihood of a firm innovating, imitating, not commercializing a new product, using a multinomial
logit (columns 1-3) and latent class logit (columns 4-9) specification. Regressors include: external invention supply, whether
a firm is standalone (versus part of a multiunit firm), whether the firm operates in multiple submarkets within their industry
(multiproduct BU), firm size and age, and whether the firm is in a high tech industry and a homogeneous industry. Coefficients
represent the change in log odds: marginal effects are listed in Table 2.

Avg class prob
Observations
ll

Constant

External Invention Supply

Homogeneous industry

High tech industry

Firm age (years)

BU size (log)

Multiproduct BU

Standalone

inno
vs none
(1)
0.09
(0.15)
0.21**
(0.10)
1.01***
(0.07)
-0.004*
(0.00)
1.00***
(0.10)
0.06
(0.10)
0.13***
(0.05)
-3.37***
(0.24)

MNL

Table 1: Innovation, Imitation or None: Multinomial and Latent Class Logits

39

Pr(imi)
(2)
0.03
-0.02
0.02
-0.01
0.02
0.08
-0.001

Pr(inno)
(3)
0.00
0.03
0.10
0.01
0.01
0.09
0.00

Latent Class Logit: 2 classes
Latent class 1
Latent class 2
Pr(none) Pr(imi) Pr(inno) Pr(none) Pr(imi) Pr(inno)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.34
-0.36
0.02
-0.07
0.12
-0.05
0.03
-0.02
-0.01
-0.03
-0.01
0.04
-0.14
-0.06
0.20
-0.07
0.05
0.02
0.20
-0.31
0.11
-0.08
0.13
-0.05
0.03
-0.01
-0.01
-0.05
0.03
0.02
-0.40
0.13
0.27
-0.13
0.09
0.04
0.003
0.001
-0.004
0.00
-0.001
0.001

LL
-3578.9
-3599.0
-3630.3
-3671.7

R2 (McF)
0.197
0.192
0.185
0.058

AIC
7291.8
7298.0
7326.5
7375.4

BIC
7724.1
7620.7
7539.5
7478.6

N
4692
4692
4692
4692

K
67
50
33
16

This table present the fit statistics across the one, two, three, and four class models which we used to select the number of
latent classes. The McFadden R2 and log likelihood values suggest models with more than one class provide much better fit
(i.e., in one class model is 0.06 and is more than 0.18 in the two, three or four class models). Yet, the AIC and BIC are lower in
the single class model. Balancing these diagnostics, and aiming for interpretability, we chose a model with two latent classes.
Note: BIC=2*LL+K*ln(N)

Classes
4
3
2
1

Table 3: Tests for fit: number of latent classes

* Indicator variables
Marginal effects represent the increase in probability of an outcome (as compared to any other alternative). For indicator (0/1)
variables, it is the increase in probability associate with a change from 0 to 1 (e.g., average increase in probability from being
a standalone firm).

Standalone*
Multiproduct BU*
High tech industry*
Homogeneous industry*
External Invention Supply
BU size (log)
Firm age (years)

Pr(none)
(1)
-0.03
-0.01
-0.13
0.00
-0.03
-0.18
0.001

MNL

Table 2: Innovation, Imitation or None: Average Marginal Effects

40
4692
-3674.6

imi
vs none
(2)
0.16
(0.14)
-0.06
(0.08)
0.65***
(0.07)
-0.003*
(0.00)
0.34***
(0.09)
-0.02
(0.09)
0.01
(0.01)
-2.09***
(0.23)

inno
vs imi
(3)
-0.07
(0.16)
0.27**
(0.11)
0.35***
(0.07)
0.00
(0.00)
0.70***
(0.11)
0.07
(0.11)
0.01
(0.01)
-1.41***
(0.28)

Latent Class Logit: 2 classes
Latent class 1
Latent class
inno
imi
inno
inno
imi
vs none vs none vs imi vs none vs none
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-5.01
-3.59
-1.42
0.77*
-0.18
(4.03)
(3.71)
(1.07)
(0.46)
(0.35)
1.27*
-0.14
1.40*
-0.12
0.23
(0.68)
(0.41)
(0.75)
(0.22)
(0.25)
4.11*** 2.87*** 1.24** 0.74*** 0.71***
(1.12)
(0.78)
(0.56)
(0.15)
(0.16)
-0.01
-0.03***
0.01
-0.01*
0.01
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.00)
0.35
0.34
0.02
1.38***
0.05
(0.62)
(0.44)
(0.63)
(0.22)
(0.34)
-2.56**
-0.45
-2.11**
0.68**
-0.50
(1.02)
(0.45)
(1.06)
(0.28)
(0.47)
0.17*
-0.03
0.20*
-0.01
0.12***
(0.09)
(0.05)
(0.11)
(0.02)
(0.04)
-2.69
1.84
-4.53** -3.78*** -4.21***
(3.38)
(3.71)
(1.83)
(0.60)
(0.92)
0.30
0.70
4692
-3622.56
2
inno
vs imi
(9)
0.95
(0.69)
-0.35
(0.36)
0.03
(0.24)
-0.01**
(0.01)
1.33***
(0.46)
1.18*
(0.61)
-0.13**
(0.05)
0.43
(1.11)

Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1
These regressions predict the likelihood of a firm innovating, imitating, not commercializing a new product, using a multinomial
logit (columns 1-3) and latent class logit (columns 4-9) specification. Regressors include: external knowledge supply, whether
a firm is standalone (versus part of a multi-unit firm), whether the firm operates in multiple submarkets within their industry
(multi-product BU), firm size and age, and whether the firm is in a high tech industry and a homogeneous industry. Coefficients
represent the change in log odds.

Avg class prob
Observations
ll

Constant

External knowledge supply

Homogeneous industry

High tech industry

Firm age (years)

BU size (log)

Multiproduct BU

Standalone

inno
vs none
(1)
0.09
(0.15)
0.22**
(0.10)
1.01***
(0.07)
-0.003**
(0.00)
1.04***
(0.10)
0.05
(0.10)
0.02*
(0.01)
-3.50***
(0.26)

MNL

Table 4: Innovation, Imitation or None: Multinomial and Latent Class Logits, External Supply measured by University R&D
(knowledge)

Table 5: Relationship between latent class assignment: Invention Supply (Table 1) versus
Knowledge Supply (Table 4)

Table 1

Low Capability
High Capability

Table 4
Low Capability
2865
116

High Capability
282
1711

This table presents a cross tabulation of the latent classes (capabilities) from Table 1 which
uses R&D specialists to measure external invention supply and Table 4 which uses university
R&D to measure external knowledge supply. The off-diagonal values represent the number
of firms differentially classified across the two analyses.

Table 6: The share of innovators using external sources, by inventive capability and BU size
Low Capability
High Capability
All capability

Small BU
0.493
(0.040)
0.479
(0.029)
0.485
(0.023)

Large BU
0.457
(0.049)
0.403
(0.065)
0.444
(0.039)

All sizes
0.487
(0.034)
0.475
(0.028)
0.480
(0.020)

This table presents a cross tabulation of the use of external sources by innovating firms across
both inventive capability and business unit (BU) size. Standard errors in parentheses.

41

Table 7: Sources of invention: internal, customers, other external source, among innovating
firms Ref cat: Internal source

Inventive capability
BU size (log)
Ext invention supply
Vertically integrated
Multiproduct BU
Industry FE
Constant
Observations
LL

noncust
cust
(1)
(2)
0.11
-0.53*
(0.28)
(0.28)
-0.04
-0.27**
(0.12)
(0.12)
0.32
-0.35
(0.25)
(0.22)
0.56**
0.52**
(0.24)
(0.24)
-0.32
-0.43*
(0.24)
(0.24)
Yes(17) Yes(17)
-0.69
-0.21
(0.49)
(0.55)
1,124
-660.8

Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1
These regressions predict the likelihood of an innovator firm using non-customer or customer
sourced invention, as compared to internal (the reference category). The predictors are: firm
inventive capability, firm size, external invention supply, whether is vertically integrated
(i.e., has supplier or customers inside the same firm), whether the firm operates in multiple
submarkets within their industry (multiproduct BU), and 17 industry fixed effects.

42

Table 8: Market share increase, by innovation outcome and capability (linear probability)

Inventive capability
Innovate
Imitate
Capability * Innovate
Capability * Imitate
BU size (log)
Start-up BU
Constant
Industry FE
Observations
R-squared
LL

Market Share Increase
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.20***
-0.00
-0.11
(0.03)
(0.06)
(0.11)
0.18***
0.02
(0.05)
(0.07)
0.13*** 0.17***
(0.03)
(0.06)
0.32**
(0.13)
0.01
(0.15)
0.03**
-0.00
-0.01
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
0.20*** 0.20*** 0.19***
(0.06)
(0.05)
(0.06)
0.53*** 0.58*** 0.60***
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.05)
Yes(45) Yes(45) Yes(45)
4,316
4,316
4,316
0.04
0.05
0.05
-3036
-3021
-3016

Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1
These regressions predict the likelihood the focal respondent business unit experienced a
market share increase from 2008 to 2009. The predictors are: firm inventive capability,
firm size, external invention supply, whether is vertically integrated (i.e., has supplier or
customers inside the same firm), whether the firm operates in multiple submarkets within
their industry (multiproduct BU), and 45 industry fixed effects.

43

References
Alcácer, J., & Chung, W. (2007). Location Strategies and Knowledge Spillovers. Management
Science, 53 (5), 760–776.
Anderson, S. P., Palma, A. D., & Thisse, J. F. (1992). Discrete Choice Theory of Product
Differentiation. MIT Press. Google-Books-ID: xiXGtz47p5oC.
Arora, A., Cohen, W. M., & Walsh, J. P. (2016). The acquisition and commercialization
of invention in American manufacturing: Incidence and impact. Research Policy, 45 (6),
1113–1128.
Arora, A., Fosfuri, A., & Gambardella, A. (2001a). Markets for Technology. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Arora, A., Fosfuri, A., & Gambardella, A. (2001b). Specialized technology suppliers, international spillovers and investment: evidence from the chemical industry. Journal of
Development Economics, 65 (1), 31–54.
Audretsch, D. B., & Feldman, M. P. (2004). Chapter 61: Knowledge spillovers and the
geography of innovation. In J. V. H. a. J.-F. Thisse (Ed.) Handbook of Regional and
Urban Economics, vol. Volume 4, (pp. 2713–2739). Elsevier.
Bordley, R. F. (1989). Note—Relaxing the Loyalty Condition in the Colombo/Morrison
Model. Marketing Science, 8 (1), 100–103.
Boxall, P. C., & Adamowicz, W. L. (2002). Understanding Heterogeneous Preferences in
Random Utility Models: A Latent Class Approach. Environmental and Resource Economics, 23 (4), 421–446.
Bucklin, R. E., & Gupta, S. (1992). Brand Choice, Purchase Incidence, and Segmentation:
An Integrated Modeling Approach. Journal of Marketing Research (JMR), 29 (2), 201–215.
Carlino, G., & Kerr, W. R. (2015). Chapter 6 - Agglomeration and Innovation. In J. V. H.
a. W. C. S. Gilles Duranton (Ed.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 5 of
Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, (pp. 349–404). Elsevier.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780444595171000064
Cassiman, B., & Veugelers, R. (2006). In Search of Complementarity in Innovation Strategy:
Internal R&D and External Knowledge Acquisition. Management Science, 52 (1), 68–82.
Ceccagnoli, M., Graham, S. J. H., Higgins, M. J., & Lee, J. (2010). Productivity and the
Role of Complementary Assets in Firms’ Demand for Technology Innovations. Industrial
and Corporate Change, 19 (3), 839–869.
Cockburn, I. M., & Henderson, R. M. (2001). Scale and scope in drug development: unpacking the advantages of size in pharmaceutical research. Journal of Health Economics,
20 (6), 1033–1057.
44

Cohen, W. M. (2010). Chapter 4 - Fifty Years of Empirical Studies of Innovative Activity
and Performance. In Handbook of The Economics of Innovation, Vol. 1 , vol. Volume 1,
(pp. 129–213). North-Holland.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016972181001004X
Cohen, W. M., & Klepper, S. (1996). A Reprise of Size and R&D. Economic Journal ,
106 (437), 925–951.
Cohen, W. M., & Levinthal, D. A. (1990). Absorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on
Learning and Innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35 (1), 128–152.
Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., & Walsh, J. P. (2000). Protecting Their Intellectual Assets:
Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not). Working
Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w7552
Colombo, R. A., & Morrison, D. G. (1989). Note—A Brand Switching Model with Implications for Marketing Strategies. Marketing Science, 8 (1), 89–99.
Delgado, M., Porter, M. E., & Stern, S. (2014). Clusters, convergence, and economic performance. Research Policy, 43 (10), 1785–1799.
Fabrizio, K. R. (2009). Absorptive capacity and the search for innovation. Research Policy,
38 (2), 255–267.
Feldman, M. P. (1993). An Examination of the Geography of Innovation. Industrial and
Corporate Change, 2 (3), 451–470.
Feldman, M. S., & Pentland, B. T. (2003). Reconceptualizing Organizational Routines as a
Source of Flexibility and Change. Administrative Science Quarterly, 48 (1), 94–118.
Franco, A. M., Sarkar, M. B., Agarwal, R., & Echambadi, R. (2009). Swift and Smart: The
Moderating Effects of Technological Capabilities on the Market Pioneering-Firm Survival
Relationship. Management Science, 55 (11), 1842–1860.
Giarratana, M. S., & Mariani, M. (2014). The relationship between knowledge sourcing and
fear of imitation. Strategic Management Journal , 35 (8), 1144–1163.
Greene, W. H., & Hensher, D. A. (2003). A latent class model for discrete choice analysis:
contrasts with mixed logit. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological , 37 (8), 681–
698.
Grimpe, C., & Sofka, W. (2009). Search patterns and absorptive capacity: Low- and hightechnology sectors in European countries. Research Policy, 38 (3), 495–506.
Henderson, R., & Cockburn, I. (1996). Scale, scope, and spillovers: The determinants of
research productivity in drug discovery. RAND Journal of Economics (RAND Journal of
Economics), 27 (1), 32–59.
45

Jaffe, A. B. (1986). Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms’
Patents, Profits, and Market Value. American Economic Review , 76 (5), 984–1001.
Jewkes, J., Sawkes, D., & Stillerman, R. (1958). The sources of invention. Macmillan.
Kamakura, W. A., Kim, B.-D., & Lee, J. (1996). Modeling Preference and Structural
Heterogeneity in Consumer Choice. Marketing Science, 15 (2), 152–172.
Kamakura, W. A., & Russell, G. J. (1989). A Probabilistic Choice Model for Market Segmentation and Elasticity Structure. Journal of Marketing Research (JMR), 26 (4), 379–390.
Levin, R. C., Klevorick, A. K., Nelson, R. R., & Winter, S. G. (1987). Appropriating
the Returns from Industrial Research and Development. Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, (3), 783.
McLachlan, G., & Peel, D. (2004). Finite Mixture Models. John Wiley & Sons.
Porter, M. E. (1998). Clusters and the New Economics of Competition.
URL https://hbr.org/1998/11/clusters-and-the-new-economics-of-competition
Roeder, K., Lynch, K. G., & Nagin, D. S. (1999). Modeling Uncertainty in Latent Class
Membership: A Case Study in Criminology. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 94 (447), 766–776.
Sutton, J. (1998). Technology and Market Structure: Theory and History. Mit Press.
Veugelers, R., & Cassiman, B. (1999). Make and buy in innovation strategies: evidence from
Belgian manufacturing firms. Research Policy, 28 (1), 63–80.
Vivas, C., & Barge-Gil, A. (2015). Impact on Firms of the Use of Knowledge External
Sources: A Systematic Review of the Literature. Journal of Economic Surveys, 29 (5),
943–964.
Volberda, H. W., Foss, N. J., & Lyles, M. A. (2010). PERSPECTIVE—Absorbing the
Concept of Absorptive Capacity: How to Realize Its Potential in the Organization Field.
Organization Science, 21 (4), 931–951.
West, J., & Bogers, M. (2014). Leveraging External Sources of Innovation: A Review of
Research on Open Innovation. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 31 (4), 814–
831.

46

Appendix
Table A1: Latent Class Probabilities

Food & Textiles (NAICS 31)
Wood & Chemicals (NAICS 32)
Pharmaceuticals (NAICS 3254)
Machinery & Transport (NAICS 331-3, 37)
Computers/Electronics (NAICS 334)
Semiconductor (NAICS 3344)
Instruments (NAICS 3345)
Electrical Equipment (NAICS 335)
Transportation (NAICS 336)
Medical Equipment (NAICS 3391)
Constant (Ref: Misc Manu (NAICS 339))

class 1
(vs class 2)
-0.695**
(0.260)
-0.571**
(0.257)
0.294
(0.332)
-0.360*
(0.218)
1.639***
(0.515)
0.611*
(0.318)
0.582
(0.455)
-0.106
(0.258)
0.055
(0.316)
0.683
(0.427)
0.241
(0.457)

Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

47

