NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE TWO BADS BETTER THAN ONE? A MODEL OF SENSORY LIMITATIONS
Lars J. Lefgren
Olga B. Stoddard
John E. Stovall
Working Paper 25060
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25060

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

We thank Matthew Ross for his excellent research assistance and Gordon Dahl, Jeff Denning, and
Erik Snowberg for their valuable feedback on earlier drafts of the paper. We express our
appreciation to audience members at Brigham Young University, the Singapore Economic
Association Conference, the Institute for Social Research Conference at Jinan University, the
University of Nottingham, the 14th Meeting of the Society for Social Choice and Welfare, the
2018 North American Summer Meeting of the Econometric Society, the 2018 Foundations of
Utility and Risk Conference, and the 2018 Economic Science Association World Meeting. We
thank the Brigham Young University College of Family, Home, and Social Science for generous
research support. John Stovall acknowledges the financial support for travel provided by the
David M. Kennedy Center for International Studies at Brigham Young University. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Lars J. Lefgren, Olga B. Stoddard, and John E. Stovall. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Are Two Bads Better Than One? A Model of Sensory Limitations
Lars J. Lefgren, Olga B. Stoddard, and John E. Stovall
NBER Working Paper No. 25060
September 2018
JEL No. D9,I1
ABSTRACT
We present a theoretical framework which explains the optimizing behavior of individuals who
are exposed to many latent stimuli but prone to experience only the most salient one. We show
that individuals with such preferences may find it optimal to engage in seemingly dysfunctional
behavior such as self-harm. Our model also explains the behavior of individuals experiencing
depression or trapped by multiple competing problems. We present experimental evidence
suggesting such preferences explain the behavior of more than two thirds of subjects exposed to
single and multiple painful stimuli.
Lars J. Lefgren
Department of Economics
Brigham Young University
130 Faculty Office Building
Provo, UT 84602
and NBER
lars_lefgren@byu.edu
Olga B. Stoddard
149 Faculty office building
Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602
olga.stoddard@byu.edu

John E. Stovall
137 Faculty Office Building
Brigham Young Universtiy
Provo, UT 84602
USA
johnestovall@byu.edu

1

Introduction

At any given time, an individual is exposed to countless latent stimuli. Some of
these are in the foreground of the individual’s attention such as an engaging task at
work, an interesting movie, or the back and forth of a conversation with a colleague.
Unnoticed in the background are many other stimuli such as background noise, minor
aches, or the drone of a boring conference presenter. While this observation is perhaps
obvious, the consequences of human limits to processing stimuli has a number of
interesting implications that, to our knowledge, have not been explored in economics.
Furthermore, these insights may explain why some optimizing individuals engage in
a number of seemingly counterproductive behaviors such as self-harm and fail to
undertake low cost actions to improve their situation.
To most simply illustrate our key idea, consider the following example. Suppose
an individual is watching a movie, with a utility measure of 10, while experiencing a
headache, with a utility measure of -2. Suppose further that the movie and headache
each have a measure of salience, and that the individual only experiences the utility
of the most salient stimulus. If the salience of the movie exceeds that of the headache,
the individual does not notice the headache in the background and enjoys a utility
of 10 from watching the movie. On the other hand, if the salience of the headache
exceeds that of the movie, then the individual cannot pay attention to the movie and
instead experiences the utility level of the headache, -2. What are the behavioral
implications of such a decision maker?
In this paper, we present a theoretical framework which explains the optimizing
behavior of individuals who are exposed to many latent stimuli but prone to experience only the most salient one. This framework has the power to explain a variety
of interesting economic behaviors and phenomena. Naturally, this model predicts
that individuals and firms will often bundle unpleasant stimuli with a more pleasant distraction (Filcheck et al., 2005; Milkman et al., 2014; Al-Khotani et al., 2016).
2

Hence, individuals may listen to music while exercising or watch TV while prone in
the dentist’s chair. More significantly, however, the model rationalizes a number of
seemingly dysfunctional behaviors as well.
First, consider the case of self-harm behaviors such as cutting, risky sexual behaviors, or substance abuse. In the setting we consider, individuals may engage in
such activities even if they are not intrinsically pleasurable in isolation. Suppose an
individual is exposed to an emotionally painful event, perhaps due to poor mental
health or a difficult interpersonal conflict. In this case, an individual may engage
in cutting, not because the stimulus is pleasurable but rather because it has higher
utility than the emotional suffering and is more salient. In this sense, it acts as an
effective, if unpleasant, distraction from an even more painful stimulus. While the
individual would prefer a pleasant distraction, there may not exist any pleasant experiences that are sufficiently salient to distract from the emotional suffering. In this
sense, the self-harming behavior serves as a feasible optimal distraction.
Second, our model explains the behavior of individuals experiencing depression.
We model depression as a very salient negative stimulus. Because depression is so
salient, it crowds out the utility associated with activities that would normally be
considered pleasant. Consequently, depressed individuals have little motivation to
engage in a variety of activities associated with a functional life. Indeed, to the
extent that the only stimuli sufficiently salient to break through depression are either
risky or harmful, our model also explains why depressed individuals are at risk of
illicit drug use, overeating, and self-harm.
Third, our model predicts that individuals experiencing multiple problems have a
diminished incentive to fix any single problem. This is because the benefit of removing
one negative stimulus is negligible if the individual is also experiencing another more
salient negative stimulus. Even the benefit of solving the problem associated with the
most salient negative stimulus is limited by the fact that removing the stimulus will

3

simply bring another problem to the fore of the individual’s attention. In this manner,
individuals may appear apathetic about improving their situation in the presence of
multiple problems. This can explain why stressed individuals act in a manner that
seems irrational or self-defeating.
We derive empirical predictions of our model that are testable in a laboratory
setting. The key prediction is that an individual’s minimum willingness to be paid
to endure two negative stimuli is less than or equal to the willingness to be paid for
the most painful of the two negative stimuli. We examine this in the case of subjects
who are asked their willingness to endure listening to a painfully loud fire alarm,
put a hand in ice cold water, or do both at the same time. Strikingly, we find that
fully 68 percent of individuals are willing to be paid as much or less to endure both
stimuli compared to enduring the most painful one. 13 percent are willing to be paid
strictly less to endure both than the most painful of the two. This is strong evidence
suggesting our model is empirically relevant in explaining human behavior.
We continue our discussion by exploring in more detail the examples listed above.
We then formally present the general behavioral implications of our model and discuss
related theoretical literature. We follow by describing our experimental protocol and
presenting our empirical results. We then conclude.

2

Examples

Before proceeding to a formal development of our model, it is helpful to illustrate
the intuition underlying our model with several simple examples. Furthermore, these
examples illustrate the relevance of our idea for explaining a number of behaviors of
interest to economists, clinical psychologists, and policy makers.
For these examples, we assume that each stimulus is indexed by a measure of utility
and a measure of salience. Exposed to a set of stimuli, an individual experiences

4

the utility of the stimulus within this set that has the highest salience. That is,
for stimulus x, let u(x) denote the individual’s utility of x and let s(x) denote the
individual’s salience of x. If X = {x, y, z, . . .} is the individual’s set of stimuli, then
the utility experienced by the individual under X is

U (X) = max u(x) subject to s(x) ≥ s(y) for all y ∈ X.
x∈X

(1)

So returning to the headache and movie example of the introduction, we have u(movie) =
10 and u(headache) = −2. If we had s(movie) = 5 and s(headache) = 10, then the
individual would experience the utility U (movie, headache) = −2 since the headache
is more salient. While the above utility function takes the same form as one attributed to Strotz (1955) in the temptation literature, we reinterpret the framework
to generate important insights in very different domains. We discuss the relationship
between our work and Strotz (1955) further in section 3 following the presentation of
our examples.

2.1

Self-injury
I used self-injury as a coping mechanism to help me overcome the emotional stress that I was incapable of dealing with in any other way. Selfinjury was a means of escape, a way to relieve the numbness, and an
expression of the pain within me.
–Giblin (2006), Hailey’s Story.

There is a large psychology literature on non-suicidal self injury (NSSI).1 An
important commonality across many of the leading explanations for self-injury is the
notion that NSSI distracts individuals from painful emotional stimuli. Consistent
1

See for instance Suyemoto (1998), Brown et al. (2002), Chapman et al. (2006), Selby et al.
(2010), and Fox et al. (2017).

5

with this framework, the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders, or DSM-5, states that “most commonly, the purpose is to reduce
negative emotions, such as tension, anxiety, and self-reproach, and/or to resolve an
interpersonal difficulty.” Consequently, those who engage in NSSI will often report
an immediate sensation of relief that occurs during the process. “When the behavior
occurs frequently, it might be associated with a sense of urgency and craving, the
resultant behavioral pattern resembling an addiction.”
Nock (2010) provides a comprehensive review of research on NSSI. While there
is no consensus on its exact prevalence, researchers estimate that between 10 and
30 percent of adolescents in the general population engage in self-harming behaviors.
Most common among these behaviors are found to be cutting, burning, and overdosing
on medications (Doyle et al., 2015). Sociodemographic and psychological factors,
including exposure to self-harming friends or family members, dysfunctional family
relationships, and sexual orientation are found to be the strongest correlates (Doyle
et al., 2015; Swannell et al., 2014; Somer et al., 2015; Kharsati and Bhola, 2016).
To explain self-injury in the context of our framework, suppose there are three
possible stimuli with the following utilities and salience.
Stimulus

u

s

g

1

0

b

−2 3

h

−1 4

We think of g as a good stimulus, b as a bad stimulus (e.g. being in an abusive
relationship), and h as self-harm (i.e. a negative but salient stimulus). The utility an
individual receives from a set of stimuli is given by U in Equation 1. Recall that the
individual experiences the utility of the most salient stimulus.
Suppose that life can either be going well or poorly for the decision maker. If
life is going well, then he experiences the set {g}. If life is going poorly, then he
6

experiences the set {g, b}. Suppose further that the decision maker has the ability to
add h to any set of experiences. If life is going well, then he would rather not have h
present. I.e.
U ({g}) > U ({g, h}).
However, when life is going poorly, then this preference switches and the individual
does want stimulus h present. I.e.

U ({g, b, h}) > U ({g, b}).

Thus when things are going well, the decision maker will not engage in self-harm.
However, if life takes a turn for the worse, then the decision maker will engage in
self-harm in order to distract himself from the bad stimulus.
Fox et al. (2017) attempt to shed empirical light on why NSSI engagement may
make individuals feel better. Examining a population of individuals with a history of
self-harm, the researchers induced a negative mood by asking the subjects to spend
five minutes writing about the most significant time “in which they failed or let themselves down in their life.” Control subjects were exposed to no additional stimulus
while other subjects were also exposed to a physically painful stimulus. Compared to
control subjects, individuals in the pain condition expressed no significant improvement of mood on average. However, subjects prone to self-criticism did experience an
improvement in mood under the pain condition relative to the control condition. The
authors interpret this as evidence that individuals engage in self-harm because their
mood improves when they engage in self-punishment for perceived shortcomings.
Our model, however, supports an alternative interpretation of the findings. The
intervention to induce a negative mood, namely having individuals recall events in
which they failed, caused more disutility for individuals prone to self-criticism than
for other subjects. Consequently, the pain intervention was more likely to provide a

7

relative utility boost for such individuals because it displaced a more painful stimulus
from the subjects’ attention.

2.2

Depression
To have depression is to have no motivation; No motivation to wake up,
no motivation to socialize, no motivation to live. It is a crushing weight
that you just need some support to lift.
–Anonymous (2014).

The DSM-5 characterizes depressive disorders by “sad, empty, or irritable mood,
accompanied by somatic and cognitive changes that significantly affect the individual's capacity to function.” Risk factors for depressive disorders include both genetic
and environmental factors. Additionally, bereavement and other severe life challenges
can induce symptoms of a depressive disorder without meeting the criteria for such
a diagnosis. Regardless of the causes of depressive disorders and symptoms, our
framework provides insight into the resulting behaviors.
Regarding major depressive episodes, the DSM-5 reports, “The mood in a major depressive episode is often described by the person as depressed, sad, hopeless,
discouraged, or ‘down in the dumps’.” However, on occasion individuals “complain
of feeling ‘blah,’ having no feelings, or feeling anxious.” From these descriptions, it
seems reasonable to model the phenomenon of depression as an extremely salient,
and generally negative, stimulus that crowds out other feelings. In the context of
our theoretical framework, the existence of such a powerful stimulus provides a compelling explanation for a variety of observed behaviors of individuals suffering from
depression.
First, the DSM-5 states, “Loss of interest or pleasure is nearly always present, at
least to some degree. Individuals may report feeling less interested in hobbies, ‘not

8

caring anymore,’ or not feeling any enjoyment in activities that were previously considered pleasurable. In some individuals, there is a significant reduction from previous
levels of sexual interest or desire.” To see how this relates to our model, consider the
following example. Assume three possible stimuli: the absence of depression, g; depression, d; and a pleasurable activity, a. The utility and salience of these measures
are given in the table below.
Stimulus

u

s

g

1

0

−10 10

d
a

5

5

An individual will enjoy the pleasurable activity in the absence of depression,
since U ({g, a}) > U ({g}). However, when depression is within the set of stimuli, an
individual will not find that the pleasurable activity increases utility since it is not
sufficiently salient to be enjoyable, yielding U ({d, a}) = U ({d}). Thus for sufficiently
salient depression, individuals would become indifferent to many activities they would
otherwise find enjoyable.
A similar example can explain the difficulty that, according to the DSM-5, depressed individuals exhibit in thinking, concentration, and decision making. Note
that depression need not be associated with very low utility or extreme sadness in
order to bring about these changes in behavior. Indeed, what is most significant is
not the utility associated with the stimulus of depression but rather its overwhelming
salience which numbs an individual to other stimuli, both pleasant and unpleasant.
Second, the DSM-5 indicates that depression is often comorbid with substancerelated disorders and that while some depressed individuals display a lack of interest in
food, others report increased appetite and weight gain. Similarly, Strine et al. (2008)
find a significant relationship between depression and unhealthy behaviors such as
smoking, obesity, physical inactivity, and heavy drinking in a cross-section of adults
9

in the US. Zetterqvist (2015) reports that among individuals engaging in NSSI, 70
to 80 percent are depressed as well. These behaviors associated with depression are
consistent with our explanation of self-harm in the prior section. Indeed, depressed
individuals are likely to engage in any behavior which is more pleasant than depression
and sufficiently salient to increase their utility.

2.3

The Trap of Competing Problems
Shawn, an office manager in Cleveland, was struggling to make ends meet.
He was late on a bunch of bills. His credit cards were maxed out. His
paycheck ran out quickly. As he said, “There is always more month than
money.” Every phone call made him tense: another creditor calling to
“remind” him? Being out of money was also affecting his personal life.
And there was no end in sight. He had bought a Blu-ray player on credit,
with no payments for the first six months. That was five months ago.
How would he pay this extra bill next month?
–Mullainathan and Shafir (2013)

Researchers have long puzzled over why individuals in difficult situations fail to
undertake action to improve their situation or indeed engage in behavior that would
seem to exacerbate the difficulties they already face. Going back to Strotz (1955),
economists have also considered the possibility that individuals have limited selfcontrol and hence are subject to temptation that they may wish to avoid. Furthermore, Mani et al. (2013) show that individuals in poverty demonstrate reduced
cognitive function that prevents them from making optimal financial decisions. The
evidence for these theories is compelling. Our framework, however, presents an additional explanation for such behaviors.
In particular, when individuals face a large number of problems or negative stimuli,
the effect on their realized utility of eliminating one negative stimulus may be quite
10

small. An individual who receives utility only from the most salient stimulus has no
incentive to remove a negative stimulus that is insufficiently salient to be felt. Even
when the experienced negative stimulus is undesirable, the benefit of eliminating it
may be limited by the fact that another negative, if slightly less salient, stimulus will
simply be brought to the fore of the individual’s attention. This intuition is similar
to that of a competing risks model in epidemiology. The life-saving benefit of curing
one illness is limited by the health risks posed by a second. For example, reducing
the health risks of heart disease by dieting are negligible for an individual diagnosed
with terminal cancer.
Consider the following example that illustrates this intuition. Suppose there are
three possible stimuli with the following utilities and salience.
Stimulus

u

s

g

1

0

b

−2 3

w

−3 4

We think of g as a good stimulus, b as a bad stimulus (e.g. being unemployed), and
w as a worse stimulus (e.g. marital problems).
Suppose the decision maker is experiencing the set {g, b, w}. He has the ability
to remove b from this set, but doing so takes effort and thus will reduce his utility
by some small amount  > 0. This means if he removes b from {g, b, w}, he will
experience utility U ({g, w}) −  = −3 − . However U ({g, b, w}) = −3. Thus no
matter how small , the decision maker will not want to remove b.
Even the willingness to ameliorate the worse stimulus, w, is limited by the existence of the bad stimulus, b. An individual experiencing the set {g, w} would be
willing to exert effort to eliminate w from the set up to a utility cost of 4. However, if
the decision maker is experiencing the set {g, b, w} he would only be willing to exert
effort at a utility cost of 1 or less to eliminate w.
11

This example also highlights the indifference of individuals experiencing negative
stimuli to the addition of other negative stimuli. To an individual with the preferences
we describe, U ({g, b, w}) = U ({g, w}). Hence the addition of the bad stimulus, b, to
the set that already includes the worse stimulus, w, has no effect on realized utility.
This example demonstrates that the existence of multiple problems limits the
willingness to eliminate any one problem. Consequently, individuals with a variety
of problems will often not find it optimal to fix any of them. They may also find it
suboptimal to prevent the occurrence of new problems. Hence, behavior that may
seem irrational, impulsive, or demonstrating poor cognitive function may instead
reflect the complementarity of negative stimuli arising from the fact that once a
person has problems, adding more problems may not change experienced utility.

3

Theory

These accompanying examples are helpful for illustrating the economic relevance of
our model. In this section we formalize our treatment of the Strotz (1955) utility
representation and consider alternative preferences over sets of stimuli. This formalization provides empirical predictions that can be tested in the laboratory. We then
discuss related theoretical literature.

3.1

Model

Let A denote the (finite) set of possible stimuli, and let P(A) denote the set of all
subsets of A. A decision maker will experience a set of stimuli X ∈ P(A), and has
a preference relation  over P(A). We define  and ∼ in the usual way. We say
U represents  if U (X) ≥ U (Y ) if and only if X  Y . Note that we include the
empty set in our domain. For all of the following representations and without loss of
generality, we set the utility of the empty set equal to zero.

12

Definition. We say  has a Strotz representation if there exist real-valued functions
u and s such that

U S (X) = max u(x) subject to s(x) ≥ s(y) for all y ∈ X,
x∈X

represents . If  has a Strotz representation, then we say that  is a Strotz preference.
As previously discussed, the interpretation is that s is the decision maker’s subjective measure of salience of stimuli while u is the decision maker’s true utility. The
decision maker experiences the utility of only the most salient stimulus.
Strotz’s original model was one of changing tastes, and he considered how a selfaware individual might behave in such a situation. He proposed that the decision
maker would prefer commitment. However in the absence of commitment opportunities, Strotz proposed the “strategy of consistent planning”: Today’s self chooses a plan
of consumption that tomorrow’s self will actually implement. In this interpretation
of U S , s represents tomorrow’s preferences while u represents today’s.
Gul and Pesendorfer (2001) (henceforth GP) extended Strotz’s analysis to a setting
of temptation and self-control in a paper that kicked off a large decision theoretic
literature on temptation.2 They introduced the following representation.
Definition. We say  has a GP representation if there exist real-valued functions u
and s such that
U GP (X) = max [u(x) + s(x)] − max s(x),
x∈X

x∈X

represents . If  has a GP representation, then we say that  is a GP preference.
One way to think about the Strotz representation is as a limiting case of the GP
2

See Lipman and Pesendorfer (2013) for a survey of this literature. Also, note that Gul and
Pesendorfer’s (2001) set up is different than our finite one. Specifically, their primitive is a preference
relation over non-empty compact subsets of lotteries over a compact metric space. See Gul and
Pesendorfer (2005) for an in depth analysis of these preferences in a finite setting.

13

representation. To see this, consider the GP representation

UαGP (X) = max [u(x) + αs(x)] − max αs(x), α > 0,
x∈X

x∈X

and note that UαGP → U S as α → ∞.
The GP representation can be applied in our setting of sensory limitations. The
functions u and s are the true utility and salience respectfully, as before. However as
opposed to the Strotz representation, a decision maker can experience the utility of a
stimulus other than the most salient one, but doing so requires exerting some mental
effort. To see this, rewrite U GP is

U GP (X) = max [u(x) − cs (x, X)] ,
x∈X

where cs (x, X) = maxy∈X s(y) − s(x). The function cs (x, X) represents the cost of
concentrating on x ∈ X. Thus a decision maker with GP preferences evaluates sets
of stimuli according to the utility function u net concentration costs.
It is straightforward to show that both the Strotz and GP preferences satisfy:
Set Betweenness. If X  Y , then X  X ∪ Y  Y .
However only the Strotz representation satisfies:
No Compromise. For all X and Y , either X ∼ X ∪ Y or Y ∼ X ∪ Y .
Recognizing these differences will allow us to test in an experimental setting whether
a decision maker is consistent with the Strotz and GP preferences. It will also allow
us to potentially differentiate between the two models.3
3

Given the limited data we can observe in an experimental setting, we can only potentially differentiate GP preferences from Strotz preferences; we cannot differentiate Strotz preferences from GP
preferences. This is because any preference consistent with No Compromise is also consistent with
Set Betweenness, while there are preferences consistent with Set Betweenness that are inconsistent
with No Compromise (e.g. X  X ∪ Y  Y ).

14

One obvious alternative model to compare ours to is an additive model. After all,
if X represents the set of stimuli experienced by the individual, perhaps the utility
from X is simply the sum of utilities from each stimulus:

U A (X) =

X

u(x).

x∈X

The key behavioral property of the additive model is that any single stimulus is either
always positive, always negative, or always neutral.
Definition. We say stimulus x is universally positive if for every X 63 x we have
X∪{x}  X. We say x is universally negative if for every X 63 x we have X  X∪{x}.
We say x is universally neutral if for every X 63 x we have X ∪ {x} ∼ X.
Additivity. For every x ∈ A, x is exactly one of the following: universally positive,
universally negative, universally neutral.
More generally, we will refer to the additive model to be not just those preferences
that can be represented by the functional form above, but to be all preferences satisfying the axiom Additivity. Note that Set Betweenness and Additivity are generally
opposed, as the following lemma shows.
Lemma 1. Suppose  satisfies {w}  {x}  {y}  {z}. Then  cannot satisfy
Additivity and Set Betweenness.
Proof. Suppose  satisfies Set Betweenness. Then we have {x}  {x, y}  {y}, with
one of these strict.
Case 1 – {x}  {x, y}. Then y is not universally positive or universally neutral.
However since {y}  {z}, Set Betweenness implies {y, z}  {z}. But this implies
that y cannot be universally negative.
Case 2 – {x, y}  {y}. Then x is not universally negative or universally neutral.
However since {w}  {x}, Set Betweenness implies {w}  {w, x}. But this implies
that x cannot be universally positive.
15

Thus under Strotz and GP preferences, a stimulus cannot be universally positive
or negative — it depends on the set of stimuli to which it is added.

3.2

Related Theoretical Literature

Our model shares a passing resemblance to recent choice theoretic work on inattention
and rationalization (Manzini and Mariotti, 2007; Masatlioglu et al., 2012; Cherepanov
et al., 2013; Lleras et al., 2017). These papers all model a decision maker who,
for a given choice set, forms a consideration set and chooses a preference-maximal
alternative from the consideration set. A special case of this would be a decision
maker with sensory limitations who forms his consideration set from the most salient
alternatives as given by some function s. However, these papers all study a decision
maker who chooses one alternative from a set, whereas our model considers a decision
maker who will consume (or experience) all alternatives in a set. Thus our primitive
is not a choice function from sets, but a preference over sets. This allows us to study
behavior and settings that are materially different from these papers.
Even among the growing literature on preferences over sets, our interpretation
that the decision maker will experience the whole set is not widely adopted. Gul
and Pesendorfer (2001) (and the temptation literature in general) view a set as representing a choice set from which the decision maker will ultimately choose a single
alternative to consume in an unmodeled future period.4 Related is the literature on
decision making under complete uncertainty wherein the decision maker chooses a set
with the understanding that ‘nature’ will ultimately choose one alternative from the
set for the decision maker to consume, usually with no knowledge about how nature
will choose. (See e.g. Bossert et al. (2000) and Olszewski (2007) as examples.) There
has been some work that considers preferences over sets in which the alternatives are
not mutually exclusive. But this has usually been in the context of group choice, such
4

Kreps (1979) and Dekel et al. (2001) also adopt this interpretation in non-temptation settings.

16

as purely hedonic games (Bogomolnaia and Jackson, 2002), voting (Barberà et al.,
1991), and matching (Roth, 1985). See Barberà et al. (2004) for a comprehensive
review of the literature on ranking sets.
Salience plays an important role in the work of Bordalo et al. (2013b, 2012, 2013a,
2015) and Ellis and Masatlioglu (2017). However, in these papers, an alternative has
multiple attributes and salience is defined relative to these attributes. E.g. a good’s
attribute is salient if, among all its attributes, it deviates most relative to the choice
set’s average level for that attribute. In contrast, an alternative’s salience is purely
a subjective judgment in our model; we put no structure on the composition of
alternatives.

4

Laboratory Experiment

4.1

Experimental Protocol

We conducted a laboratory experiment to test the key prediction of our model. In
particular, our experiment was designed to test whether an individual’s minimum
willingness to be paid to endure two negative stimuli is less than or equal to the
willingness to be paid for the most painful of the two negative stimuli.
The experiment was administered to each subject individually in a private room.
Upon signing the consent form, the subject was asked to practice each of the four
unpleasant tasks for 30 seconds. The tasks were: 1) listening to a loud (85 decibel) fire alarm sound through headphones, 2) holding a hand in ice cold (32 degrees
Fahrenheit) water, 3) doing 1 and 2 simultaneously, and 4) holding two hands in ice
cold water.5 To avoid potential order effects, subjects practiced each task twice in
5

While unpleasant, these tasks were in compliance with Occupational Safety and Health Administration regulations and not deemed dangerous by a physician. The Institutional Review Board of
Brigham Young University approved the protocol. Kahneman et al. (1997) and others have tested
individuals’ responses to painful stimuli by having subjects place their hand in cold water.

17

random order. For the purposes of the current study, we focus on the first three tasks,
though in the results section we briefly discuss results from the fourth task.
Participants were then asked to write down the minimum amount (from $0 to $15,
in fifty-cent increments) that they would be willing to be paid to complete one of the
four tasks for two minutes. They were told that after they write down the amount
for each task, the experimenter would randomly select one of the four tasks as well
as one of the ten threshold amounts, ranging from $0 to $15, from an envelope. If
the chosen threshold amount exceeds the minimum amount listed by the subject for
a particular task, the subject would receive that amount after she completes the task
for two minutes. If the threshold amount is less than the minimum amount listed
by the subject for a particular task, the subject would not have an opportunity to
complete the task, but would need to sit in the room for the remaining two minutes
until they can be paid a show-up fee of $2. This protocol ensured that the amounts
listed by the subjects were incentive compatible and strategy-proof.
To ensure the subjects understanding of the instructions, before writing down
the amounts, they were asked to answer multiple comprehension questions correctly
to proceed. At the end of the experiment, subjects completed a post-experimental
questionnaire intended to collect their demographic information, including gender,
age, university status, GPA, and study major. An average experimental session lasted
approximately 15 minutes and subjects earned $6 on average, in addition to the show
up fee.
Subjects in our experiment were students at Brigham Young University recruited
through email advertisements. The exact content of the recruitment email can be
found in appendix A and detailed experimental instructions are included in appendix
B.
Relating this experiment to our proposed model, let ` and h denote listening to
the loud siren for two minutes and submerging one hand in ice water for two minutes

18

respectively. How a subject ranks ∅, {`}, {h}, and {`, h} (as revealed by his/her
reservation payments) will determine whether he or she is consistent with a given
model. For example, the ordering

∅  {`}  {`, h}  {h}

is consistent with Set Betweenness, but not No Compromise or Additivity. Hence this
ordering is consistent with GP preferences, but not Strotz or additive preferences. As
another example, the ordering

∅ ∼ {`}  {`, h} ∼ {h}

is consistent with No Compromise, Set Betweenness, and Additivity. Hence it is
consistent with Strotz, GP, and additive preferences.

4.2

Results

We collected data from 65 subjects. From this sample, we drop 5 subjects who
stopped the protocol prior to completion. This leaves us with an analysis sample of
60 subjects who completed the protocol. Table 1 shows summary statistics for these
subjects. Consistent with the fact that we recruited subjects in a university setting,
the average age is approximately 22 years old. Only about a third of our subjects
are female and a majority are white. After practicing with all of the tasks, students
reported the minimum amount they would be willing to accept to perform each of the
tasks, which we refer to as a reservation payment. We see that the average reservation
payments in our sample for the various tasks range from $2.50 to $5.28.
We now turn our attention to the theoretical predictions of our model. Both
the Strotz and GP utility representations predict that the reservation payment for
two stimuli, which are each negative in isolation, should be less than or equal to
19

the maximum reservation payment of the two individual stimuli. In contrast, if we
thought that the stimuli were additive in the amount of disutility imposed upon the
subjects, we would expect to see the reservation payment for two stimuli exceed the
maximum reservation payment of the two stimuli in isolation. Figure 1 sheds light on
how well our models explain the data. The figure shows the empirical CDF of subjects’
reservation payment for one hand in cold water and listening to a siren divided by
the maximum reservation payment of the two stimuli in isolation. In our sample, all
subjects for whom this ratio is equal to or below one exhibit preferences consistent
with the GP and possibly Strotz representations.6 We see that fully two thirds of
individuals reveal a reservation payment for the two stimuli less than or equal to the
greater of the two reservation payments corresponding to the individual stimuli. There
is a discontinuous increase in the density at a value of 1 demonstrating that for many
subjects the disutility of two stimuli is exactly equal to the disutility of the most
uncomfortable individual stimulus. The behavior of a majority of subjects stands
in stark contrast to the prediction of any additive model in which each additional
stimulus should increase the subject’s reported reservation payment.
Table 2 shows the fraction of subjects exhibiting each preference ordering across
sets of stimuli. Note that only the preference orderings actually exhibited by subjects are shown in the table. Table 3 shows more concisely the fraction of subjects
exhibiting preferences consistent with each utility representation. Note that the sum
of these fractions exceeds one since some of these preferences are consistent with
multiple models. Examining the table, we see that 63 percent of subjects exhibit
preferences consistent with the Strotz representation in that the reservation payment
is exactly equal to the reservation payment of one of the stimuli in isolation. 68 percent exhibit preferences consistent with a GP representation in that the reservation
6

It is possible for preferences to be inconsistent with the Strotz or GP preferences and still have
this ratio be less than one: {`, h}  {`}  {h} is one such example. However none of our subjects
exhibited such preferences.

20

payment for both stimuli lies in the closed interval between the reservation payments
of the two individual stimuli. Only 40 percent of subjects exhibit additive preferences
in which an additional stimulus increases the reservation payment. One individual
(2 percent of subjects) demonstrates inconsistent preferences in the sense that the
subject reports no disutility from hearing the siren yet the reservation payment for
the siren and hand exceeds that of the hand alone. Collectively, the experimental
evidence strongly suggests that most individuals only have a limited ability to experience multiple latent stimuli at the same time. Strikingly, the simple Strotz model
in which an individual is able to experience the utility of only a single stimulus is
sufficient to explain a majority of subjects’ decisions in this setting.
One might be concerned that our results are driven in part by individuals who do
not find the stimuli unpleasant. The results are virtually identical if we exclude the
6 observations who report a reservation payment of 0 for one or more stimuli.
As mentioned in our description of the protocol, we also elicited from subjects their
reservation payment for placing two hands in cold water. In this setting 35 percent
of subjects indicate the same reservation payment for placing two hands in water as
for placing one hand in water. 2 percent (one subject) indicate a lower reservation
payment for two hands than for one. 63 percent require a reservation payment for two
hands that exceeds the reservation payment for putting a single hand into cold water.
If we view each hand as a separate stimulus, 35 percent of subjects in this setting
demonstrate preferences consistent with the GP and Strotz representations. To the
extent that placing two hands in cold water represents an increased intensity of the
same stimulus relative to placing one hand in cold water, this part of the protocol
provides a less informative test of the theory.

21

5

Conclusion

We reinterpret the Strotz and GP utility representations to provide insight into how
people behave when they have only a limited ability to experience competing latent
stimuli. This framework demonstrates that one cannot characterize a stimulus as
positive or negative absent the set of all latent stimuli. One key insight from our
model regards the complementarity of negative stimuli. In particular, once one is
experiencing a salient and negative stimulus the utility cost of additional negative
stimuli might be quite small. This can lead to a variety of seemingly dysfunctional
behaviors that are nevertheless consistent with utility maximization.
In particular, our theoretical framework provides explanations for phenomena including destructive distractions, an unwillingness to ameliorate negative situations in
one’s life, and the apathy of severe depression. In each of these examples, actions
that would seem to objectively improve an individual’s life fail to be optimal if the
benefits are insufficiently salient to rise above the pain of other life circumstances.
Furthermore, individuals may engage in behavior that seems destructive if doing so
provides a salient distraction from a greater pain. Understanding how these behaviors
are optimal from a utility maximization perspective may provide researchers, policy
makers, and clinicians with insights regarding how to better help individuals in these
conditions. In particular, policies to improve the circumstances of such individuals
should take into account the full set of latent circumstances and stimuli to which an
individual is exposed.
While our theory has a strong intuitive appeal, we also present convincing empirical evidence that our theoretical framework predicts behavior in a setting with both
real payoffs and consequences. We find that over two thirds of individuals exhibit
preferences consistent with our framework in an experiment in which subjects are
exposed to single and multiple painful stimuli. In particular, after experiencing the
stimuli together and in isolation, 68 percent of individuals experience the same or less
22

disutility from two painful stimuli than one of the stimuli in isolation. This suggests
that, at least in this experimental context, our framework explains the majority of
peoples’ choices in a way that runs counter to what an additive model would predict.
Future researchers may wish to consider building upon the current project in at
least two ways. First, our model assumes that both the utility and salience of stimuli
are exogenous and fixed. It may be that actors such as therapists and advertisers seek
to alter individuals’ well-being and decision making by changing either the salience
or utility of particular stimuli. Extending the model to include such possibilities
may be clinically and empirically relevant. Second, we encourage researchers to also
design and execute observational tests of the theory with data from individuals who
experience self-harm, despair, and depression. Such studies are likely to shed insight
into the applicability of the theory in important settings that cannot be ethically
studied experimentally.

23

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable
Age

Mean
22.18
(2.21)
0.35
(0.48)
3.68
(0.34)
0.83
(0.38)
0.13
(0.34)

Female
GPA
White
Asian

Reservation Payment to Perform Task
Siren
One Hand in Water
Siren and One Hand
in Water
Two Hands in Water
Observations

$2.50
(2.21)
$4.12
(2.90)
$4.57
(3.17)
$5.28
(3.56)
60

Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses.

24

Table 2: Preference Ordering of Various Stimuli
Preference Ranking
∅  {`}  {`, h} ∼ {h}
∅  {h}  {`, h} ∼ {`}
∅  {`} ∼ {`, h}  {h}
∅  {`} ∼ {`, h} ∼ {h}
∅ ∼ {`}  {`, h} ∼ {h}
∅ ∼ {`} ∼ {`, h} ∼ {h}
∅ ∼ {`}  {`, h}  {h}
∅  {`}  {`, h}  {h}
∅  {`}  {h}  {`, h}
∅  {h} ∼ {`}  {`, h}
∅  {h}  {`}  {`, h}
∅ ∼ {`}  {h}  {`, h}
Observations

Fraction
0.27
(0.06)
0.02
(0.02 )
0.05
(0.03)
0.20
(0.06)
0.07
(0.03)
0.03
(0.02)
0.03
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.23
(0.06)
0.05
(0.03)
0.02
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
60

Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses.

25

Consistent Representations
Strotz, GP
Strotz, GP
Strotz, GP
Strotz, GP
Strotz, GP, Additive
Strotz, GP, Additive
GP
GP
Additive
Additive
Additive
Inconsistent

Table 3: Fraction of Subject Preferences Consistent with Each Utility Representation
Utility Representation
Strotz
GP
Additive
Inconsistent
Observations

Fraction
0.63
(0.06)
0.68
(0.06)
0.40
(0.06)
0.02
(0.02)
60

0

.2

Empirical CDF
.4
.6

.8

1

Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses.

.5

1

1.5
2
Ratio of Reservation Payments

2.5

3

Notes: The figure shows the empirical cdf of the ratio of the reservation payment for both one
hand in cold water and the siren divided by the maximum reservation payment of the two individual
stimuli.

Figure 1: Are Reservation Payments Higher for Two Negative Stimuli than for One?

26

Appendix
A

Email announcement

New time-slots are available for the research study “Economics of decision making”
next week. If you are interested in participating, please sign up for an available session
of “Economics study on decision making.” Please show up on time to your scheduled
session in room 340 TNRB (Behavioral Lab).
*The link that will be provided (http://byu-marriott.sona-systems.com/Default.as
px?ReturnUrl=%2f) which will direct the students to the SONA recruitment site
where they can sign up for a session. They will see the following details about the
project before they sign up.

Study name: Economics experiment on decision making.
Brief abstract: In this study you will participate in a task that will involve listening
to a loud (85 dB) sound as well as holding your hands submerged in cold water.
You will also complete a short demographic questionnaire. Please read the eligibility
requirements carefully before you sign up to participate.
Eligibility requirements and risks: To participate in the study, you need to have good
hearing and be willing to have your hands submerged in uncomfortably cold water for
up to 5 minutes. If you have poor hearing and/or use a hearing device, you cannot
participate in the experiment.
Also, be aware that there are certain medical pre-existing conditions, such as
circulatory, rheumatological, and autoimmune disorders, which could cause longerterm symptoms. If you have any of these conditions, you will not be able to participate
in this experiment.
Duration: 15 minutes
Pay: $6 on average, depending on your decisions. The exact compensation amounts
27

range from $2 and $15, depending on your decisions.
If you have any questions, please contact the primary researcher, Olga Stoddard,
Ph.D. at olga.stoddard@byu.edu

B

Participant Instructions

Welcome and thank you for your participation in this study. Please follow along as
we read through the instructions. If you have any questions, please feel free to ask
these questions as we move forward.
If you complete the study, you will receive at least $2 for your participation. The
exact amount that you will be paid at the end of the study depends on your decisions,
as I will explain shortly.
There are four tasks that you will need to perform during this experiment. To
begin, we would like you to experience and practice each task for 30 seconds, two
times (for a total of eight practice runs). We would like you to:

Treatment 1:

The subject listens to a loud siren-like sound (at 85 decibels)
through headphones.

Treatment 2:

The subject submerges one hand in ice-cold water (41◦ F) up to
the wrist.

Treatment 3:

The subject submerges both hands in ice-cold water up to.
the wrists.

Treatment 4:

The subject submerges one hand in ice-cold water up to the wrist
while listening to a loud siren-like sound through headphones.

Next, you are asked to write down the minimum amount (in 50 cent increments,
up to $15) that you would be willing to accept to do one of these tasks for 2 minutes.

28

You will need to write down the minimum amount for each task, but only one of them
will actually be selected for you to do. These four envelopes contain all four tasks.
After you complete this sheet, you will select an envelope containing one of the four
tasks.
Also, prior to the study, we have randomly chosen 10 different threshold amounts
between $0 and $15 and have placed each one in an envelope. After you indicate the
minimum amount you are willing to accept to do the task, you will be asked to choose
one of the envelopes at random reveal the threshold amount. If the minimum amount
you are willing to accept for the chosen task is less than the threshold amount, then
you will be paid the threshold amount once you complete the task for 2 minutes. If
the amount you are willing to accept is more than the threshold amount, then you
will not have an opportunity to complete the task, and will be paid a $2 show up fee
to sit in the room for the remaining 2 minutes.
Note that it is in your best interest to state the true minimum amount that you
are willing to accept since you can never receive less than that amount, but you can
end up with a lot more.
To make sure that you understand the instructions, consider two hypothetical
examples:

Example 1: Suppose that the minimum amount that you listed to do the chosen
task is $5. We draw the threshold amount of $7.
Question: Will you have to do the task? How much will you earn?

Example 2: Suppose that the minimum amount that you listed to do the chosen
task is $5. We draw the threshold amount of $3.
Question: Will you have to do the task? How much will you earn?

29

C

In-Experiment Questionnaire

Participant ID #:
What is the minimum amount (in 50 cent increments, up to $15) that we would have
to pay you to do one of these tasks for 2 minutes?
Task

Amount ($0 - $15)

Listen to the loud siren sound through the headphones
Hold one hand submerged in ice cold water
Hold two hands submerged in ice cold water
Hold one hand submerged in ice cold water
while also listening to loud siren through the headphones

D

Post-Experimental Exit Questionnaire

Participant ID #:
1. What is your age?
2. What is your gender?

M(=1) F(=2)

3. What is your ethnicity?
(0=Caucasian, 1=Asian, 2=Hispanic, 3=African American, 4=Other)
4. What is your major at BYU?
(1=Business, 2=Economics, 3=English, 4=Science, 5= Sociology,
6=Mathematics, 7=Other)
5. What is your GPA?

(0=2.0, 100=4.0)

6. What is your marital status?

(1=single, 2=married)

7. How easy were these instructions?
8. Did you like the experiment?

(0=easy, 100=Hard)
Yes(=1) No(=2)

9. Do you have any comments regarding this experiment?

30

References
Al-Khotani, Amal, Lanre A’aziz Bello, and Nikolaos Christidis (2016), “Effects of audiovisual distraction on children’s behaviour during dental treatment: a randomized
controlled clinical trial.” Acta Odontologica Scandinavica, 74, 494 – 501.
American Psychiatric Association (2013), Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (DSM-5 R ). American Psychiatric Pub.
Anonymous (2014), “What does depression feel like?” URL https://www.7cups.
com/qa-anxiety-16/what-does-depression-feel-like-14.
Barberà, Salvador, Walter Bossert, and Prasanta K. Pattanaik (2004), “Ranking sets
of objects.” In Handbook of Utility Theory (Salvador Barberà, Peter Hammond,
and Christian Seidl, eds.), volume 2, 893–977, Springer.
Barberà, Salvador, Hugo Sonnenschein, and Lin Zhou (1991), “Voting by committees.” Econometrica, 595–609.
Bogomolnaia, Anna and Matthew O. Jackson (2002), “The stability of hedonic coalition structures.” Games and Economic Behavior, 38, 201–230.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer (2012), “Salience theory of
choice under risk.” The Quarterly journal of economics, 127, 1243–1285.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer (2013a), “Salience and asset
prices.” American Economic Review, 103, 623–28.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer (2013b), “Salience and consumer choice.” Journal of Political Economy, 121, 803–843.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer (2015), “Competition for attention.” The Review of Economic Studies, 83, 481–513.
31

Bossert, Walter, Prasanta K. Pattanaik, and Yongsheng Xu (2000), “Choice under
complete uncertainty: axiomatic characterizations of some decision rules.” Economic Theory, 16, 295–312.
Brown, Milton Z., Katherine Anne Comtois, and Marsha M. Linehan (2002), “Reasons for suicide attempts and nonsuicidal self-injury in women with borderline
personality disorder.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111, 198–202.
Chapman, Alexander L., Kim L. Gratz, and Milton Z. Brown (2006), “Solving the
puzzle of deliberate self-harm: The experiential avoidance model.” Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 371–394.
Cherepanov, Vadim, Timothy Feddersen, and Alvaro Sandroni (2013), “Rationalization.” Theoretical Economics, 8, 775–800.
Dekel, Eddie, Barton L. Lipman, and Aldo Rustichini (2001), “Representing preferences with a unique subjective state space.” Econometrica, 69, 891–934.
Doyle, Louise, Margaret P. Treacy, and Ann Sheridan (2015), “Self-harm in young
people: Prevalence, associated factors, and help-seeking in school-going adolescents.” International Journal of Mental Health Nursing, 24, 485–494.
Ellis, Andrew and Yusufcan Masatlioglu (2017), “A regional approach to salience.”
Working paper.
Filcheck, Holly A., Keith D. Allen, Hilary Ogren, James Brant Darby, Brian Holstein,
and Steve Hupp (2005), “The use of choice-based distraction to decrease the distress
of children at the dentist.” Child & Family Behavior Therapy, 26, 59–68.
Fox, Kathryn R., Kaitlyn E. Toole, Joseph C. Franklin, and Jill M. Hooley (2017),
“Why does nonsuicidal self-injury improve mood? A preliminary test of three
hypotheses.” Clinical Psychological Science, 5, 111–121.
32

Giblin, Hailey (2006), Hailey’s Story. John Blake.
Gul, Faruk and Wolfgang Pesendorfer (2001), “Temptation and self-control.” Econometrica, 69, 1403–1435.
Gul, Faruk and Wolfgang Pesendorfer (2005), “The simple theory of temptation and
self-control.” Mimeo.
Kahneman, Daniel, Peter P. Wakker, and Rakesh Sarin (1997), “Back to Bentham?
Explorations of experienced utility.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112,
375–406.
Kharsati, Naphisabet and Poornima Bhola (2016), “Self-injurious behavior, emotion
regulation, and attachment styles among college students in India.” Industrial Psychiatry Journal, 25, 23–28.
Kreps, David M. (1979), “A representation theorem for ‘preference for flexibility’.”
Econometrica, 47, 565–578.
Lipman, Barton L. and Wolfgang Pesendorfer (2013), “Temptation.” In Advances
in Economics and Econometrics: Tenth World Congress, Volume 1, Economic
Theory (Daron Acemoglu, Manuel Arellano, and Eddie Dekel, eds.), volume 1 of
Econometric Society Monographs, Cambridge University Press.
Lleras, Juan Sebastian, Yusufcan Masatlioglu, Daisuke Nakajima, and Erkut Y.
Ozbay (2017), “When more is less: Limited consideration.” Journal of Economic
Theory, 170, 70–85.
Mani, Anandi, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jiaying Zhao (2013), “Poverty
impedes cognitive function.” Science, 341, 976–980.
Manzini, Paola and Marco Mariotti (2007), “Sequentially rationalizable choice.”
American Economic Review, 97, 1824–1839.
33

Masatlioglu, Yusufcan, Daisuke Nakajima, and Erkut Y. Ozbay (2012), “Revealed
attention.” American Economic Review, 102, 2183–2205.
Milkman, Katherine L., Julia A. Minson, and Kevin G. M. Volpp (2014), “Holding
the Hunger Games hostage at the gym: An evaluation of temptation bundling.”
Management Science, 60, 283 – 299.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Eldar Shafir (2013), Scarcity: Why Having Too Little
Means So Much. Times Books.
Nock, Matthew K. (2010), “Self-injury.” Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 6,
339–363.
Olszewski, Wojciech (2007), “Preferences over sets of lotteries.” The Review of Economic Studies, 74, 567–595.
Roth, Alvin E. (1985), “The college admissions problem is not equivalent to the
marriage problem.” Journal of Economic Theory, 36, 277–288.
Selby, Edward A., Lavonna D. Connell, and Thomas E. Joiner Jr. (2010), “The pernicious blend of rumination and fearlessness in non-suicidal self-injury.” Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 34, 421–428.
Somer, Oya, Tezan Bildik, Bürge Kabukçu-Başay, Duygu Güngör, Ömer Başay,
and Richard F. Farmer (2015), “Prevalence of non-suicidal self-injury and distinct
groups of self-injurers in a community sample of adolescents.” Social Psychiatry
and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 50, 1163–1171.
Strine, Tara W., Ali H. Mokdad, Shanta R. Dube, Lina S. Balluz, Olinda Gonzalez,
Joyce T. Berry, Ron Manderscheid, and Kurt Kroenke (2008), “The association of
depression and anxiety with obesity and unhealthy behaviors among communitydwelling us adults.” General Hospital Psychiatry, 30, 127–137.
34

Strotz, Robert H. (1955), “Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility maximization.” The Review of Economic Studies, 23, 165–180.
Suyemoto, Karen L. (1998), “The functions of self-mutilation.” Clinical Psychology
Review, 18, 531–554.
Swannell, Sarah V., Graham E. Martin, Andrew Page, Penelope Hasking, and
Nathan J. St. John (2014), “Prevalence of nonsuicidal self-injury in nonclinical
samples: Systematic review, meta-analysis and meta-regression.” Suicide and LifeThreatening Behavior, 44, 273–303.
Zetterqvist, Maria (2015), “The dsm-5 diagnosis of nonsuicidal self-injury disorder:
a review of the empirical literature.” Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental
Health, 9.

35

