                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  WHO FEELS THE NUDGE? KNOWLEDGE, SELF-AWARENESS AND RETIREMENT
                         SAVINGS DECISIONS

                                         Anders Anderson
                                         David T. Robinson

                                        Working Paper 25061
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25061


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2018




We are grateful to Patrick Bolton, Magnus Dahlquist, Harrison Hong, Yaron Levi, Annamaria Lusardi,
Olivia S. Mitchell, Terry Odean, Avi Wohl and seminar participants at the Stockholm School of Economics,
Oxford, the University of Georgia, Florida State University, Carnegie Mellon University and the 2018
London School of Economics Winter Conference, the 2018 Cherry Blossom Financial Education Institute
conference at the George Washington University, the 2018 EFA and 2019 AFA conference for helpful
comments. Yao Fu, Ivika Jäger and Zihao Liu provided excellent research assistance. We are especially
grateful to Magnus Dahlquist, José Martinez and Paul Söderlind for sharing their data on coordinated
trades. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Anders Anderson and David T. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Who Feels the Nudge? Knowledge, Self-Awareness and Retirement Savings Decisions
Anders Anderson and David T. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 25061
September 2018, Revised February 2019
JEL No. G11,G18,G4,G41

                                              ABSTRACT

Using a financial literacy survey of Swedish pension investors matched to actual retirement savings
decisions, we argue that respondents can be broken into three groups: those who are financially literate,
those who mistakenly believe they are financially literate, and those who know that they are not. We
examine how these groups respond differently to informational nudges encouraging them to take charge
of their own investments. Investors with mistaken beliefs responded to the nudge, and were more likely
to work with mass-market advisors who steer them into high-fee funds. They underperform as a result.
By comparison, those who either possess financial literacy or else understand that they do not possess
financial literacy were less likely to respond to the nudge. They avoided advisors, stayed with the low-cost
default fund, and therefore accumulated retirement savings more quickly.


Anders Anderson
Stockholm School of Economics
Drottninggatan 98
Stockholm, Sweden
Anders.Anderson@hhs.se

David T. Robinson
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
davidr@duke.edu
1        Introduction

Over the last twenty years, public and private retirement plans around the world have
moved away from defined benefit schemes towards defined contribution schemes, plac-
ing the onus of retirement planning on individuals and households. As a result, increas-
ing amounts of financial sophistication and engagement are required in order to simply
make routine retirement savings decisions. To encourage engagement with long-range
financial planning decisions that are otherwise easy to ignore or postpone in the short-
run, a common policy strategy is to use information campaigns to encourage attention
and action, in combination with a choice architecture that creates well-structured default
options for those who remain disengaged.1
        But inaction is not the only behavioral bias that affects long-range financial planning
decisions. Limited familiarity with financial decisions, limited financial knowledge, and
inaccurate self-perceptions also impact long-range financial decision-making. Indeed, as
Anderson, Baker, and Robinson (2017) show, many individuals appear to hold mistaken
beliefs about their own financial expertise; moreover, these beliefs are more important
than their actual knowledge for predicting their level of engagement with savings and
retirement decisions. This raises important questions about how nudges interact with
other behavioral tendencies.
        In this paper, we study this interaction by making use of a kind of natural experiment
that exposed some individuals, but not others, to an information campaign encouraging
active choice. Our primary focus in on the role of self-awareness, or what Kruger and
Dunning (1999) call metacognition—knowing what one does and does not know. Using a
detailed behavioral survey of a random sample of Swedish households which we link to
administrative and tax records, we group people into three categories based on their re-
sponses to questions that gauge domain-relevant financial sophistication: those who are
financially knowledgeable (those who know), those who are aware that they are not fi-
nancially knowledgeable (those who know they don’t know), and those who are unaware
that they hold mistaken beliefs about their financial knowledge (those who don’t know
they don’t know). The distinction between being knowledgeable, aware of one’s own
    1
   See, for example, Thaler and Sunstein (2008), Beshears et al. (2016), Lusardi and Mitchell (2011) and
Hastings, Madrian, and Skimmyhorn (2013).
lack of knowledge, or unaware is critical for understanding how individuals respond.
   The natural experiment occurred in the context of the reform of the Swedish pension
system. In the late 1990s, the Swedish government began a transition from a fully de-
fined benefit pension system to a mixed system in which a fixed proportion of income
was allocated to a defined contribution plan to supplement the standard retirement plan.
Starting in 2000, all members of the Swedish labor force were allowed to allocate this
defined contribution balance across a large number of appropriately registered mutual
funds. Investors who did not make a choice were allocated to a low-fee, well diversified,
global index fund. The pension system offers hundreds of equity, bond, target-date and
mixed funds; these vary significantly in terms of both fees and historical performance.
   Importantly, the initial cohort of pension savers was exposed to what Cronqvist, Thaler,
and Yu (2018) call the “Do it Yourself Nudge”: in order to promote maximum engagement
in the new system, the Swedish government initially embarked on a large-scale informa-
tion campaign designed to encourage citizens to make an active portfolio choice in this
new plan. This nudge was then dropped in the wake of the tech crash that occurred in
the early 2000s. Effectively, this means that one group of individuals was exposed to the
government’s nudge while other groups were not.
   Certain aspects of this choice architecture allow us to draw much sharper welfare con-
clusions than would otherwise be possible. In particular, the level of pension savings in
the program is externally mandated, and not a choice of the individual retirement saver.
As Campbell (2006) points out, because it is difficult to observe the financial constraints
that individual households face, it is challenging to establish whether households are be-
having sub-optimally when they save more or less than they might otherwise. Because
the nudges in our study do not affect the participation margin, but instead how a fixed
proportion is allocated, the welfare conclusions from our analysis are much more stark
than in most previous work.
   As Cronqvist, Thaler, and Yu (2018) have also shown, this nudge worked: the opt-out
rate is much higher in the nudged cohort than in later cohorts. Our contribution lies in
understanding which types of individuals responded to the nudge. This in turn allows
us to speak to the underlying mechanisms responsible for how the nudge moved people
into action.



                                            1
   We find that in the nudged cohort, unaware investors were much more likely to act
on the nudge than knowledgeable investors. Moreover, investors who are unaware of
their lack of knowledge are more likely to choose high-fee funds when they opt out of
the default fund. After the nudge was removed, unaware investors are no more likely
than knowledgeable investors to opt-out, and the group with meta-cognition—those who
knew they did not know—are the ones most likely to remain in the default fund. This
group is also much larger in number after the nudge is removed, which suggests that
psychologically the nudge works by encouraging people to form an opinion on an issue
about which they are uncertain, which in turn then leads them to act. Well-structured
choice defaults protect against costly inaction, but not against an action rooted in mis-
taken beliefs.
   After the government stopped encouraging investors to make active retirement plan-
ning choices, a class of retirement savings tele-marketing firms emerged offering to as-
sist people in directing their pension portfolios. This very fact illustrates a critical factor
in pension program design, which is that choice architecture does not operate in a vac-
uum: instead it incites competitive responses from market participants. In this context,
mass-market retirement planning tele-marketers operated by pooling individual retire-
ment portfolios into a common portfolio and trading that portfolio in a coordinated fash-
ion. Individuals paid these retirement advisors a direct management fee for this service
on top of the fees already charged by the mutual funds themselves. Many of these tele-
marketing advisory firms applied aggressive sales methods and engaged in unscrupu-
lous business practices; as complaints increased, the government in 2011 dramatically
constrained their ability to electronically coordinate retirement trading activity. Larger
firms responded by establishing their own fund-of-funds, and directing their clients into
these products.
   By linking our survey and administrative data to data provided by Dahlquist, Mar-
tinez, and Söderlind (2017), we can also explore the role that these firms have played in
shaping the results described above. The nudged group was much more likely to respond
to the tele-marketing than later, non-nudged cohorts. This fact further supports the idea
that the informational nudge works by urging people to form an opinion about an issue
about which they may be unfamiliar; presumably one reason uptake was higher in the



                                              2
nudged cohort is because this group had a heightened sense of the importance of making
a decision and was therefore more open to the advice being marketed.
      One reason why unaware investors select into higher-fee funds when they opt out is
that they are much more likely to sign up with advisors. Those who delegate retirement
planning to advisers pay higher fees and earn lower Sharpe-ratios. This is not just an
opt-out effect: the fees associated with advisers are higher, on average, than those faced
by individuals who opt out of the default pension choice without going through advisers.
The economic magnitude of this difference is large. Individuals who use advisors pay av-
erage mutual fund fees that are nearly four times those of the default fund; the difference
between the median advisor-led fund and the median non-default fund is roughly the
same order of magnitude as the fees on the default fund itself. The fees associated with
advisor recommendations are roughly 25 percent greater than those faced by individuals
who opt out of the default without the assistance of an advisor.
      In sum, the do-it-yourself nudge contained two important hidden costs: one was that
it encouraged people to act without necessarily equipping them with the relevant knowl-
edge, skills and information to act in their own best interest; a second is that it drove them
to take up low-quality advisory services that generated underperformance. These costs
were disproportionately borne by individuals who lacked the self-awareness to appreci-
ate the fact that they did not possess the relevant domain-specific knowledge in order to
make a well informed choice.
      This paper contributes to several strands of research. One is the literature that il-
lustrates the power of nudges to work in a variety of contexts. The closest are Cronqvist,
Thaler, and Yu (2018), which studies the Swedish context directly, as well as papers exam-
ining retirement and savings decisions (Madrian and Shea (2001); Choi et al. (2004) and
Choi et al. (2006); Beshears et al. (2006)) or enrollment in savings plans more generally
(Carrol et al. (2009); Beshears et al. (2015)). Ours is the first, however, to examine how
variation in average responses to choice architecture is driven by financial literacy and
other behavioral factors.2 We also add to a broad body of work linking financial literacy
to retirement security by augmenting general financial literacy measures with measures
of specific knowledge. Finally, our work adds to the literature that explores conflicts of
  2
      See Beshears et al. (2015) on work linking income to response variation.



                                                      3
interests and the role of advisors in retail financial markets. This literature is too vast to
summarize here; see Burke et al (2015) for a comprehensive review.
        The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. We begin in Section 2 with a brief
description of the institutional setting. In Section 3, we describe the data. Section 4 relates
the domain-specific measure of financial sophistication that we use to broader measures
of financial literacy and develops our measure of metacognition. Section 5 presents results
connecting financial literacy to opting out choices, the resulting fees, and the reliance on
advisors. Section 6 studies the performance implications of these decisions. Section 7
concludes.



2        The Institutional Setting

2.1       Historical Background

In June of 1994, the Swedish Parliament passed legislation that transformed the public
pension system from one based on defined benefit to one based on defined contribution.3
The exact details of the transition are complicated and are discussed at length in Palme,
Sunden, and Söderlind (2007) and Palmer (1995). Our purpose here is to highlight the key
features as they pertain to our analysis. Prior to 1994, the system was a flat-rate universal
benefit system augmented by an earnings-related supplement. The period between 1994
and 1999 allowed for the accumulation of two types of accounts. One is a notional defined
contribution plan linked to an income index and funded on a pay-as-you-go basis based
on a contribution rate of 16% of (capped) labor incomes.4 An additional 2.5% of labor
income was credited to a fully funded individual account managed by the pension au-
thority, similar to a 401(k) plan in the United States, but part of the state pension, rather
than an occupational pension. Starting from 2000, individuals were allowed to control
how this account was invested by allocating this portion of their account across as many
as five different funds. In 2000, there were 456 funds available, a number that has grown
    3
      The 1990s were a period of tremendous economic change and upheaval in Sweden more generally.
In 1990 and 1991, the Swedish tax system was completely overhauled, reducing tax rates and broadening
the base of taxpayers (Agell, Englund, and Södersten (1995), “The Swedish Tax Reform: An Introduction”
Swedish Economic Policy Review 2, 219-228). In the fall of 1992, the country experienced a banking crisis
following a collapse in real estate prices.
    4
      There is also a mean-tested benefit that provides a minimum pension.


                                                   4
to 855 at the end of 2015.
      The SPA maintains the fund platform and administrates the deposits and redemp-
tions on behalf of the investors. Individual account information is available through their
webpage, but also sent out by letter once a year (known in Sweden as the “the orange
envelope”), which provides a summary of performance as well as a long term projec-
tion of the pension outcome. Funds available on the platform are required to follow the
European UCITS Directive which puts some restrictions on minimum diversification and
transparency, but there are no other specific prerequisites for allowing or preventing fund
companies to enter. Funds are however required to follow a discount schedule, which is
based on the size of the total SPA investment on the fund family level. Discounts are
paid back at the individual account level, and therefore vary across funds. The PPA also
charges a small fee from each account to cover its costs. We provide a detailed description
of the fees in Section 3.


2.2      The Informational Nudge and the Rise of Mass-Market Advisors

The introduction of the system was accompanied by an extensive information campaign
encouraging workers to make an active choice. A booklet containing assessments of risk,
fees and past performance for 456 funds managed by 72 fund companies was sent out to
around 4 million people affected by the change, encouraging them to allocate their sav-
ings between one to five funds. As argued in Cronqvist and Thaler (2004), policymakers
in Sweden clearly nudged their citizens to make an active choice over falling into the
default fund. In 2000, the initial year, almost two-thirds made an active choice, but en-
thusiasm for active choice did not last long. Of those entering the system in 2001, only
18% made an active choice at the point they entered, and 29% of this cohort had made a
choice six years later in 2007. Of those entering 2007, less than 2% made an active choice
initially, and by 2013, only 20% had done so.5
      The fact that a low fraction of individuals made an initial choice, but a much larger
share later opted out of the default fund, is widely attributed to the emergence of retire-
ment advisors working aggressively with telemarketing towards very broad layers of the
population. The advisor would typically offer to rebalance the individual’s pension port-
  5
      Data obtained from the Swedish government committee report SOU 2016:61.


                                                  5
folio in exchange for a fee, usually between SEK 500 to 1,000 per year (around USD 100).6
To facilitate this, the individual would share the PIN-code to her account at the SPA with
the advisory firm, allowing the advisor to make automated changes across a large num-
ber of accounts. The SPA reports that the number of fund changes grew from around a
half a million in 2004 to four and a half million in 2009. As this segment of the market
grew, the government received increasing numbers of complaints against advisors and
their sales methods, as well as raising a discussion about the added value they provide.
        In 2011, the government instructed the SPA to redesign its web interface in order to
prohibit robots from making mass changes on behalf of individual accounts. The trading
impact was immediate, as from December 2011, the number of transactions fell by 75%.
Many of the larger advisor firms responded by forming their own fund-of-funds to which
they steered customers in order to retain the mandate to manage their pension savings.
Though most advisors stopped charging the direct, fixed yearly advisory fee after the
change, the fund-of-fund structure they offered as an alternative had higher than average
fees.



3        Data

Our data are assembled from the Swedish Pensions Agency, which provides mutual fund
returns data; data from Dahlquist, Martinez, and Söderlind (2017), which allowed us to
determine the role that advisors play in the retirement planning decision; and data from
Statistics Sweden, which conducted a financial literacy survey on our behalf and merged
the data with Swedish tax records and pension contribution data. We next describe each
of these in detail.


3.1       Swedish Pensions Agency

Our data include all fund returns and fees from the SPA since the program’s inception
in 2000. Panel A of Table I reports pension fund investments and fees across eight fund
types, as classified by the SPA. There are 789 and 155 holdings in the default equity and
    6
    Even if this fee is relatively low in nominal terms, it commonly represents 1% to 2% of individuals’
accounts according to the SPA. The relatively small accounts are explained by the implied build-up through
contributions over peoples’ working life.


                                                    6
bond fund, respectively, where individuals in the bond fund also have holdings in the
equity fund. The default funds are managed by the government-controlled AP 7 fund
and takes the form of a target date fund.7 Young individuals who do not actively choose
a fund are automatically enrolled in the equity fund. After the age of 56, allocations to
the bond fund are made progressively in five steps up to the age 75, when the default
portfolio consists of two-third bonds.

                                            —Table I here—

Around a quarter of the value of all pension assets are invested in the default fund, and
around half in equity funds, which is also by far the biggest category measured by the
number of different funds. Mixed and Target date funds together constitute around a
quarter of fund investments, and Bond funds have a negligible share of the overall value
of investments.
       The fees we report are net of discounts negotiated on behalf of investors by the au-
thority, but excludes the service fee charged to all accounts by the SPA.8 The discounts
are paid back annually to investors and are substantial. According to the SPA, as much as
two-thirds of total management fees are distributed back to investors every year. There is
a cap on the net fees since 2015. The maximum fee after discounts for equity funds is 0.89
percent, and for mixed and target date funds it is 0.62. The maximum fee for bond funds
was set to 0.42 percent.
       Fees are reported in the last three columns of Panel A of Table I and points out the
low management fees for the default funds. The AP 7 equity and bond fund charges 12
and 5 basis points (bps) annually. The highest fees are found in the equity fund category,
where the median fund in our sample charges 51 bps, and the upper quartile 70 bps. The
median fee for a Mixed fund is 38 bps, and for a Bond fund it is 19 bps - all of them well
above the default alternatives.
   7
     Since May 2010, the equity default fund has a mandate to gear its equity exposure up to 1.5. Although
the gearing changes over time, it has been relatively stable around 1.2 to 1.3 during the sample period.
Because the stock market has performed well during most of this time, the default fund has outperformed
most other funds.
   8
     The service fee is determined annually to cover the administrative costs of the system. In 2015, it was
13 basis points with a cap of SEK 120 for each pension account.




                                                     7
3.2   Advisor-led trades

Panel C of Table I reports frequencies of advisor-led trades. We flag trades in our data as
advisor-led by cross-checking trades against data from Dahlquist, Martinez, and Söderlind
(2017). Their dataset includes a large random sample of 480,000 people of all 6 million
members of the Swedish pension system making over 10 million choices, from which
they identify coordinated trades as trades defined by the number of identical portfolio
choices made the same day. We use a similar methodology to determine coordinated
trades. Because we can only observe choices, and not the client-customer relation itself,
it is an empirical matter to determine a reasonable cut-off for the number of coordinated
trades in order to attribute them to advisors. We use three break-points in this paper
to classify investor-initiated trades: the same 1,000 identical trades benchmark used by
Dahlquist, Martinez, and Söderlind (2017), the 25th percentile of coordination size (3,076
identical trades occurring at the same point in time) and the 50th percentile of coordi-
nation size (12,535 trades). For each classification in the larger data set, we then match
the coordinated portfolio and date onto our smaller set of investors and flag them as co-
ordinated. The first two classifications are relatively insensitive to the number investors
classified as having advisors. There are 353 investors in our data who made a trade that
was coordinated with at least 1,000 other individuals, and 330 investors using the 25th
percentile breakpoint. Using the upper half of the distribution, we classify 220 individ-
uals, or almost 9% of the sample, as having enrolled with an advisor. The classification
of advisor-led activity is therefore quite insensitive to different assumptions about the ac-
tivity at the lower end of the distribution, but may act too restrictive in the upper half in
order to capture all of them.
   Because our varying thresholds for defining investor-led trades are based on the num-
ber of simultaneous, identical trades, this threshold classification also naturally sorts indi-
viduals according to the size of the advisory firm with which they are affiliated: a greater
degree of coordination implies a larger market share for the advisor firm. This is an im-
portant source of variation for us, since many of the larger, mass-market advisory firms
changed business model after 2011 to steer customers towards their own fund-of-funds
as it became impossible to coordinate large numbers of trades simultaneously through a
single electronic trade. Panel C of Table I reveal that our classification captures 59% of


                                              8
all trades in our sample defined as 1,000 simultaneously changes at one time; this falls to
34% if we set the threshold at the median.


3.3      Measuring Financial Literacy

Our second source of data is a web-based survey designed to measure actual and per-
ceived financial literacy, both at a broad level as well as it pertains to the specifics of
mutual fund investing.


3.3.1     Survey implementation

We construct a short web survey with 21 questions including a version of the standard Big
5 financial literacy questions, which appears in the National Financial Capability Studies
(NFCS).9 Invitations to take the survey were sent by regular mail by Statistics Sweden
in January 2016 to 12,000 people in the ages 18 to 65. Sampling from this age range is
designed to match normal working ages in Sweden. There are approximately 5.9 million
Swedes in this age group, and we are able to benchmark the demographics of participants
in our study against that of the overall population. We received 1,564 responses after the
first invite, and a total of 2,854 responses after two reminders sent out in February and
early March, which translates into a total response rate of almost 24%. After deleting
incomplete responses and matching with socio-demographics and pension fund choices
we are left with 2,502 complete survey observations.
      We match the survey responses to fund holdings obtained by the pension authority.
Panel B of Table I shows that the number of investors in the default fund in the year
of 2000 was 24%, or 422 out of 1,768 individuals. The majority, or two-thirds of those
who entered after 2000 did not make an active choice, and 73 people opted out of the
default fund by 2015. At the end of 2015, there are 854 individuals in the default fund in
our sample, which constitutes 34% of the 2,502 survey respondents. We find that 18% of
investors in sample only traded once, meaning that they chose to leave the default fund,
but never made any further changes to the portfolio.
  9
      See Lusardi and Mitchell (2014) for an overview.




                                                         9
3.3.2    Survey design

Our version of the Big 5 financial literacy questions and responses are displayed in the
Appendix in Table A.1. Because standard residential mortgages in Sweden typically do
not exist in the same form as in the U.S., we opt instead to include a question related to
savings and compounding, known as the “72” rule of thumb. Questions of this sort have
previously appeared in the work of Ambuehl, Bernheim, and Lusardi (2014), and have
proven to be an efficient way to convey the concept of compounding for people broadly
unfamiliar with finance and investments.10 A question of this sort is particularly relevant
for those saving for retirement.
    As in many previous studies, we find that the fraction of correct responses is very
high for the first three questions, usually referred to as the Big 3. Finding the correct
compounded interest rate, on the other hand, is found to be much more difficult for most
people. Less than half of the respondents realized that the required rate of return to
double the value of an investment over 10 years is lower than 10%, but only 5% reported
that they did not know this.
    Following Moore and Healy (2008) and Anderson, Baker, and Robinson (2017), we
augment the five standard literacy questions with a question that asks the survey partici-
pant to assess the probability for having five, four, three, etc. questions correct. We label
the mean of this probability distribution perceived score, and the difference of the financial
literacy score and perceived score, overestimation.
    To hone in on financial literacy as it pertains to mutual fund choice, our survey in-
cludes a question about the importance of fees as opposed to past returns when selecting
mutual funds.11 The survey also includes questions about attitudes to saving and finan-
cial advice. Table II tabulates the responses to two of the main questions besides the
financial literacy test. For our questions about mutual fund selection, we ask respondents
to agree or disagree to the following statement:

        “When selecting a mutual fund, its past returns are more important than its fees”

Possible responses are Strongly agree, Agree somewhat, Disagree somewhat, Strongly
disagree and Don’t Know. The responses to the questions are tabulated in Panel A and
  10
     The idea is that the factor 72 gives a first approximation of the effect of compounding and interest, i.e.
savings will double in 10 years at an interest rate of 7.2%.
  11
     The questions and responses are included in the Internet Appendix.


                                                      10
B of Table II. We find that 44% agree with the statement, and 11% strongly so. This
is a larger share compared to those who think fees are more important (29%). We also
find that 25% respond that they do not know. This is surprising given the effort Swedish
policymakers and the SPA have put into informing the public of the importance of fees
for future performance when selecting mutual funds, but it is line with other studies.12

                                          —Table II here—

The literature on mutual fund performance is somewhat inconclusive with respect to past
returns and fees. On one hand, there is strong support for indexing and minimizing in-
stead of chasing past performance, as suggested by the work of Malkiel (2003) and others.
But there is also evidence of momentum in stock returns that carry over to mutual funds,
as suggested by Carhart (1997). Dahlquist and Martinez (2015) suggest that neglecting
past returns is suboptimal for Swedish pension savers, as inattentive investors tend to be
stuck in underperforming funds. It is therefore possible that sophisticated investors find
a mix of both past returns and fees to be the best predictor of future performance, but
they should never overlook the importance of fees in the long run.
       In our analysis, we categorize investors with respect to their views on these two
salient, and often discussed, characteristics of mutual funds. We then test empirically
how individuals differ depending on their beliefs with respect to overall financial knowl-
edge, self-perceptions, and actual pension fund choice. We choose responses that fall into
either side of agreeing or disagreeing somewhat to the returns versus fees statement as
our benchmark. The benchmark group is then used for comparing the responses of our
three main groups of interest: those who strongly agree (hereafter labeled MF Return),
strongly disagree (labeled MF Fee), and contrast those categories to those who do not
know (MF Don’t know).
       Column (4) of Table II shows that those finding fees to be most important to have
the highest average literacy score of 3.72 out of 5, and those who report that they do not
know of only 2.34. Having an opinion about past returns or fees is therefore strongly
related to the level of financial knowledge, as measured by the literacy test. We find that
  12
     Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2010) show that most people fail to pick the lowest cost index fund in
an experimental setting; Anderson, Baker, and Robinson (2017) report that most people think past returns
more important than fees for determining future performance in a sample of U.S. LinkedIn members. Hast-
ings, Mitchell, and Chyn (2011) find that lower literacy individuals rely less on cost data and more on
friends and coworkers when making pension fund decisions.


                                                  11
25% of those who find past returns to be most important for future performance are in
the default fund at the end of 2015, whereas 49% of those who report not knowing never
made an active choice.
       One of the most important implications of possessing financial knowledge is how it re-
lates to financial engagement. Most studies find strong correlations between scores on the
financial literacy test and the propensity for individuals to save and plan for retirement.13
But being financially engaged could also drive literacy. Anderson, Baker, and Robin-
son (2017) find that overestimation to be an important driver for savings and retirement
planning decisions, which could be an indication that engagement spurs self-confidence.
Direct questions of desirable investment behavior are also likely to be correlated with
other biases, such as cognitive dissonance.14


3.3.3     Survey responses

As we draw randomly from a population with known demographic characteristics, we
are able to compare the fractions of individuals taking the survey to the underlying pop-
ulation in Sweden in the working age 18 to 65. Statistics Sweden, who administrated
the survey for us, attached population weights to each response based on the character-
istics of Table III. The second column Table III presents the sample proportions, and the
corresponding composition of the population. Comparing the two, we find much lower
response rates for those with lower income, education and age.

                                           —Table III here—

Table III shows that the average score of the test is 3.14 out of possible 5, and as discussed
by Lusardi and Mitchell (2008), men generally score higher than women on the test. On
average, survey participants thought they scored half a point better than they actually
did, with overestimation slightly higher for men than women. Similar to the results of
Anderson, Baker, and Robinson (2017), we find that overestimation increases with age,
but decreases with the level of education.15
  13
     See Lusardi and Mitchell (2014).
  14
     Barber and Odean (1999) find evidence for self-selection in the decision to go online for investors who
previously did well, but worse afterwards, and Goetzmann and Peles (1997) show that individuals tend to
report overly optimistic assessments of the performance of their mutual fund holdings.
  15
     The distribution of beliefs vary systematically across scores, where those who score very well or very
poorly are quite confident about the outcome, but where there is considerable uncertainty in the interme-
diate score categories. We include a plot of this relation in the Internet Appendix.


                                                    12
   Next we turn to the demographics of the mutual fund question. Men are more likely
to have stronger opinions of both fees and past returns being important for fund choice,
while women are twice as likely to report that they do not know. The general pattern
of responses to the mutual fund question broadly follows the score of financial literacy
across demographic groups. Within the highest income bracket, 15% think that fees are
more important, and 12% past returns. Only 10% report that they do not know. This
contrasts with the lowest income bracket, where 46% report that they do not know, but a
majority strongly believes past returns are more important than fees for predicting future
performance.
   The last column in Table III reports the fraction of individuals who were in the default
fund at the end of 2015. Overall, a third of our sample was in the default fund, whereas
the population weighted average is 39%. This is likely due to the lower representation of
young, low income and less educated in our sample as suggested by the first and second
column in Table III. For example, our sample only captures 5% of those in the ages 18-25,
though they represent 14% of the population. The fraction who holds the default fund is
96% for this group. The fraction holding the default fund drops quickly with age. The
strong effects can be explained by the fact that new (and young) entrants in the system
did not make an active choice, as evidenced by the results in Table I.
   Since young people with low income are also under represented in taking the survey,
we re-calculate the sample averages in the first row of Table III using population weights.
Scaling up the proportion of this omitted group, we find that the average financial literacy
score falls from 3.14 to 2.98. We also find that the group not knowing if fees or past
returns are important for mutual fund selection rises from 0.27 to 0.32. Adjusting for the
omitted group, which is presumably less engaged in financial decisions, can therefore
have important implications for interpreting the subsequent results. We therefore opt to
include population weights in the preceding analysis when we match the survey results
to choice data.




                                            13
3.3.4     Household Planning and Financial Literacy

The survey also contains a number of questions related to household planning, attitudes
and decision-making.16 We ask if respondents agree or disagree with the statement: “I
find personal financial matters boring.” A slight majority (51%) of survey respondents
either agreed or strongly agreed with this statement, and only 2% responded that they
did not know or refused to answer.
       Column (1) of Table IV display the result of a Probit regressions where we code a
dummy to one if the respondent disagree (22% of respondents) or strongly disagree (25%
of respondents) with the statement, which we label “Interesting.” Interest in finance is
strongly related to financial literacy. In Column (2), while controlling for overall financial
knowledge, we find that those not knowing the mutual fund question display the greatest
lack of interest in financial matters. Among those who think that fees or past returns
are important, only the fee group displays interest in finance. We take this as evidence
pointing to this group being more sophisticated, even if we cannot formally reject that
they are equal when testing the difference in the parameter estimates.
       The dependent variable in Columns (3) and (4) of Table IV takes the value one if the
respondent reports having thought about how much to save for retirement. Almost 48%
responds yes to this question, which illustrates that Sweden is a country where there is
generally a very high awareness of pension planning. Nevertheless, we still find some
cross-sectional differences. Planning is more common among high financial literacy, mar-
ried, older, higher income, and university-educated people. Introducing mutual fund
beliefs in Column (4), we find that those who do not know if fees or past returns are more
important for fund performance are about 17% less likely to report that they have tried
to figure out how much they need in retirement, which is in support with the notion that
these individuals should be the main priority for policy interventions.

                                           —Table IV here—

We ask if people would be willing to accept free financial advice if it was offered to them,
and code a dummy equal one and zero otherwise if the response was yes to this question.
Column (5) of Table IV shows that willingness to accept financial advice is higher for
  16
       A complete description of the questions and responses can be found in the Internet Appendix, Table
A.2.


                                                    14
females and high income earners, but lower for the married and insignificantly related to
general financial literacy. When we introduce mutual fund beliefs in Column (5), we find
evidence that those not knowing are in fact reluctant to receive advice. At the other end,
we find that those who think past returns are more important than fees are almost 10%
more likely to report that they are willing to accept free financial advice.
    In Columns (7) and (8) of Table IV, we model the probability that a respondent reports
that they are the sole decision-maker in their household, controlling for marital status.
In Column (7), we find that those with higher education and those with higher literacy
scores are more likely to be sole decision-makers, but the latter effect is crowded out
when introducing beliefs about mutual fund choice. Those thinking past returns rather
than fees are more important for mutual fund choice are also more likely to be the sole
decision-maker in the household.
    The analysis suggests that there are important differences between the groups defined
over whether fees or past returns are important. Those who think fees are important dis-
play high interest in personal financial matters. Those who think past returns are more
important than fees generally lack interest in personal finances, but they are more open to
receive financial advice. Furthermore, they are more likely to be decision makers, which
raises the concern that they may be particularly exposed to bad or fraudulent financial ad-
vice. Finally, those who do not know lack interest in finance, do not plan for retirement,
and are reluctant to receive financial advice. This group therefore seems particularly im-
portant to target when designing default options, but our results also reveal that they
may be difficult to reach due to their lack of engagement.



4    From General to Specific Financial Literacy

As discussed in Hastings, Madrian, and Skimmyhorn (2013) and Fernandes, Lynch, and
Netemeyer (2014), there is little research about the relationship between general and spe-
cific financial knowledge, and its relevance for actual consumer choices in financial mar-
kets. The concern is that an increase in general financial knowledge may not be enough
to prepare consumers for many relatively sophisticated and infrequent choices, such as
mortgages or deciding to participate in the stock market (see Van Rooij, Lusardi, and


                                             15
Alessie (2011)).
       In this section, we explore correlations between general financial literacy, knowledge
about mutual fund choice and interest in personal finance. The latter piece is especially
important as policymakers struggle to communicate to younger generations where these
decisions are important, but where lack of interest makes it difficult to reach broad layers
of this group.


4.1      Mutual fund responses across score

Figure 1 traces out Perceived score’–the average self-assessed scores plotted against the
actual financial literacy score. We find a systematic overestimation of the outcome among
those who score poorly on the test. This is a robust feature of the data, which has been
shown in many previous studies of overconfidence.17

                                           —Figure 1 here—

       The bars in Figure 1 indicate the fraction of responses about fees and past returns, and
they show a clear pattern where those who believe fees to be most important for future
performance have higher literacy scores, whereas those who believe past returns to be
important are self-confident if not necessarily knowledgeable.
       We formally test these correlations in Table V, using a Probit regression on mutual
fund responses and financial literacy variables, with controls for socio-demographics. In
this analysis, we explore the relation between mutual fund beliefs, actual financial knowl-
edge (as measured by financial literacy score), and perceived score in order to determine
the relative importance of self-perceptions and knowledge. In our study, we are not only
interested in what people know, but whether they know that they do not know.18
       A lower test score can originate from two sources: either because the respondent re-
ported the wrong answer, or that they did not know. Thus, we decompose the comple-
ment of financial literacy score (ranging from 0 to 5) into two parts: Don’t know responses
(labelled “DK”) and the number of mistakes (labelled “Financial Mistakes”), counting the
number of mistakes. Since the three variables naturally sums up to five, test scores with
  17
     See for example Kruger and Dunning (1999), Moore and Healy (2008), and references therein.
  18
     In a different survey setting, Müller and Weber (2010) find support for a relation between measures of
self-confidence and the propensity to choose actively managed funds.


                                                    16
high meta-cognition should be associated with fewer mistakes, even if the counts of DK
responses increase in lower scores.

                                          —Table V here—

       Column (1) shows that a past return response is indeed negatively related to level of
education, but positively related to age and financial literacy score. When the perceived
score is included in Column (2), it completely crowds out the effect of the financial liter-
acy score. In other words, thinking that past returns is the main determinant of future
fund performance is common among those who think they are more literate than they
actually are.19 This conjecture is supported by the results in Column (3), that shows that
respondents thinking that past returns are more important than fees are less likely to be
among those responding Don’t Know in the financial literacy test, but they are not less
likely to report the wrong answer to the question, as given by the insignificant loading on
Financial Mistakes. We take this as another indication that these investors display more
confidence than competence.
       Columns (4) through (6) explore the responses for those thinking fees are more im-
portant. In Column (4), higher literacy scores are associated with thinking fees are more
important, but in a horse race between actual and perceived literacy, both are significant.
The difference in the point estimates on actual and perceived literacy is insignificant,
which indicates that while those who think returns are more important think they are
more literate than they actually are, those who think fees are more important have a more
accurate picture of their financial literacy. Comparing the two groups, those who find
minimizing fees to be most important appear to be more sophisticated investors than
those focusing on past returns. We find further evidence for this conjecture in Column
(6), where this group has a significant lower propensity to give wrong answers to the test.
Therefore, we conjecture that they display both confidence and competence. This is in
sharp contrast to the results of the past returns group in Column (3).
       Columns (7) through (9) of Table V present similar regressions for the group who
responded that they do not know whether fees or returns are more important. This group
has lower scores and income, and they are also younger compared to the other groups.
  19
    Strictly speaking, the difference between the loadings on the perceived and actual literacy measures
mistaken beliefs about literacy; it is significantly positive here.


                                                  17
Women are roughly 13% more likely to report that they do not know, an effect size that is
roughly equivalent to one additional incorrect answer on the financial literacy test. As in
the other regressions, self-perceptions crowd out some of this effect when introduced in
Column (8).
         The last column of Table V shows that the correlation between responding don’t know
on the financial literacy test increases the likelihood by 19% to give the same response
to the fee versus past return question. Not knowing the mutual fund question is also
associated with a higher number of mistakes, but the marginal effect of DK is three times
as large compared to making a mistake. This further supports the notion that those with
low mutual fund literacy are less knowledgeable, but also better aware of their lack of
competence.
         Finally, we find that the nudged cohort, that is those who entered the market in 2000,
are much less likely to report that they do not know, whereas the dummy is insignificant
for both return and fee responses. One way to interpret this result is that it is evidence
that the informational nudge worked: it caused this cohort to be much more likely to
form an opinion about the subject of mutual fund choice.20



5         Who Responds to the Nudge?

To explore how nudges interact with financial literacy and self-awareness to affect re-
tirement savings behavior we examine differences between the nudged cohort and later
cohorts in terms of three distinct aspects of program participation. The first is the choice
of whether to stay in the default fund or opt out. Second, we examine the tendency to
trade exactly once: that is, to opt out of the default fund and never make a subsequent
portfolio adjustment. Finally, we examine overall turnover, measured by the number of
trades in the funds. To increase the external validity of the estimates we report from our
survey, all regressions are weighted with population weights.
    20
   In untabulated results, we find no evidence that financial literacy is higher or lower for the initial cohort
when controlling for the same characteristics as in Table V .




                                                      18
5.1     Opting out of the Default Fund

To study whether respondents remain in the default fund option we estimate Probit re-
gressions in which the dependent variable is an indicator variable for having opted out
of the default fund as of 2015. The results are presented in the first three columns of Table
VI.
      Column (1) focuses on the nudged cohort. The variable “Financial literacy,” which is
formed by summing the number of correct responses to the Big 5 questions, is unrelated
to the choice to remain in the default. This illustrates the fact that general financial knowl-
edge is less relevant for the specific knowledge required to make domain-specific choices
about mutual funds. The domain-specific questions, however, are more revealing: those
who think past returns are more important than fees are over 6% more likely to opt out
of the default fund in the nudged cohort. The effect is large: there is a 14% difference,
significant at the 1% level, in the marginal probability of opting out between those who
think fees are more important and those who think returns are more important. Given
that the nudged cohort is about 44% more likely to opt out conditional on observables
(from the parameter estimate in Column(3)), this means that about one-third of the over-
all effect of the nudge can be explained by differences in financial literacy surrounding
mutual funds. Standing in between those who know and those know they don’t know are
the group with meta-cognition, the group of those who know that they do not know. This
group is more likely to stay in the default fund, but not to the same degree in the nudged
cohort as those who assert that fees are more important than returns for performance.
      Column (2) repeats the same regression but for the later cohorts who did not receive
the informational nudge. Here the relation between literacy and opting out is completely
different than for the nudged cohort. In the cohorts that did not receive the nudge, there
is no different in the marginal probability of opting out between those who think fees
are more important and those who think funds are more important. Instead, there is a
dramatically higher probability that the “Don’t knows” remain in the default fund. In
other words, merely having an opinion about the relative importance of fees or returns,
rightly or wrongly, is associated with opting out, but having domain-specific knowledge
itself has no impact outside the nudge.

                                      —Table VI here—

                                              19
   Given the fact that many fewer responses indicated that they did not know the answer
to the mutual fund question in the nudge period, the comparison of columns (1) and (2)
suggests that the nudge works through two mechanisms: first by encouraging people
to form beliefs about the relevant parameters of engagement, and then by encouraging
them to act on those beliefs. The fact that the self-aware were much less resolute in their
decision to stick with the default fund when exposed to the nudge indicates that the ad-
vertising was perhaps reaching an audience of those ill-equipped to handle the decision
they were being asked to make.
   Column (3) pools the sample and estimates the same model but with a dummy vari-
able for whether a respondent was in the nudged cohort. In addition to confirming the
demographic patterns in the first two columns, the point estimate on the initial cohort
dummy is itself useful. It indicates that 44% of the nudged cohort responded to the infor-
mation intervention on a population-weighted basis.


5.2   Understanding the Frequency of Trade

In Columns (4) through (6) of Table VI, the dependent variable equals one for the 445
respondents who traded exactly once. The sample is restricted to those who opted out of
the default fund. None of the financial literacy variables that explain the decision to opt
out have any power to explain whether individuals trade beyond that initial decision.
On the other hand, single-trade investors (those who opt out initially but never trade
again) are much more likely to belong to the initial cohort. When we introduce a dummy
variable for belonging to the initial cohort in Column (7), we find them to be almost 44%
more likely to belong to this group.
   Rather than measuring subsequent trade with a dummy for trading exactly once,
columns (7) through (9) replace the dependent variable with a measure of turnover ob-
tained by counting the number of times the portfolio has been rebalanced among those
out of the default fund (irrespective of when the individual entered). As before, there is
no evidence that returns chasers behave differently than those who think fees are more
important in the nudged sample. Among those coming in later, return chasers trade more
often but this effect is mainly due to the average higher turnover for the nudged cohort,
which we control for in Column (9). This further speaks against the idea that returns-


                                            20
oriented respondents pursue momentum strategies that would trigger substantial trading
activity.
       There is, however, a substantial average effect for the nudged cohort. This group
trades on average more than twice as often as those coming into the system in later co-
horts. This difference is considerably larger than what would occur if the probability of
trade were proportional to the passage of time, and remains after controlling separately
for the individual retirement cohorts.
       In sum, possessing domain-specific financial literacy is a robust predictor of who re-
sponded to the initial informational nudge, but has little power to predict what happens
after they have been nudged. The variation in knowledge that predicts opting out does
not predict subsequent trading activity. Nevertheless, the nudged group was both more
likely to never trade again and more likely to be a frequent trader. The next section ex-
plores what is responsible for this apparent contradiction.


5.3      Mass-Market Advisors

As we discussed in Section 2, coordinated trades by financial advisors play an important
role in driving the turnover studied in the previous section.21 In this section, we study
how the uptake of such financial services is related to financial literacy. Because we are
interested in providing quantitative magnitudes that reflect the broader population, we
apply sampling weights to some regression specifications.

                                           —Table VII here—

       Table VII reports Probit regressions in which the dependent variable equals one if the
respondent in question is classified as having used a mass-market advisor (MMA) and
zero otherwise. Because advisors operate at different levels of market scope, the table
includes separate analyses depending on how widely the trades in question occurred.
Columns (1) through (3) counts a respondent as being affiliated with an advisor if at
least 1,000 coordinated trades occurred, which resulted in 353 investors being classified as
having subscribed to an advisor. This definition probably covers many different types of
  21
    Indeed, if we include a dummy variable for mass-market advisor (as described below) into the turnover
regressions in Table VI we find that it has a highly significant positive loading. Results are available upon
request.


                                                     21
advisors, including MMA’s. Column (4) through (6) only counts respondents associated
with trades in the upper half of the distribution of coordination size (or at least 12,535
identical portfolio rebalances in a sample of 480,000 retirement accounts), valid for 220
investors in sample. The independent variables MF Return, MF Fee and MF Don’t Know
are dummy variables for the three categories of mutual fund financial literacy (answers
to the statement “When selecting a mutual fund, its past returns are more important than
its fees” as discussed above).
   Overall, Table VII shows that respondents with higher actual literacy scores are some-
what less likely to use mass-market advisors, and significantly so when narrowing the
definition of MMA’s. In addition, mistaken beliefs about mutual fund selection criteria
are associated with increased uptake of such services, while correct beliefs about mutual
fund selection criteria are associated with decreased uptake. Columns (4) to (6) show that
there are significant links between mutual fund literacy and uptake, and that this effect is
generally coming from the nudged cohort. Note too that these effects are not present in
Columns (1) through (3), which suggests that advisory firms with mass appeal appear to
attract less sophisticated investors who were nudged to make an active choice in 2000.
   It is important to stress that we cannot attach a causal interpretation to the point es-
timates on financial advisor in Table VII. The tabulated results are consistent with alter-
native explanations, each interesting in their own right. One is that retirement advisors
convince investors to entrust them with their retirement accounts by persuading them
that returns are important and promising that they can deliver superior performance.
They then incorporate these statements into their beliefs about how mutual fund markets
function, and we then measure their understanding of the importance of past returns as
a consequence of this. The second is that by holding the belief that returns are more im-
portant than fees, people are more likely to succumb to the marketing pressure of the
tele-marketing organizations. Both explanations square with existing evidence in the lit-
erature on the incentives of advisors, as in Linnainmaa, Melzer, and Previtero (2015). In
this sense, the weak results for less widespread coordination of trades may suggest that
larger and more successful advisors are among the more aggressive in marketing invest-
ment advice.
   As discussed earlier, many MMA’s opened high-fee fund-of-funds in the wake of



                                            22
changing regulations that made it more difficult to operate through coordinated trades
across a large number of investors. The SPA names 15 fund families and 61 funds that
originate from advisory firms having a majority fund-of-fund construction, of which 41
appear in our data. According to the SPA, these companies had almost 600,000 clients as
of 2014 which is about 10% of the total number of people in the pension system.22 These
funds are on, average, much more expensive for investors. The average equity fund fee
for advisor funds is 65 bps, compared to 51 bps in the full sample.

                                         —Table VIII here—

       As a further test of assessing the propensity to sign up for MMA services, we estimate
the probability of holding one of these funds in 2015 as a function of investor characteris-
tics and financial literacy. Again, these regressions are estimated with sampling weights.
Columns (1) through (3) of Table VIII show that those with lower financial literacy and
strongly believing past returns are important for performance are more likely to hold
these funds compared to the benchmark group, but this only for the nudge cohort. Peo-
ple in the nudged cohort are 9.1% more likely to end up with a mass market advisor,
but even controlling for this general effect, return chasers are much more likely to hold
these funds. In Column (4), we include an indicator variables for having participated
in a coordinated change measured on the two different levels of coordinated changes.
The point estimates in Columns (4) and (5) reveal that the median coordinated change
(labelled “MMA / 50th”, with over 12,000 coordinated changes) gives the highest predic-
tion (with a marginal probability of 41.7%) of holding one of the MMA managed funds.
At the same time, the point estimate for MF Return becomes attenuated as we expand the
scope of the advisory firm, indicating that the main channel by which returns-oriented
investors take up advisory-led fund of funds is through their prior affiliation with the
more mass-market advisory firms.
  22
    Effekter av massfondbytesstoppet, PM Pensionsmyndigheten, PID119386. The five largest firms listed are
Monetar, Solitar, Allra, Indecap and Advisor, which together have close to half a million customers accord-
ing to the estimates.




                                                    23
6     The Consequences of Fund Choices

Up to this point, the analysis shows that less financially literate respondents are more
likely to opt out of the default fund and that a good deal of this comes from reliance
on mass-market retirement investment planners, which coordinate trades across large
numbers of individuals. The final step of the analysis explores the welfare implications of
these decisions for the investors who make them. We do this by first examining the fees
(not including any fees paid directly to retirement investment coordinators) and then by
examining net-of-fee performance.


6.1   Fees

Table IX reports OLS regressions of the fees associated with mutual fund choices. The
independent variables include literacy, demographics, fund characteristics and whether
the respondent used an advisor.

                                     —Table IX here—

    Columns (1) and (2) omit mutual fund literacy and focus on the role that MMA’s play
in mutual fund fees. Individuals who use retirement advisors pay substantially higher
fees. Column (1) does not control for the type of mutual fund in question (there is sub-
stantial variation in average fees by fund type) and shows that advisor-related respon-
dents pay 7.6 basis points more per year, on a population-weighted basis, compared to
other individuals who opt out without using an advisor. Given that the conditional mean
fee given by the intercept of the regression is around 30.8 basis points and the cost for
the default fund is 12 basis points, this effect is substantial both economically and statis-
tically. Respondent demographics play little role in explaining fees in the sub-sample of
those who have opted out of the default fund.
    Column (2) adds the weights in each respondent’s portfolio on each of the four fund
types of funds in our data. Because the weights naturally sum to one, the constant term
is omitted. When we control for the composition of fund types, we see that advisor-
affiliated respondents still face higher fees; the coefficient for the MMA dummy drops to
6.1 basis points. Thus, the higher fees associated with advisor-managed accounts do not


                                             24
stem from the fact that they tilt investors more into one asset class than another: within
asset classes they are choosing the higher fee funds available.
   Column (3) removes the advisor variable but adds the three variables that capture
mutual fund literacy. This column shows that investors who think past returns are more
important pay higher fees on average. Again, this is estimated on the subsample of those
who opted-out, so the increased tendency for these types to leave the default fund is
not responsible for the magnitude of this point estimate. It is based on a comparison
with other investors who opted out of the default fund but held different beliefs about
the factors that are important for mutual fund selection. Although the effects are not
precisely estimated, the loadings on mutual fund fees and on self-awareness indicate that
both types pay lower fees, with those who know the importance of fees paying less than
those who are unsure.
   Advisor selection and mutual fund literacy are jointly considered in Column (4). Here
both sets of variables are important. Advisor-affiliated respondents pay about 5.9 basis
points more in fees per year, even holding constant their financial literacy. Finally, Col-
umn (5) repeats Column (4) but includes the full sample. This changes the interpretation
of the point estimate for the advisor dummy variable, because the comparison group is
now all individuals who did not choose an advisor, including those who stayed with the
default fund. The results are even stronger when benchmarked against those individu-
als who kept the default choice with an estimated difference of 8.5 basis points. People
in the nudged cohort pay an additional 7 basis points higher fees on average compared
to later entrants which we associate with their higher propensity to opt out. Those with
high meta-cognition, not knowing about fees or past returns, are more likely to stay in de-
fault and so pay 3.2 basis points lower fees, controlling for the nudge and the measured
mass-market advisor activity.


6.2   Performance

In the final part of our analysis, we investigate how mutual fund literacy and reliance
on outside advisors impacts performance. We take several approaches to performance
measurement where we have computed monthly returns from daily holdings and prices.



                                            25
First, we derive an average raw excess returns over the default fund return as follows:
                                              T
                                           1X
                                   AP 7i =       (Ri,t − RAP 7,t ).                                (1)
                                           T t=1

This provides a measure of performance relative to the return one would have earned had
one not opted out of the default fund. Second, use a standard factor model that includes
a Swedish and Global value weighted index and three other factor exposures. Formally,
we estimate

 Ri,t = αi + βi,S RS,t + βi,G RG,t + βSM B,i RSM B,t + βHM L,i RHM L,t + βM OM,i RM OM,t + ei,t , (2)

where RS,t and RG,t denote the monthly Swedish and Global equity excess returns and
RSM B,t , RHM L,t , and RM OM,t denote the size, value and momentum zero cost portfolios
obtained from the Swedish House of Finance website.23 We present results for both the
full model and those excluding the zero-cost factor portfolios.

                                         —Figure 2 here—

       Figure 2 plots the distribution of annualized market-model alphas for those who have
opted out of the default. The dark-shaded region of the graph corresponds to those who
underperform the benchmark. The annualized mean performance is around negative
1.3% per year, and the median is slightly lower. The upper (lower) decile of the alphas is
1.4% (-3.9%). Only 21% of the active investors have non-negative alphas.
       Table X examines how performance is related to participant characteristics for the full
sample in OLS-regressions. The median annualized Sharpe ratio in our sample is approx-
imately 0.27, but there is significant variation according to the literacy of the respondent
and their reliance on advisors. Column (1) shows that those who think fees are important
in the nudged sample have significantly higher Sharpe ratios, and the difference between
those believing past returns to be important is significant. The parameter estimates im-
ply an average difference in Sharpe ratios of over 15%. There is a smaller, but significant
relation between having higher financial literacy and higher Sharpe ratios, which is four
times smaller compared to mutual fund literacy. The group who do not know also have
  23
    All benchmarks are value weighted. The data was retrieved from the Swedish House of Finance website
at https://data.houseoffinance.se/.



                                                  26
significantly higher Sharpe ratios in the full sample, but they are also more likely to be
in the default fund. In Column (3), we include a dummy for those classified as having
an advisor in the full sample, which shows that are being associated with a mass-market
advisor have 0.074 lower average Sharpe-ratios. Like in the previous analysis, the inclu-
sion of the dummy attenuates some of the effects coming from mutual fund beliefs. To
put this point estimate in perspective, the loading on MMA in Column (3) corresponds to
around 1% lower annual return holding constant the annual standard deviation.

                                    —Table X here—

   The remaining columns of the table replace the Sharpe ratio with abnormal returns ob-
tained from the AP7 benchmark, a market model, or the extended Fama-French-Carhart
model. The results are broadly consistent with those of the first three columns. Those
finding past returns (fees) to be important for mutual fund selection underperform (out-
perform) by 27 to 32 (25 to 28) basis points per year on average in the full sample when
we do not control for MMA’s. When controlling for MMA’s, this effect becomes less pro-
nounced, but the difference in performance between the groups are only significant in
both model specifications. The negative loadings on the mass-market advisor variable
range from an underperformance of 0.5% to 1.1% per year. This underscores the fact
that the Sharpe ratio differences come not just from choosing funds with lower average
returns, but also with excessive volatility for the returns achieved. The “Don’t know”
category also do better on a risk-adjusted basis than the past returns group, but not sig-
nificantly so in the nudged cohort. Our robustness analysis shows that this is driven
largely by their greater propensity to remain in the outperforming default fund, and to
some extent a greater propensity to avoid expensive advisor-led fund-of-funds. Related
to this, we also find some evidence that general financial literacy is associated with bet-
ter performance. By comparing the point estimates in Columns (10) through (12), we
draw the conclusion that the main channel for this is not related to better fund choices
per se, but them having a lower propensity to opt out of the default fund and to follow
mass-market advisors.
   Taken together, the results in Table X indicate that returns-oriented investors and in-
vestors who rely on mass-market advisory firms have significantly worse retirement sav-
ings outcomes than either those who know the importance of low fees, or else know of

                                            27
their own ignorance in the matter. These findings are robust to changing the sample pe-
riod to account for the banning of coordinated trading in 2011, and also to changes in the
construction of the default fund.24



7         Conclusion

Some of the most important long-run financial decisions facing households throughout
the world play out in market settings where household decision-makers must confront
persuasion and strategic obfuscation as they search to collect the relevant information
required to make appropriate choices. Behavioral biases and the choice architecture itself
not only affect how households make decisions, they also affect the very incentives for
strategically generating information by other market participants. Understanding how
these factors interact is critical not only for designing effective economic policy, but also
for understanding more generally how cognitive factors and market structures affect the
manner in which information is incorporated into household financial decisions.
         Sweden’s pension reform experience offers a natural laboratory for studying these
interactions. The Swedish system offers a low-cost, well-diversified default fund along
with the opportunity to choose among an enormous number of alternative mutual funds;
moreover, the initial cohort received a strong informational nudge encouraging them to
actively manage their retirement portfolio while later cohorts did not. Thus, through
the Swedish experience we can study how behavioral biases and knowledge affect who
responds to informational nudges, acknowledging that the informational nudge itself
shapes the market structure facing pension savers.
         We find that individuals with mistaken beliefs about their own general financial liter-
acy are also prone to hold mistaken beliefs about the factors important for making mutual
fund allocation decisions. These mistaken beliefs have negative consequences: individu-
als who hold them are steered away from a well-diversified, low-cost default mutual fund
into low-performing, higher-cost alternatives. This is especially true among the cohort of
individuals who were nudged to make an active choice—the respondents who felt the
nudge the most were those who misunderstood the factors important for making mutual
    24
         These results are available upon request.



                                                     28
fund choices.
   In contrast, individuals in our study who find finance uninteresting and are gener-
ally disengaged from financial decision-making are well protected by the plan’s default
structure. These are exactly the investors best served by a choice architecture designed
to guard against costly indecision. Nevertheless, the informational nudge undermined
this feature of the system, pulling the otherwise disengaged into the mutual fund choice
process.
   These results underscore the need for a better understanding of the connection be-
tween knowledge, self-awareness and choice architecture. A system that allows individ-
uals to opt out of a default not only provides choice, it creates markets for information and
advice. Taking this into account is critical for our understanding of how to balance the
costs of sub-optimal decision-making from certain groups against the benefits associated
with greater freedom of choice in a market setting where consumer financial knowledge
is both heterogeneously distributed and essential for participation.




                                             29
References
Agell, Jonas, Peter Englund, and Jan Södersten, 1995, The Swedish tax reform: An intro-
  duction, Swedish Economic Policy Review 2, 219–228.

Ambuehl, Sandro, B. Douglas Bernheim, and Annamaria Lusardi, 2014, The effect of fi-
 nancial decision education on the quality of decision making, National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research Working Paper 20618.

Anagol, Santosh, and Hugh Hoikwang Kim, 2012, The impact of shrouded fees: Evidence
  from a natural experiment in the indian mutual funds market, American Economic Re-
  view 102, 576–593.

Anderson, Anders, Forest Baker, and David T. Robinson, 2017, Precautionary savings,
  retirement planning and misperceptions of financial literacy, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 126, 383–398.

Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 1999, The courage of misguided convictions, Finan-
  cial Analysts Journal 55, 10–18.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2006, The impor-
  tance of default options for retirement saving outcomes: Evidence from the United
  States, in Jeffrey R. Brown, Jeffrey B. Liebman, and David A. Wise, ed.: Social Security
  Policy in a Changing Environment . pp. 167–195 (NBER).

      , and Sean (Yixiang) Wang, 2016, Who is easier to nudge?, Working paper, Harvard
  University.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Katherine L. Milkman, 2015, The
  effect of providing peer information on retirement savings decisions, Journal of Finance
  70, 1161–1201.

Burke, Jeremy, Angela Hung, Jack Clift, Steven Garber, and Joanne Yoong, 2015, Impacts
  of conflicts of interest in the financial services industry, Discussion paper RAND.

Campbell, John Y., 2006, Household finance, Journal of Finance 61, 1553–1604.

Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistance in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance
  52, 57–82.

Carroll, Gabriel D., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2009, Op-
  timal defaults and active decisions, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1639–1674.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2010, Why does the law of one
  price fail? an experiment on index mutual funds, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1405–
  1432.

       , and Andrew Metrick, 2004, For better or for worse: Default effects and 401(k)
  savings behavior, in David A. Wise, ed.: Perspectives in the Economics of Aging . pp.
  81–121 (University of Chicago Press).



                                           30
      , 2006, Saving for retirement on the path of least resistance, in Edward J McCaffery,
  and Joel Slemrod, ed.: Behavioral Public Finance: Toward a New Agenda . pp. 304–351
  (Russell Sage Foundation).

Cronqvist, Henrik, and Richard H. Thaler, 2004, Design choices in privatized social-
  security systems: Learning from the Swedish experience, American Economic Review,
  Papers and Proceedings 94, 424–428.

      , and Frank Yu, 2018, When nudges are forever: Inertia in the swedish premium
  pension plan, Working paper, University of Chicago.

Dahlquist, Magnus, and José Martinez, 2015, Investor inattention: A hidden cost of choice
  in pension plans?, European Financial Management 21, 1–19.

        , and Paul Söderlind, 2017, Individual investor activity and performance, Review
  of Financial Studies 30, 866–899.

Fernandes, Daniel, John G. Lynch, and Richard G. Netemeyer, 2014, Financial literacy,
  financial education, and downstream financial behaviors, Management Science 60, 1861–
  1883.

Goetzmann, William N., and Naday Peles, 1997, Cognitive dissonance and mutual fund
  investors, Journal of Financial Research 20, 145–158.

Hastings, Justine, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Eric Chyn, 2011, Fees, framing, and financial lit-
  eracy in the choice of pension managers, in Olivia S. Mitchell, and Annamaria Lusardi,
  ed.: Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace
  (Oxford University Press).

Hastings, Justine S., Brigitte C. Madrian, and William L. Skimmyhorn, 2013, Financial
  literacy, financial education, and economic outcomes, Annual Review of Economics 5,
  347–373.

Kim, Hugh Hoikwang, Raimond Maurer, and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2016, Time is money:
  Rational life cycle inertia and the delegation of investment management, Journal of Fi-
  nancial Economics 121, 231–248.

Kruger, Justin, and David Dunning, 1999, Unskilled and unaware of it: How difficul-
  ties in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments, Journal of
  Personality and Social Psychology 77, 1121–1134.

Linnainmaa, Juhani, Brian T. Melzer, and Alessandro Previtero, 2015, Costly financial
  advice: Conflicts of interest or misguided beliefs?, Working Paper w20712, NBER.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2017, Optimal Financial
  Knowledge and Wealth Inequality, Journal of Political Economy 125, 431–477.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2008, Planning and financial literacy: How
  do women fare?, American Economic Review 98, 413–417.




                                             31
       , 2011, Financial literacy and planning: Implications for retirement well-being,
  in Annamaria Lusardi, and Olivia S. Mitchell, ed.: Financial Literacy: Implications for
  Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace . pp. 17–39 (Oxford University Press)
  Michigan Retirement Research Center, WP 2015-108.

       , 2014, The economic importance of financial literacy: Theory and evidence, Journal
  of Economic Literature 52, 5–44.

Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea, 2001, The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
 participation and savings behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1149–1187.

Malkiel, Burton G., 2003, The efficient market hypothesis and its critics, Journal of Economic
 Perspectives 17, 59–82.

Moore, Don, and Paul J. Healy, 2008, The trouble with overconfidence, Psychological Re-
 view 115, 502–517.

Müller, Sebastian, and Martin Weber, 2010, Financial literacy and mutual fund invest-
  ments: Who buys actively managed funds?, Schmalenbach Business Review 62, 126–153.

Palme, Marten, Annika Sunden, and Paul Söderlind, 2007, How do individual accounts
  work in the swedish pension system?, Journal of the European Economic Association 5,
  636–646.

Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein, 2008, Nudge (Yale University Press).

Van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie, 2011, Financial literacy and
  stock market participation, Journal of Financial Economics 191, 449–472.




                                             32
Table I: Pension funds and holdings
This table reports characteristics of the funds in the sample. Panel A reports the investments and fees across six broad fund
categories. Since 2010, default fund savers automatically obtain an increasing allocation to the default bond fund after the age of
56. Fees are reported net of discounts, but excludes the service fee charged to all accounts by the Swedish Pensions Agency (SPA).
Panel B reports the number of individuals who were in the default fund at the end of 2000 - the year which the pension system was
introduced. The following columns report the number of new savers who entered after 2000; those who opted out of default up
until 2015; and the number of individuals in the default fund at the end of 2015. The last column of Panel B reports the number of
people trading only once, out of the default fund at the end of 2015. The data is obtained from the SPA and matched to our sample
of 2,502 survey respondents. Panel C reports frequencies for respondents and trades that are associated with mass-market advisors,
where advisor-led trades are defined according to three different criteria from a sample of 480,000 retirement accounts: a trade
coincides with at least 1,000 other identical trades on the same day, a trade coincides with a number exceeding the 25th percentile of
coordinated trades, or a trade coincides with trades that involve more than the median number of coordinated trades.




                            Panel A: Pension fund types, investments and fees
                                                                                                               Fees, BPs

    Fund type                                 No. of          No. of       Value    Share               Q1       Med.       Q3
                                              funds           invest.       2015 of value
    Default equity fund                            1              789       86.67    23%                  12         12       12
    Default bond fund                              1              155        4.80     1%                   5          5        5
    Equity funds                                336             3,152      183.21    48%                  33         51       70
    Mixed funds                                   57              375       31.28     8%                  35         38        5
    Target date funds                             30              587       63.31    17%                  18         20       20
    Bond funds                                    68              277       13.20     3%                  12         19       36
    Total                                       493             5,335      382.47   100%                  25         40       62

                           Panel B: Active and passive choice
                                2000       New Opted          2015                                               One
    Fund choice              default entrants        out default                                                trade
    Default fund                  422        505     -73        854                                               445
    Other                      1,346         229      73      1,648                                             2,057
    Total                      1,768         734       0      2,502                                             2,502
    Fraction (Default/Trade)     24%        69%        -       34%                                               18%

                Panel C: Trades Coordinated through Mass-Market Advisors
    Coordination                      Respondents                Trading
    Threshold                           N=2,502           Tot. trades = 18,566
    At least 1,000 trades                     353 (14.1%)        10,884 (58.6%)
      th
    25 percentile                             330 (13.2%)        10,393 (56.0%)
    Median                                     220 (8.8%)         6,345 (34.2%)




                                                                 33
     Table II: Measuring Metacognition with Knowledge of Mutual funds
     This table reports key statistics tabulated on responses to the mutual fund question: “When selecting a mutual fund, its past returns are more important than its fees”. Responses are
     categorized into Strongly agree (MF Return), Strongly Disagree (MF Fee) and Don’t know (MF DK). Sample proportions are reported separately for the initial (nudged) and later cohorts, as
     well as the full sample. The baseline (omitted group) are those who agree or disagree somewhat. Literacy Score denotes the average score on the five-question financial literacy test reported in
     the Appendix. Default (2015) denotes the proportion of respondents in that category who were in the default fund in 2015. Average fees are expressed in basis points. The last column reports
     the fraction of respondents who are classified as using mass-market advisors (MMA’s) according to the median definition as described in Panel C of I. The data contains a total of 2,502 survey
     responses.




                                                     “When selecting an equity mutual fund,
                                                its past returns are more important than its fees”




34
                          Survey            Variable               Sample Proportion      Literacy Default Avg. Prop.
                          Responses         Definition         Nudged Later          All      Score (2015) Fees MMA
                          Strongly agree    MF Return             11.9%    8.4% 10.9%          3.39   25%    28  15%
                          Agree somewhat    Baseline              36.3% 27.3% 33.7%            3.34   30%    25   9%
                          Disagree somewhat Baseline              20.9% 15.9% 19.5%            3.58   28%    26   8%
                          Strongly disagree MF Fee                  9.6%   8.0%    9.2%        3.72   32%    25   5%
                          Don’t know        MF Don’t know         19.2% 38.3% 24.8%            2.34   49%    21   8%
                          Prefer not to say MF Don’t know           2.0%   2.0%    2.8%        1.52   46%    24   8%
Table III: Respondent Characteristics
This table tabulates the responses from the survey based on individual characteristics. The first two columns report the frac-
tion of responses compared to the sample population. The third and fourth columns report the average score on the financial literacy
test, along with Overestimation, which is the difference between the respondent’s subjective estimate of their score and their actual
score. Columns (5)-(7) reports fraction of responses to the mutual fund question described in Table II, and the last column the fraction
of people in the default fund at the end of 2015. The survey was conducted by Statistics Sweden and matched to data from the
Swedish Pensions Agency and consists of 2,502 observations.


                        Sample         Pop.         Fin. Lit.                          Mutual Fund:                   Default
                          Prop.        Prop.         Score    Overest.              Return Fee D/K                     Fund

 Overall                  100.00 100.00                3.14            0.50           0.11        0.09      0.27         0.34
 Pop. Wtd.                     -   -                   2.98            0.52           0.11        0.08      0.32         0.39

 Gender
 Men                       50.04        50.90          3.48            0.53           0.13        0.11      0.17         0.33
 Women                     49.96        49.10          2.81            0.48           0.09        0.07      0.37         0.35

 Age
 18-24                      5.36        14.40          2.81            0.25           0.07        0.05      0.50         0.96
 25-34                     16.39        21.70          3.09            0.29           0.09        0.08      0.40         0.64
 35-44                     20.18        21.00          3.15            0.44           0.12        0.11      0.26         0.30
 45-54                     28.22        21.80          3.21            0.56           0.11        0.11      0.22         0.17
 55-65                     29.86        21.10          3.17            0.65           0.12        0.08      0.21         0.25

 Income
 0-124                      9.11        23.90          2.91            0.42           0.08        0.06      0.46         0.63
 125-274                   37.85        41.50          2.78            0.57           0.10        0.07      0.36         0.40
 275-374                   29.98        21.20          3.21            0.53           0.11        0.08      0.21         0.27
 375+                      22.42        13.40          3.78            0.41           0.12        0.15      0.10         0.21

 Education
 Some school                6.08        16.00          2.60            0.68           0.08        0.09      0.38         0.28
 High school               38.85        45.80          2.82            0.65           0.12        0.07      0.30         0.29
 College                   54.84        38.20          3.43            0.38           0.11        0.11      0.23         0.38




                                                                  35
     Table IV: Household planning and financial literacy
     This table explores the connection between household planning decisions by running Probit regressions including beliefs about the importance of fees or past performance when select-
     ing mutual funds. Interesting takes the value of one if the respondent disagreed or strongly disagreed to the statement “I find personal financial matters boring” and zero otherwise. Retire,
     Advice, Sole and Equity takes the value of one if the respondent report that they have tried to figure out the amount to save for retirement; if they are willing to accept free financial advice; if
     they are the sole decision maker in the household; and if the respondent held any financial assets outside the pension account; zero otherwise. The independent variables MF Return, MF Fee and
     MF Don’t Know takes the value of one if the respondent strongly agreed, strongly disagreed or reported don’t know to the statement “When selecting a mutual fund, its past returns are more
     important than its fees” and zero otherwise. Nudged Cohort is a dummy variable taking the value of one if the respondent was in the initial 2000 cohort, zero otherwise. Rejection probabilities
     from a Wald test for difference in coefficients between MF Return and MF Fee are included at the bottom of the table. The survey was conducted by Statistics Sweden and matched to data from
     the Swedish Pensions Agency and consists of 2,502 observations. Point estimates are reported as marginal probabilities. Intercepts are included but untabulated for brevity. Robust standard
     errors are reported in parentheses; one, two and three asterisks denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1% level.



                                                       (1)                 (2)                (3)             (4)            (5)              (6)               (7)              (8)
                     VARIABLES                     Interesting         Interesting           Retire          Retire         Advice           Advice            Sole             Sole

                     MF Return                                              0.036                     -0.002                         0.099***             0.071**
                                                                           (0.034)                   (0.033)                          (0.033)             (0.035)
                     MF Fee                                               0.093**                      0.035                           -0.045               0.058
                                                                           (0.036)                   (0.036)                          (0.034)             (0.037)
                     MF Don’t know                                       -0.167***                  -0.166***                         -0.042*              -0.028
                                                                           (0.026)                   (0.026)                          (0.025)             (0.027)
                     Financial Literacy               0.100***            0.076***         0.057*** 0.034***                 0.002     -0.004  0.024***   0.018*




36
                                                       (0.009)             (0.010)          (0.009)  (0.010)                (0.008)   (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.010)
                     Nudged Cohort                    -0.072**           -0.097***           0.052     0.031                 0.029      0.022    -0.005    -0.011
                                                       (0.035)             (0.035)          (0.035)  (0.035)                (0.032)   (0.032)   (0.036)   (0.036)
                     Married                            -0.002              -0.013         0.048**   0.039*                -0.055*** -0.061*** -0.314*** -0.318***
                                                       (0.022)             (0.022)          (0.022)  (0.022)                (0.021)   (0.021)   (0.021)   (0.021)
                     Female                            -0.041*              -0.020           0.001     0.020               0.055*** 0.061*** -0.102*** -0.097***
                                                       (0.022)             (0.022)          (0.022)  (0.022)                (0.021)   (0.021)   (0.022)   (0.022)
                     Age                                0.001               0.001          0.003*** 0.003**                -0.005*** -0.005***    0.001     0.001
                                                       (0.001)             (0.001)          (0.001)  (0.001)                (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
                     Log Income                         0.013               0.007          0.050*** 0.045**                 0.021**   0.020*    0.018*    0.016*
                                                       (0.010)             (0.010)          (0.019)  (0.018)                (0.011)   (0.010)   (0.010)   (0.010)
                     University                         -0.036              -0.034         0.053**   0.055**                 0.033    0.038*   0.060*** 0.062***
                                                       (0.023)             (0.023)          (0.023)  (0.023)                (0.022)   (0.022)   (0.023)   (0.023)

                     Observations                      2,502               2,502      2,502      2,502       2,502                            2,502            2,502           2,502
                     MF Ret-MF Fee=0                      -                0.21          -        0.41         -                              0.01               -             0.77
                     Pseudo R2                         0.0474             0.0636      0.0486    0.0612      0.0184                           0.0236           0.0785          0.0810
                                                                          Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                                                              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Table V: Mutual fund beliefs and financial literacy
     This table explores the connection between financial literacy as measured by a modified version of the NFCS Big 5 Financial Literacy test and beliefs about the importance of fees or
     past performance when selecting mutual funds. The dependent variable in the first three columns is a dummy equaling one if the respondent strongly agreed to the statement “When selecting
     a mutual fund, its past returns are more important than its fees” and zero otherwise. In columns (4) through (6) the dummy is one for respondents who strongly disagreed with that statement,
     while in Columns (7) through (9) the dummy is one for those who report that they don’t know the answer to the statement. The independent variables Financial Literacy is the score from the
     test ranging from 0 to 5; Perceived Fin. Literacy is the average self-assessed score. Financial Mistakes and DK is the complement to Financial Literacy score, i.e. the number of mistakes and
     number of Don’t Know responses from the same test. Nudged Cohort is a dummy variable taking the value of one if the respondent was in the initial 2000 cohort, zero otherwise. The survey
     was conducted by Statistics Sweden and matched to data from the Swedish Pensions Agency and consists of 2,502 observations. Point estimates are reported as marginal probabilities. Intercepts
     are included but untabulated for brevity. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses; one, two and three asterisks denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1% level.



                                                  Past Returns More Important                        Fees More Important                                   Don’t Know
                                                    (1)       (2)      (3)                          (4)      (5)      (6)                         (7)          (8)                (9)

             Financial Literacy                   0.018***         0.008                         0.032*** 0.020***                            -0.140*** -0.108***
                                                   (0.005)        (0.006)                         (0.005)  (0.006)                             (0.008)   (0.009)
             Perceived Fin. Literacy                             0.019***                                 0.025***                                      -0.058***
                                                                  (0.007)                                  (0.007)                                       (0.009)
             Financial Mistakes                                                    0.001                                      -0.022***                            0.065***
                                                                                  (0.007)                                      (0.006)                              (0.011)
             DK                                                                 -0.039***                                     -0.046***                            0.192***




37
                                                                                  (0.008)                                      (0.009)                              (0.013)
             Nudged Cohort                          0.022          0.023           0.018          0.010          0.012           0.008        -0.141*** -0.144*** -0.124***
                                                   (0.020)        (0.020)         (0.020)        (0.018)        (0.017)        (0.018)         (0.034)   (0.033)    (0.035)
             Married                              0.029**        0.028**         0.028**          -0.010         -0.012         -0.011        -0.073*** -0.068*** -0.070***
                                                   (0.013)        (0.013)         (0.013)        (0.012)        (0.011)        (0.011)         (0.019)   (0.019)    (0.020)
             Female                                 -0.018         -0.013         -0.021*         -0.016         -0.010         -0.017        0.132*** 0.112*** 0.150***
                                                   (0.013)        (0.013)         (0.013)        (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.011)         (0.019)   (0.019)    (0.019)
             Age                                    0.000          -0.000          -0.000         -0.000         -0.001         -0.000          -0.001    0.000      -0.000
                                                   (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
             Log Income                             0.002          0.002           0.002         0.023**        0.020**        0.021**        -0.031*** -0.030*** -0.030***
                                                   (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.009)   (0.008)    (0.008)
             University                           -0.029**       -0.029**        -0.026**         0.011          0.011           0.012           0.015    0.014      0.005
                                                   (0.013)        (0.013)         (0.013)        (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.021)   (0.021)    (0.021)

             Observations                          2,502          2,502      2,502      2,502     2,502      2,502                              2,502           2,502           2,502
             Pseudo R2                             0.0189         0.0234    0.0288     0.0502     0.0612    0.0545                              0.219           0.233           0.255
                                                                      Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                                                         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Table VI: Default fund and turnover
     This table reports the probability to stay in the default fund and portfolio turnover for those who opt out. Columns (1) through (3) reports Probit regressions of a dummy variable that
     equals one if the respondent traded out of the default fund in the Swedish pension system as of 2015 and zero if they opted out. The independent variables MF Return, MF Fee and MF DK takes
     the value of one if the respondent strongly agreed, strongly disagreed or reported don’t know to the statement “When selecting a mutual fund, its past returns are more important than its fees”
     and zero otherwise. Columns (4) through (6) display the results of a Probit regression where the dependent variable takes the value of one if the individual traded out of default, but never made
     any other change. Nudged Cohort is a dummy variable taking the value of one if the respondent was in the initial 2000 cohort, zero otherwise. The full sample consists of 2,502 observations, the
     nudged sample refers to the 1,768 investors coming in during the year 2000, and the later sample consists of the remaining 734 later entrants. Columns (7) through (9) report OLS regressions in
     which the dependent variable is the count of number of times trade has occurred in the portfolio on the subsample of 1,648 investors who were not in the default fund as of 2015. All results are
     based on regressions using sampling weights to match the full Swedish population in the ages 18 to 65. Rejection probabilities from a Wald test for difference in coefficients between MF Return
     and MF Fee are included at the bottom of the table. Point estimates for the Probit regressions are reported as marginal probabilities. Intercepts are included but untabulated for brevity. Robust
     standard errors are reported in parentheses; one, two and three asterisks denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1% level.



                                             Traded out of Default                                  Traded Exactly Once                                    Portfolio Turnover
                                          (1)        (2)          (3)                           (4)         (5)         (6)                            (7)         (8)        (9)

      MF Return                       0.062**             -0.039             0.052           -0.069              -0.485            -0.111            -0.154             3.919             0.528
                                       (0.030)           (0.059)           (0.033)           (0.125)            (0.421)           (0.119)           (1.381)           (2.930)           (1.244)
      MF Fee                           -0.079*            -0.028            -0.034            0.053              -0.560            -0.029            -2.200            -1.861           -2.172*
                                       (0.043)           (0.062)           (0.038)           (0.145)            (0.497)           (0.136)           (1.386)           (1.595)           (1.136)
      MF Don’t know                     -0.045          -0.182***         -0.101***           0.141              0.050             0.116             -1.710             0.680            -1.345
                                       (0.031)           (0.042)           (0.027)           (0.111)            (0.307)           (0.103)           (1.290)           (1.539)           (1.075)




38
      Financial Literacy                -0.008            -0.007            -0.006            0.008              -0.058            0.000             0.414              0.606             0.391
                                       (0.010)           (0.016)           (0.009)           (0.039)            (0.120)           (0.038)           (0.564)           (0.521)           (0.465)
      Married                           0.042*             0.019           0.051**            0.102              0.130             0.102             0.273              1.308             0.449
                                       (0.022)           (0.045)           (0.022)           (0.082)            (0.235)           (0.078)           (0.982)           (1.386)           (0.847)
      Female                            -0.000             0.028            -0.002            0.014             -0.453*            -0.039            -0.467            -1.113            -0.516
                                       (0.022)           (0.039)           (0.022)           (0.087)            (0.250)           (0.081)           (1.063)           (1.332)           (0.891)
      Age                             -0.003**          0.010***             0.000            0.005              0.022             0.006             0.021              0.130             0.041
                                       (0.001)           (0.003)           (0.001)           (0.005)            (0.014)           (0.005)           (0.056)           (0.099)           (0.049)
      Log Income                      0.027**            0.062*           0.049***           -0.041              0.014             -0.032            0.073              0.622             0.233
                                       (0.012)           (0.034)           (0.016)           (0.051)            (0.094)           (0.045)           (0.574)           (0.382)           (0.469)
      University                        -0.022             0.036            -0.002           -0.083              -0.202            -0.105            -1.540           -2.395*           -1.526*
                                       (0.025)           (0.043)           (0.023)           (0.090)            (0.257)           (0.085)           (1.015)           (1.413)           (0.837)
      Nudged Cohort                                                       0.440***                                               0.441***                                               1.916*
                                                                           (0.033)                                                (0.150)                                               (1.147)

      Sample                          Nudged              Later              Full           Nudged               Later              Full           Nudged              Later               Full
      Observations                     1,768               734              2,502            1,419                229              1,648            1,419               229               1,648
      Pop. weights                      Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes                 Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes                Yes
      Wald Ret=Fee                      0.01              0.89              0.07             0.49                0.90              0.62             0.22               0.07               0.07
Table VII: Working with mass-market advisors
This table reports Probit regressions where the dependent variable that takes the value of one if classified as having used a
mass-market advisor (MMA), zero otherwise. The full sample consists of 2,502 observations, the nudged sample refers to the 1,768
investors coming in during the year 2000, and the later sample consists of the remaining 734 later entrants. Columns (1) through (3)
use a classification as being part of a collective rebalancing scheme of 1,000 coordinated changes (“Any”). Columns (4) through (6)
repeats the analysis for trades at the 50th percentile (“MMA 50”) of correlated changes, corresponding to 12,535 identical portfolio
rebalances at a given day. The independent variables MF Return, MF Fee and MF DK takes the value of one if the respondent
strongly agreed, strongly disagreed or reported don’t know to the statement “When selecting a mutual fund, its past returns are
more important than its fees”’ and zero otherwise. Sampling weights based on the Swedish working-age population are applied to
all specifications. Nudged Cohort is a dummy variable taking the value of one if the respondent was in the initial 2000 cohort, zero
otherwise. Rejection probabilities from a Wald test for difference in coefficients between MF Return and MF Fee are included at the
bottom of the table. Point estimates are reported as marginal probabilities. Intercepts are included but untabulated for brevity. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses; one, two and three asterisks denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1% level.



                                             Any (1,000 trades)                             50th (12,000 trades)
                                           (1)        (2)       (3)                       (4)        (5)         (6)
       MF Return                         0.023      -0.001    0.012                     0.057*      0.018    0.042**
                                        (0.033)    (0.019)   (0.022)                   (0.030) (0.019) (0.020)
       MF Fee                            -0.050     0.003     -0.024                   -0.047*      0.012      -0.014
                                        (0.034)    (0.019)   (0.023)                   (0.028) (0.016) (0.019)
       MF Don’t know                     -0.005     -0.021    -0.021                    0.014      -0.008      -0.000
                                        (0.029)    (0.015)   (0.018)                   (0.025) (0.009) (0.014)
       Financial Literacy                -0.011     0.001     -0.006                  -0.016** -0.000 -0.009**
                                        (0.010)    (0.004)   (0.006)                   (0.008) (0.002) (0.005)
       Married                           0.011      0.016     0.017                     -0.021      0.011      -0.004
                                        (0.021)    (0.018)   (0.015)                   (0.018) (0.011) (0.011)
       Female                            -0.020     0.002     -0.012                    -0.009      0.007      -0.003
                                        (0.022)    (0.014)   (0.015)                   (0.018) (0.007) (0.011)
       Age                               -0.001   0.001**     0.001                     0.001      0.001*     0.001*
                                        (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)                   (0.001) (0.000) (0.001)
       Log Income                        -0.002   0.029***    0.009                     0.000      0.012**     0.006
                                        (0.012)    (0.009)   (0.009)                   (0.006) (0.006) (0.004)
       University                      -0.045** -0.020* -0.033**                       -0.031*     -0.007 -0.019*
                                        (0.021)    (0.011)   (0.014)                   (0.018) (0.006) (0.010)
       Nudged Cohort                                        0.112***                                         0.072***
                                                             (0.021)                                          (0.017)

       Sample                         Nudged     Later       Full    Nudged                            Later           Full
       Observations                    1,768      734       2,502      1,768                            734           2,502
       Pop. weights                     Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes                             Yes            Yes
       Wald Ret=Fee                     0.11      0.89       0.23       0.02                           0.77            0.04
                                      Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  39
Table VIII: Choosing advisor-affiliated funds
This table reports weighted Probit regressions of a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the respondent invests in
an advisor-affiliated fund of funds (as identified by the SPA). The independent variables labelled MMA takes the value one if the
investor is classified as having used mass-market advice and zero otherwise. MF Return, MF Fee and MF DK takes the value of one if
the respondent strongly agreed, strongly disagreed or reported don’t know to the statement “When selecting a mutual fund, its past
returns are more important than its fees”, and zero otherwise. Nudged Cohort is a dummy variable taking the value of one if the
respondent was in the initial 2000 cohort, zero otherwise. Column (2) and (3) redefines the classification as being part of a collective
rebalancing scheme that belong to the 25th and 50th percentile of correlated changes, corresponding to 3,076 and 12,535 identical
portfolio rebalances at a given day in a separate sample of 480,000 retirement accounts. Column (1) to (4) display the results for all
respondents and Column (5) includes only investors who opted out of the default fund. Sampling weights based on the Swedish
working-age population are applied to all specifications. Rejection probabilities from a Wald test for difference in coefficients between
MF Return and MF Fee are included at the bottom of the table. Point estimates are reported as marginal probabilities. Intercepts
are included but untabulated for brevity. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses; one, two and three asterisks denote
statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1% level.



                                                 (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
               VARIABLES                       A-fund          A-fund         A-fund          A-fund         A-fund

               MMA / All                                                                     0.387***
                                                                                              (0.031)
               MMA / 50th                                                                             0.417***
                                                                                                       (0.039)
               Nudged 2000                                                    0.091***       0.047** 0.064***
                                                                               (0.021)        (0.020)  (0.021)
               MF Return                       0.107***          0.024        0.074***       0.070*** 0.055**
                                                (0.038)        (0.036)         (0.028)        (0.027)  (0.027)
               MF Fee                            -0.007         -0.026          -0.016         -0.004   -0.007
                                                (0.035)        (0.023)         (0.023)        (0.024)  (0.024)
               MF Don’t know                     0.043          -0.004          0.019          0.024    0.015
                                                (0.029)        (0.022)         (0.020)        (0.019)  (0.019)
               Financial Literacy              -0.015*          -0.005        -0.012*          -0.010   -0.008
                                                (0.009)        (0.007)         (0.006)        (0.006)  (0.006)
               Married                           -0.012          0.034          0.006          0.002    0.011
                                                (0.020)        (0.023)         (0.015)        (0.014)  (0.015)
               Female                            -0.022          0.007          -0.008         -0.003   -0.006
                                                (0.021)        (0.017)         (0.015)        (0.014)  (0.015)
               Age                               -0.001          0.000          0.000          -0.000   -0.001
                                                (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)  (0.001)
               Log Income                        0.000         0.026**         0.012*          0.008    0.012
                                                (0.009)        (0.012)         (0.007)        (0.006)  (0.008)
               University                        -0.002         -0.015          -0.008         0.007    0.002
                                                (0.023)        (0.019)         (0.017)        (0.017)  (0.017)

               Observations        1,768      734      2,502                                   2,502           2,502
               Sample            Nudged Later           Full                                    Full            Full
               Pop. weights         Yes       Yes        Yes                                    Yes             Yes
               MF Ret-MF Fee=0      0.02      0.20      0.01                                    0.03            0.06
                               Standard errors in parentheses
                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                                                                  40
Table IX: Fees
This table reports weighted OLS regressions on mutual fund fees. The dependent variable is the weighted average fee per-
centage they face in their fund holdings, computed by weighting each fund’s fee percentage by that fund’s weight in their portfolio at
the end of 2015. The independent variable MMA 50 takes the value one if the investor has participated in coordinated trades defined
at the median, and zero otherwise. MF Return, MF Fee and MF DK takes the value of one if the respondent strongly agreed, strongly
disagreed or reported don’t know to the statement ‘When selecting a mutual fund, its past returns are more important than its fees”,
and zero otherwise. Nudged Cohort is a dummy variable taking the value of one if the respondent was in the initial 2000 cohort,
zero otherwise. Columns (2) through (5) include variables that measure the fraction of each respondent’s fund invested in each of the
four fund types: equity funds, bond funds, target-date funds, and money market funds. Columns (1) through (4) include only those
respondents who opted out of the default fund, while Column (5) includes the full sample. Sampling weights based on the Swedish
working-age population are applied to all specifications. Investor characteristics controls correspond to those in Table VIII. Rejection
probabilities from a Wald test for difference in coefficients between MF Return and MF Fee are included at the bottom of the table.
Intercepts are included but untabulated for brevity. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses; one, two and three asterisks
denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1% level.



                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)
              VARIABLES                            Fee            Fee            Fee            Fee             Fee

              MMA / 50th                        0.076***       0.061***                     0.059*** 0.085***
                                                 (0.014)        (0.009)                      (0.009)  (0.011)
              MF Return                                                       0.021**        0.018*   0.018*
                                                                              (0.011)       (0.010)   (0.010)
              MF Fee                                                           -0.013         -0.009   -0.007
                                                                              (0.015)       (0.014)   (0.011)
              MF Don’t know                                                    -0.005         -0.005 -0.032***
                                                                              (0.009)       (0.008)   (0.007)
              Financial Literacy                  0.003          -0.002        -0.003         -0.003   -0.001
                                                 (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)  (0.003)
              Nudged Cohort                       -0.011         -0.020        -0.017         -0.021 0.070***
                                                 (0.018)        (0.014)       (0.014)        (0.014)  (0.010)
              Constant                          0.308***
                                                 (0.082)

              Observations           1,648     1,648     1,648  1,648                                         2,502
              R-squared              0.029     0.863     0.860  0.864                                         0.771
              Demographics            Yes       Yes       Yes    Yes                                           Yes
              Population weights      Yes       Yes       Yes    Yes                                           Yes
              Strategy weights        No        Yes       Yes    Yes                                           Yes
              Wald Ret=Fee             -         -        0.04   0.09                                          0.08
                                Standard errors in parentheses
                                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  41
     Table X: Performance
     This table reports the results of OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is various measures of performance: the monthly Sharpe-ratio in Columns (1) through (3); the default
     fund-adjusted raw return denoted AP7 in Columns (4) to (6); the abnormal return obtained by a two factor market model using a global and Swedish equity index, denoted Market Model in
     Columns (7) through (9); and a Fama-French-Carhart specification adding European value, size and momentum factors in Columns (9) through (12). Benchmark factor returns are obtained
     from Swedish House of Finance website. The independent variables MF Return, MF Fee and MF DK takes the value of one if the respondent strongly agreed, strongly disagreed or reported
     don’t know to the statement “When selecting a mutual fund, its past returns are more important than its fees”, and zero otherwise. A dummy variable for investors classified as having used
     mass-market advisors (at the median) is labelled “MMA 50”. Columns (3), (6), (9) and (12) report the results from the previous column, but with population weights. Characteristics include a
     constant and independent variables included in Table IV through VIII. There are 2,502 observations in the full sample, of which 1,768 people belong to the Nudged Cohort. Population weights
     are based on all Swedes in the ages 18 to 65. Rejection probabilities from a Wald test for difference in coefficients between MF Return and MF Fee are included at the bottom of the table. Intercepts
     are included but untabulated for brevity. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses; one, two and three asterisks denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1% level.



                                        (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)           (10)         (11)         (12)
           VARIABLES                  Sharpe       Sharpe        Sharpe          AP7          AP7          AP7           MKT          MKT          MKT            FFC          FFC          FFC

           MMA / 50th                                           -0.074***                               -1.662***                                -1.112***                               -0.470***
                                                                 (0.011)                                 (0.192)                                  (0.157)                                 (0.157)
           MF Return                   -0.012      -0.016         -0.013        -0.146       -0.174       -0.096         -0.252       -0.316       -0.264        -0.244       -0.271       -0.249




42
                                      (0.015)      (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.244)      (0.201)      (0.198)        (0.242)      (0.197)      (0.196)       (0.213)      (0.180)      (0.181)
           MF Fee                     0.033*        0.019          0.018        0.397         0.238        0.209         0.481         0.250        0.230       0.475*         0.281        0.272
                                      (0.018)      (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.286)      (0.210)      (0.211)        (0.309)      (0.219)      (0.220)       (0.271)      (0.197)      (0.198)
           MF Don’t know               0.018       0.017**       0.017**        0.062         0.084        0.096         0.247       0.231*       0.239**        0.250       0.262**      0.265**
                                      (0.012)      (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.180)      (0.140)      (0.137)        (0.169)      (0.123)      (0.121)       (0.158)      (0.117)      (0.117)
           Financial Literacy         0.010**      0.009**       0.009**       0.143**      0.103*         0.085        0.120*         0.085        0.073       0.105*         0.074        0.069
                                      (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.067)      (0.058)      (0.057)        (0.066)      (0.053)      (0.053)       (0.059)      (0.048)      (0.048)

           Sample                    Nudged           Full         Full       Nudged       Full       Full     Nudged                  Full         Full       Nudged          Full          Full
           Observations               1,768          2,502        2,502        1,768      2,502      2,502       1,768                2,502        2,502        1,768         2,502         2,502
           R-squared                  0.027          0.808        0.811        0.023      0.168      0.193       0.029                0.569        0.576        0.027         0.721         0.722
           Characteristics             Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes                  Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
           Cohort                      No             Yes          Yes          No         Yes        Yes         No                   Yes          Yes          No            Yes           Yes
           Pop. weights                Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes                  Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
           MF Ret-MF Fee=0             0.04           0.04         0.07         0.13       0.13       0.25        0.05                 0.04         0.07         0.03          0.03          0.04
                                                                                   Standard errors in parentheses
                                                                                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Figure 1: Beliefs about fees vs. past returns across financial literacy scores
This figure shows the number of respondents sorted on financial literacy score (“Actual Score”; bars, right scale), together
with mean self-estimated correct score, labelled Perceived Score, traced by the solid line (left scale). The dotted 45-degree line
indicates a perfect match between Actual and Perceived Score. The bars show the proportion respondents strongly agreeing or
disagreeing to the statement “When selecting a mutual fund, its past returns are more important than its fees.”



                  5                                                                                                             0.3
                          Strongly Agree, MF Return (Right scale)
                          Strongly Disagree, MF Fee (Right scale)
                          Perceived Score (LeD scale)
                  4       45-degree line




                                                                                                                                      Propor%ons MF responses
                                                                                                                                0.2
Perceived Score




                  3



                  2
                                                                                                                                0.1


                  1



                  0                                                                                                             0
                      0         1                       2                     3                      4                      5
                                                            Actual Score




                                                               43
 Figure 2: Distribution of market model alphas
 This graph displays the distribution of the αi from the regression of each respondent’s portfolio excess return on two market
 excess returns, Rit − rf t = αi + βS,i RS,t + βG,i RG,t + it , where S and G denote the Swedish excess market return and the Global
 excess market return, respectively. The dark-shaded portion of the graph correspond to αi < 0. The OLS-regression is estimated
 using monthly data from 2000 to 2015 on a sample of 1,678 respondents that were not in the default fund at the end of 2015.



           20

           18

           16

           14

           12
Frequency, %




           10

               8

               6

               4

               2

               0
                   -8   -6   -4        -2        -1        1          3        5         7         8        10        12        14
                                                           Annualized alpha, %




                                                                 44
A    Online Appendix
This Appendix contains the distribution of answers to the questions in our financial lit-
eracy survey and a plot of the belief distribution across scores of the financial literacy
test.




                                           45
Table A.1: Five Modified Financial Literacy Questions
Below are the five (“Big 5”) financial literacy questions used in the study and corresponding frequency responses on each item. Correct
answers are highlighted in boldface. The questions have been translated from Swedish into English.


    1. Compounding. Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per year.
       After 5 years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to grow?
       Please select one.
            • More than $102 (92%)
            • Exactly $102 (2%)
            • Less than $102 (3%)
            • Don’t know (2%)
            • Prefer not to say (1%)
    2. Inflation. Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was
       2% per year. After 1 year, how much would you be able to buy with the money in this account?
       Please select one.
            • More than today (6%)
            • Less than today (81%)
            • Exactly the same as today 3%)
            • Don’t know (8%)
            • Prefer not to say (2%)
    3. Diversification. Buying a single company’s stock usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual
       fund. Please select one.

            • True (4%)
            • False (76%)
            • Don’t know (19%)
            • Prefer not to say (1%)
    4. Saving. Suppose you were given 10,000 as a gift and wanted to double the amount by saving the
       money ten years without having to touch it. What interest rate would you require to achieve this
       goal? Please select one.
            • About 15% annual interest rate (6%)
            • About 10% annual interest rate (45%)
            • About 7% annual interest rate (43%)
            • Don’t know (5%)
            • Prefer not to say (1%)
    5. Bond Pricing. If interest rates fall, what should happen to bond prices? Please select one.
            • They will rise (23%)
            • They will fall (17%)
            • They will stay the same (45%)
            • Don’t know (14%)
            • Prefer not to say (1%)




                                                                 46
Table A.2: Question about beliefs and household planning
Below are the questions and responses for the mutual fund belief and household planning questions reported in Table IV. Dummy
variables taking the value of one for each response highlighted in boldface. The questions have been translated from Swedish into
English.


    1. Past returns and fees. Do you agree or disagree with the following statement when choosing a mutual
       fund:“When selecting an equity mutual fund, its past returns are more important than its fees” Please
       select one.

            • Strongly agree (11%), labelled “MF Return”
            • Agree (34%)
            • Disagree (19%)
            • Strongly disagree (9%), labelled “MF Fee”
            • Don’t know (25%), labelled “MF DK”
            • Prefer not to say (2%)
    2. Retire. Have you ever tried to figure out how much to save for retirement? Please select one.

            • Yes (48%)
            • No (49%)
            • Don’t know (1%)
            • Prefer not to say (2%)
    3. Advice. Would you be willing to accept free financial advice it was offered to you? Please select one.

            • Yes (36%)
            • No (24%)
            • Maybe, it depends (37%)
            • Don’t know (2%)
            • Prefer not to say (2%)
    4. Finance interesting. Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? “I think personal financial
       matters are boring.” Please select one.
            • Agree (12%)
            • Agree somewhat (39%)
            • Disagree (22%)
            • Strongly disagree (25%)
            • Don’t know (1%)
            • Prefer not to say (1%)
    5. Decision maker. Who is primarily respsonsible for planning the savings decisions in your household?
       Please select one.
            • Myself (50%)
            • Someone else (6%)
            • I share respsonsiblitiy (40%)
            • Financial advisor (1%)
            • Someone else in the family or friend (0%)
            • I don’t save (1%)
            • I don’t plan (1%)
            • Prefer not to say (1%)
                                                              47
Figure A.3: Beliefs about financial literacy scores
This figure shows the average beliefs distribution of self-assessed scores (“Perceived Score”, bottom scale) across actual fi-
nancial literacy score (“Actual Score”, right scale). There are 2,502 respondents in sample. The average of the belief distribution is
used to compute the variable “Perceived Score” in the main text.




                 70
                 60
Probability, %




                  50
                  40
                   30
                   20
                    10                                                                                                           5
                      0                                                                                                    4
                          0                                                                                          3
                              1                                                                               2
                                         2                                                                         Actual Score
                                                                                                       1
                                                       3
                              Perceived Score                                                  0
                                                                      4
                                                                                     5




                                                                 48
