                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DIVERGING TRENDS IN NATIONAL AND LOCAL CONCENTRATION

                                     Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
                                       Pierre-Daniel Sarte
                                        Nicholas Trachter

                                       Working Paper 25066
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25066


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2018




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. We thank Eric LaRose and Sara Ho for outstanding research assistance.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25066.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Nicholas Trachter. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Diverging Trends in National and Local Concentration
Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Nicholas Trachter
NBER Working Paper No. 25066
September 2018
JEL No. E23,L11,R12

                                           ABSTRACT

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal Reserve System. We thank Eric LaRose
and Sara Ho for outstanding research assistance.Using U.S. NETS data, we present evidence that
the positive trend observed in national product-market concentration between 1990 and 2014
becomes a negative trend when we focus on measures of local concentration. We document
diverging trends for several geographic definitions of local markets. SIC 8 industries with
diverging trends are pervasive across sectors. In these industries, top firms have contributed to the
amplification of both trends. When a top firm opens a plant, local concentration declines and
remains lower for at least 7 years. Our findings, therefore, reconcile the increasing national role
of large firms with falling local concentration, and a likely more competitive local environment.


Esteban Rossi-Hansberg                            Nicholas Trachter
Princeton University                              Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Department of Economics                           701 E Byrd Street
289 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building                Richmond, VA 23219
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021                          Nicholas.Trachter@rich.frb.org
and CEPR
and also NBER
erossi@princeton.edu

Pierre-Daniel Sarte
Research Department.
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
PO Box 27622
Richmond, VA 23261
pierre.sarte@rich.frb.org
                    Diverging Trends in National and Local Concentration∗

                         Esteban Rossi-Hansberg                         Pierre-Daniel Sarte
                          Princeton University                  Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond

                                                     Nicholas Trachter
                                            Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond


                                                      September 12, 2018


                                                             Abstract

          Using U.S. NETS data, we present evidence that the positive trend observed in national product-market
      concentration between 1990 and 2014 becomes a negative trend when we focus on measures of local concentration.
      We document diverging trends for several geographic definitions of local markets. SIC 8 industries with diverging
      trends are pervasive across sectors. In these industries, top firms have contributed to the amplification of both
      trends. When a top firm opens a plant, local concentration declines and remains lower for at least 7 years. Our
      findings, therefore, reconcile the increasing national role of large firms with falling local concentration, and a likely
      more competitive local environment.


1    Introduction
Most product markets are local. The reason is simply that the transportation of goods and people is costly so firms
set up production plants, distribution centers, and stores close to customers. In turn, individuals locate in areas
where they can obtain the goods they desire. A coffee shop or restaurant in Manhattan does not compete with similar
establishments in Seattle, and probably not even in Brooklyn. The wedge in prices created by the inconvenience
and monetary cost of buying a product far away from the desired consumption point shields companies in different
locations from direct competition. Of course the size of these costs, and therefore the geographic extent of the
market, varies by product. Markets are also product-specific. Producers of a particular product are shielded from
competition by producers of distinct but related goods and services to the degree that their consumption requires
households to move away from their ideal variety.
    Much has been written recently about the increase in national market concentration observed over the last two
decades, and the role that large national firms have played in driving this trend. The evidence for the rise in
   ∗
     Rossi-Hansberg: erossi@princeton.edu. Sarte: pdgs4frbr@gmail.com. Trachter: trachter@gmail.com. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal Reserve System.
We thank Eric LaRose and Sara Ho for outstanding research assistance.


                                                                  1
concentration is uncontroversial; the share of the largest firms and the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index, among other
measures of concentration, have increased consistently in most sectors since 1990.1 A narrative has emerged whereby
this increase in national concentration is perceived as the cause of lower product-market competition. This fall in
competition is then viewed as the culprit of other apparent trends, such as rising markups and market power (De
Loecker and Eeckhout, 2017), the increasing profits of large firms (Barkai, 2017), declining labor market dynamism
and firm entry (Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda, 2017), and a declining labor share (Autor, Dorn, Katz,
Patterson, and Van Reenen, 2017). All of these trends, and in particular those related to concentration, markups,
and profits, point to the notion that market power has been increasing. While the empirical robustness and validity
of some of these trends has been contested in recent work, the rise in national market concentration remains as their
main empirical foundation.2
       In this short paper, we document four main facts regarding national and local product-market concentration in
the U.S. economy between 1990 and 2014.3 We make use of the National Establishment Time Series (NETS) dataset
which covers the universe of U.S. firms and their plants.4 The dataset includes sales and employment numbers for
all plants at different levels of geographical and industrial disaggregation down to the SIC 8 product code.
       Our first fact is that the observed positive trend in market concentration at the national level has been accom-
panied by a corresponding negative trend in average local market concentration. We measure concentration using
the Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI), but our findings hold for a variety of statistics. We observe an increase in
concentration at the national level overall across the vast majority of sectors and industries, but a fall in concen-
tration when it is measured at the CBSA, County, or Zip code levels.5 The narrower the geographic definition, the
faster the decline in local concentration. This is meaningful because the relevant definition of concentration from
which to infer changes in competition is, in most sectors, local and not national.
       The second fact shows that local concentration is falling across SIC 8 industries that together account for
77% of employment and 70% of sales. Furthermore, conditioning on industries where national concentration is
rising, industries where local concentration has declined account for the majority of employment overall (70% of
employment and 65% of sales) across all major sectors. The presence of these diverging trends is always large but
   1
      A 2016 report by the Council of Economic Advisers, for instance, finds that the national revenue share of
the top 50 firms has increased across most NAICS sectors between 1997 and 2012.The report can be found at
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/page/files/20160414 cea competition issue brief.pdf. Gutiérrez and Philippon
(2017) show that this increase in U.S.-wide market concentration is not uniform across all sectors and has been most pronounced in
non-manufacturing sectors. Barkai (2017), and Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson, and Van Reenen (2017), find that the national sales share
of top firms has also been rising since 1997 and, in fact, helps explain the decline in the labor share over the same period.
    2
      While rising market concentration at the national level is relatively undisputed, the evidence regarding markups is more mixed. De
Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) show evidence of rising markups since the 1980s among publicly traded firms. Hall (2018) finds similarly
increasing markups at the sectoral level using KLEMS productivity data. However, Traina (2018) points out that the evidence on
markups depends crucially on the measurement of variable costs. When variable costs include marketing and management costs, as well
as other indirect costs of production, markups have been relatively flat since the mid-1980s. Similarly, Karabarbounis and Neiman (2018)
find generally flat markups over time when also accounting for selling, general, and administrative expenses. Anderson, Rebelo, and
Wong (2018) focus on the retail sector and find stable markups since 1979 using scanner data on the price of transactions and measuring
marginal costs as replacement costs at the store level. Edmond, Midrigan and Xu (2018) show that when weighted by costs rather than
sales, as implied by the microfoundations they lay out, aggreate markups have increased only modestly.
    3
      See Neumark, Zhang and Wall (2006), or Barnatchez, Crane and Decker (2017) for a thorough discussion of the advantages and
disadvantages of this data source relative to U.S. Census data.
    4
      Throughout the paper we interchangeably use the terms plant and establishment. We also treat firm and enterprise as synonymous.
    5
      In the main text, we focus mostly on ZIP codes as our geographic definition of a local market. The appendix presents results with
other geographic units.



                                                                   2
more pronounced in services, retail trade, and FIRE relative to wholesale trade and manufacturing. This ordering
is natural given that transport costs are less relevant in the latter two sectors. Together, these first two facts
underscore an unmistakable decline in local concentration on average that is pervasive across all sectors.
       How does one reconcile a positive trend in national concentration with a negative trend in local concentration?
Our third fact shows that among SIC 8 industries that exhibit this pattern, top firms have accelerated these trends.
That is, excluding the top firm in each industry (in terms of national sales in their SIC 8 industry in 2014), the
national increase in concentration becomes naturally less pronounced. Perhaps more surprisingly, the decline in
local concentration also becomes less pronounced. Put another way, large firms have materially contributed to the
observed decline in local concentration.6 Among industries with diverging trends, large firms have become bigger
but the associated geographic expansion of these firms, through the opening of more plants in new local markets, has
lowered local concentration thus suggesting increased local competition. In the considerably smaller set of industries
where we observe increases in both national and local concentration, top firms have also been responsible for both
forms of concentration.
       Our fourth fact establishes that among industries with falling local concentration, the opening of a plant by
a top firm is associated with a decline in local concentration at the time of the opening, and that this lower
level of concentration persists for at least the next 7 years. This observation provides further evidence that in
those industries, large enterprises do not enter and dominate the local market but instead lower its concentration,
either by competing with the previous local monopolist or by simply adding one more establishment that grabs
a proportional market share from other local establishments. In any case, the notion that entry by large firms
eliminates local producers to the point of increasing concentration is certainly not supported in the vast majority
of industries where most of U.S. employment resides.
       Consider the much-publicized case of Walmart. Most of Walmart’s establishments are in the discount department
stores industry, an industry with declining local concentration. Consistent with fact four, when Walmart opens a
store, the HHI falls by 0.15 in the associated ZIP code. In contrast, computing the HHI without taking into account
the opening Walmart establishment, concentration remains constant. One can also consider the effect of Walmart
on the number of firms in a market. When Walmart enters, the total number of establishments in the ZIP code
increases, though by less than one-to-one (about 3/4). In other words, Walmart generates some exit but the net
result of opening a Walmart store is a greater number of competitors in the market for at least 7 years after entry.7
This case is paradigmatic, but there are many others across all major sectors. For example, the expansion of Cemex,
the top firm by sales in 2014 in the ready-mixed concrete industry, led to a similar decline in local concentration
and an expansion in the local number of establishments in the industry.8
       Our findings challenge the view that product-market concentration is increasing in the U.S. They do so not by
   6
     This finding also holds when we exclude the top three firms in each industry instead of just the top firm.
   7
     Jia (2008) studies competition by Walmart and other discount retail stores. She proposes a structural model of this competition
and argues that the profits of previously available retailers decrease when ‘Walmart comes to town’. This is consistent with our view
that Walmart lowers concentration by taking market share away from local competitors. Moreover, the exit of firms we observe is also
consistent with those of Jia (2008) when measured at the county level. Holmes (2011) studies the expansion strategy of Walmart and,
in particular, its geographic expansion strategy. Our findings are exactly consistent with this view of geographic expansion and provide
related facts concerning its impact on local concentration. In contrast to these studies, our empirical findings extend to most U.S.
industries in addition to the discount retail sector.
   8
     This industry was singled out in Syverson (2008) as an example of an industry with a local market. We present the results of this
case in the appendix.



                                                                   3
challenging the evidence that national concentration has increased – we actually provide additional evidence to that
effect across many industries – but by observing that this national trend does not imply a positive local trend in
concentration. In fact, we show that it implies the opposite in most industries, a declining trend in concentration.
Ultimately, concentration matters because it can lead to less competition. Hence, measures of concentration have
to be aligned with product markets as well as their geographic and industrial scope. In particular, for the majority
industries, concentration is likely more relevant to firm pricing and other strategic behavior at a more local level. Our
findings are also consistent with the mixed evidence found in recent literature regarding secular changes in markups
across individual industries. If local competition matters, we should not see increases in markups or profits in
the markets where local competition is increasing. The measurement of markups in local markets associated with
particular industries depends on important assumptions and requires very detailed data. The NETS data does not
allow us to calculate these local statistics, but there exists evidence of flat markups over time in specific industries
with declining concentration (Anderson, Rebelo, and Wong, 2018), and in the aggregate (Traina, 2018).
        The facts we document are directly relevant to the design of antitrust policy and other policies that can prevent
successful firms from growing at the national level. We document heterogenous trends across industries and, in
some industries, concentration is clearly rising both at the national and local level. However, our results should
provide pause for policy-makers that worry about increases in market power. On the whole, and in most industries,
large firms are lowering local concentration and, therefore, most likely increasing product market competition.
Carl Shapiro, a former Deputy Assistant Attorney General at the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice,
and member of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers under Barack Obama, makes a similar argument.
Discussing evidence on the positive trend in national market concentration, he observes: “So, while these data do
reflect the fact that large, national firms have captured an increasing share of overall revenue during the past 20
years in many of these 893 ‘industries,’ they do not, in and of themselves, indicate that the relevant local markets
have become more concentrated.” In this paper, we provide the empirical evidence supporting the notion that, in the
face of rising national concentration, local markets have indeed become on average significantly less concentrated.9
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data, the way we use it, as well as our
benchmark measure of national and local concentration. Section 3 presents our main four facts and describes their
implications. Section 4 concludes. The appendix presents a large variety of additional calculations using other
concentration statistics, and provides additional detail regarding the data and the results in the main text.


2        Data and Concentration Statistics
Our analysis uses data from the National Establishment Time Series (NETS), which is provided by Walls & Asso-
ciates, and comprises annual observations on specific lines of business at unique locations over the period 1990−2014.
In particular, NETS data allow us to observe sales and employment of between 7 and 15 million lines of business
each year in our sample. Each line of business is assigned a data universal numbering system (DUNS) identifier
that makes it possible to track its sales and employment over time at the SIC 8 level of Standard Industrial Classi-
fication (SIC) and at specific latitudes and longitudes. Industries can be mapped into broader SIC 2 classifications
    9
   De Loecker and Eeckhout (2018) also argue that in order to measure concentration in a way that is meaningful as an indicator of
market power, this measurement has to be carried out for specific goods and local markets using the universe of firms. This is exactly
what we do in this paper using the NETS data.


                                                                  4
or divisions, and locations can be mapped into ZIP codes, counties, or Core-Based Statistical Areas (CBSAs). In
addition, each line of business is also assigned a headquarters (HQ) number that gives the particular enterprise to
which it reports. Thus, the NETS data encompass the universe of establishments operating in the U.S., and the
enterprise to which each belongs, between 1990 and 2014.
    To better illustrate the nature of the NETS data, consider the case of Walmart as an example of an enterprise. It
is headquartered in Bentonville, AR, and in 2014, it is associated with approximately 4700 establishments across all
50 states. Each of these 4700 establishment is assigned its own 8−digit primary SIC code, with 3718 establishments
operating mainly as discount department stores (SIC 53119901), 603 establishments operating mainly as warehouse
club stores (SIC 53999906), 241 establishments operating primarily as grocery stores (SIC 54110000), and the
remaining establishments scattered mostly across various retail classifications.
    Because each establishment in the NETS data is assigned a unique DUNS identifier, it is possible to track when
an establishment enters our sample (for those that enter after 1990) and, if applicable, when it exits. In addition, the
DUNS identifier follows each establishment over time even if it is sold from one enterprise to another, or becomes
included in a merger of enterprises, so that sales and employment of particular establishments may be tracked
irrespective of corporate-level changes.
    Approximately a quarter of enterprises in the NETS data have only one employee. This feature of the data
is typically not accounted for by alternative government sources of local employment as estimated by the County
Business Patterns (CBP) or the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW).10 Since these establishments
nevertheless report positive sales, we include them in our benchmark analysis. In the supplement to this paper, we
show that our results are robust to excluding enterprises with only one employee.
    At the 2−digit SIC code, the data is classified in terms of 11 divisions, including Manufacturing, Services, Retail
Trade, Wholesale Trade, and Finance, Insurance and Real Estate (FIRE), that together account for approximately
85 percent of sales and 80 percent of employment respectively in 2014. Because our analysis centers on the relation-
ship between market concentration and the geographic expansion of enterprises, we exclude from our benchmark
exercises industries that are intrinsically tied to specific locations because of weather or endowments of natural
resources. These industries include Mining, Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing, Construction, and Transportation
and Public Utilities. We also exclude from our benchmark analysis any government establishment, including estab-
lishments belonging to enterprises whose headquarters are associated with a public administration SIC code, and
establishments associated with education, non-profit endeavors, health care, and central banking.11

2.1    Measuring Concentration
Establishments in our dataset are indexed by industry, i, location, `, and year, t. Industries are defined by an
SIC 8 code. Locations are defined by a latitude-longitude pair. We denote collections of industries into broader
classifications (SIC 2 or divisions) by d. We denote collections of locations into broader geographies (ZIP codes,
   10
      Many enterprises with one employee are non-employer enterprises, or in other words, have no paid employees. While employment at
those enterprises is then at times the result of imputations, Barnatchez, Crane, and Decker (2017) show that taking out those imputations
leaves measures of local employment that are generally highly correlated with those in the CBP across industries.
   11
      We eliminate health-care from our analysis since changes in the organization of the sector driven by changes in its institutional
framework (in particular Obamacare) have generated a number of changes that are specific to this context. The appendix shows that
including the sector does not change our country-wide average implications.



                                                                   5
Counties, CBSAs, or the whole U.S.) by g. When defining locations at the CBSA level, counties that are not within
CBSAs are not represented, which amounts to between 5 and 10 percent of establishments in any given year.
                                                                                                             P
  Let Se,i,`,t denote the nominal sales of enterprise e in industry i at location ` in year t, and Se,i,g,t = `∈g Se,i,`,t
its sales in the broader geography g (i.e. the sum of all its establishments’ sales across all latitude-longitude pairs
in geography g). We then denote by se,i,g,t this enterprise’s share of all sales in industry i located in geography g at
date t. We adopt as our benchmark measure of market concentration the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index,
                                                                      X
                                                          Ci,g,t =        s2e,i,g,t ,
                                                                      e

where Ci,g,t ∈ [1/N, 1] is the sales concentration, and N the number of enterprises in (i, g, t). In the appendix, we
also consider alternative measures of concentration, such as the sales share of the top firm, top 3 firms, and the
adjusted Herfindahl, and show that all of our findings are robust to these other measures.


3     National and Local Market Concentration: The Facts
We organize the discussion of our findings into four main facts. The first two facts document the diverging trends in
national and local concentration and their importance across sectors and geographic definitions of a ‘local’ market.
The third and fourth facts document the role that large firms have played in these trends. As a form of corollary
to the last fact, we also present evidence specific to Walmart, a firm that has featured prominently in the debate
on the evolution of market concentration.

3.1    Fact 1: Diverging Trends on Average
Fact 1 is summarized in Figures (1). Figure (1a) shows a weighted average of the change in concentration, ∆Ct ,
across all industry-geography pairs (i, g) for different definitions of geography, namely ZIP code, County, CBSA,
and the whole U.S.,
                                                               X
                                                       ∆Ct =          wi,g,t ∆Ci,g,t ,
                                                                i,g

where the weights wi,g,t are given by the employment shares of industry-geography (i, g) in aggregate employment
in year t, and ∆Ci,g,t denotes the change in market concentration between year t and the first year for which we
observe sales in the location-industry pair (i, g).12
    As indicated in the 2016 CEA report, Barkai (2017), Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017), and others, market
concentration at the national level has been steadily increasing since 1990. However, the exact opposite is true
for less aggregated measures of concentration. Figure (1a) shows that the more geographically disaggregated the
measure of concentration, the more pronounced its downward trend over the last two and a half decades.
    Figure (1b) shows a weighted average of the change in concentration across all industry-geography pairs (i, g)
within a particular division, d, namely Manufacturing, Services, Retail Trade, Wholesale Trade, and FIRE, for
   12
      Given differences in the number of firms and other industry characteristics, the HHI cannot be compared directly across sector. This
is why we aggregate changes in the HHI. Using sales shares instead of employment shares as weights yields similar results, as shown in
the appendix.



                                                                      6
geographies defined by ZIP code and the whole U.S.,
                                                                                               X
                                                                                      ∆Ctd =           wi,g,t ∆Ci,g,t .
                                                                                               i∈d,g


             Figure (1b) shows that while increasing market concentration at the national level holds broadly across all
divisions, it is equally the case that concentration has steadily fallen at the ZIP code level in these divisions.
Observe, in particular, that market concentration in the Retail Trade division has been increasing nationally more
than in any other division. However, Retail Trade is also among the divisions that show the steepest decline in
concentration at the ZIP code level. This fact is especially striking given that physical retail establishments in our
dataset are likely to have very local markets.

                                                 a) Average Change in HHI from First Year                                                                          b) Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                              Across All Divisions                                                                                           National and ZIP Levels, for Each Division
                    .05




                                                                                                                                                .05
  Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                          Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                   0




                                                                                                                                         0
                          -.05




                                                                                                                                -.05
                   -.1




                                                                                                                          -.1




                                                                                                                                                        National                        ZIP
           -.15




                                                                                                                  -.15




                                                                                                                                                                    Manufacturing
                                                 National                                                                                                          Wholesale Trade
                                                 CBSA                                                                                                                Retail Trade
    -.2




                                                                                                           -.2




                                                 County                                                                                                                FIRE
                                                 ZIP                                                                                                                  Services
                    -.25




                                                                                                                              -.25




                                          1990      1995      2000             2005   2010     2014                                                   1990            1995              2000             2005             2010   2014
                                                                     Year                                                                                                                      Year

                                                                     Figure 1: Diverging national and local concentration trends



3.2                                       Fact 2: Pervasive Diverging Trends
Fact 2 is presented in Figure (2). Within each SIC 2 classification, the figure gives a breakdown of employment
in industries with different market concentration trends. In particular, for a given SIC 2 classification, the height
of each bar gives the percentage of employment in all industries within that classification that have rising market
concentration at the national level between 1990 and 2014. For each SIC 8 industry i within an SIC 2 classification,
                                    P
we compute in each year ∆Ci,t = g wi,g,t ∆Ci,g,t , where g denotes the whole U.S., and regress ∆Ci,t on t. The
height of the bar then represents the percent of labor, within that SIC 2 and across all years, employed in all SIC
8 industries with positive national concentration time trends. Thus, the major part of U.S. employment resides in
industries with rising national concentration across all SIC 2 classifications. Within a bar associated with a given
SIC 2 classification in Figure (2), the colors red, blue, and black represent, respectively, the percent of employment
that resides in industries with declining, rising, and flat market concentration at the ZIP code level.13
             Figure 2 shows the pervasiveness of SIC 8 industries with diverging trends.14 That is, a substantive share
 13                                                    P
            Specifically, in the calculation of ∆Ci,t = g wi,g,t ∆Ci,g,t , g now represents a ZIP code.
 14
            We reserve the term of ‘diverging trends’ for a case of positive national trend and a negative local trend. The case of a negative


                                                                                                      7
of employment resides in industries with rising market concentration at the national level and declining market
concentration at the ZIP code level. It also shows the heterogeneity in this share across SIC 2 divisions. For
example, in division 52, which includes General Merchandise Stores, virtually all employment resides in SIC 8
industries with diverging trends (96.38%). In contrast, in division 21, which includes Tobacco Products, none of the
SIC 8 industries exhibit a positive national trend and a negative local trend. Diverging trends are more pronounced
in Retail, FIRE and Services, than in Wholesale Trade and Manufacturing, though still very much present in the
latter two divisions.
    The proportion of aggregate U.S. employment located in all SIC 8 industries with increasing national market
concentration and decreasing ZIP code level market concentration is 43 percent. Thus, given that some industries
have also had declining concentration at both the national and ZIP code level, 77 percent (or over 3/4) of U.S.
employment resides in industries with declining local market concentration.15

                                                                    Percent of Employment in SIC8s, within Each SIC2, with Increasing National Trends
                                            100
                Percent of Employment in SIC2
                                            80
                                            60
                                            40
                                            20
                                            0




                                                  53 55 56 54 57 59 52 58   60 65 61 67 63 62 64   83 88 86 72 78 75 70 76 79 87 73 81 89 84   50 51   26 30 38 36 32 33 37 24 34 27 35 28 20 22 31 39 23 25 29 21

                                                      Retail Trade                FIRE                            Services             Wholesale Trade                     Manufacturing

                                                                                      Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and ZIP Trends
                                                                                      Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Decreasing ZIP Trends
                                                                                      Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Zero ZIP Trends


                                                                        Figure 2: Pervasive diverging trends across 2-digit sectors



3.3    Fact 3: The Role of Top Firms
Fact 3 explores the contribution that top firms –in terms of sales share– have made to the diverging trends in each
SIC 8 industry. Figures (3a) and (3b) focus on just those industries whose market concentration has increased at
the national level since 1990, represented by the height of the bars in Figure (2). Those industries account for
roughly half of all industries in our sample, 61% of aggregate U.S. employment, and 67% of aggregate sales.
    Within that set of SIC 8 industries, Figure (3a) focuses on those that exhibit negative local concentration trends.
These industries account for 70% of total employment in industries with positive national trend (65% of sales). The
figure presents in solid orange and solid red, respectively, the national HHI and the local ZIP code level HHI among
national trend and a positive local trend is also possible, though much less common in virtually all industries.
  15
     The share of national sales in sectors with decreasing local market concentration is 70%.


                                                                                                                           8
these industries. Given our industry selection, the national concentration (orange) line is increasing by construction
and the local concentration (red) line is decreasing by construction. The dashed orange and dashed red lines in that
figure depict the same objects but excluding the top enterprise in each SIC 8 industry as measured by sales in 2014.16
We consider only industry-geography pairs (i, g) for which i’s top enterprise has at least one establishment present
in g in at least one year. Furthermore, because we are interested in isolating the effect of the top enterprise on
market concentration, among those remaining industry-geography pairs, we then only include observations (i, g, t)
where at least one establishment remains after dropping the top enterprise in i and its associated establishments.17
              Figure (3a) shows that among SIC 8 industries with diverging trends, excluding the top firm results in a national
concentration trend that is less pronounced. The fact that large firms have contributed to the national increase
in concentration is as expected. More surprising is the observation that the top firms have also contributed to
the decline in local concentration. Figure (3a) shows that when we exclude the top firm, the negative trend in
ZIP-code-level concentration is less pronounced. Hence, the top firm (and more generally the largest firms) in an
industry are responsible (though not entirely) for the diverging trends.
              Figure (3b) is constructed exactly as Figure (3a) but uses the SIC 8 industries with increasing national trends
which are not depicted in Figure (3a). In other words, it uses the SIC 8 industries with positive national and local
trends. The figure shows that for this set of industries, excluding the top firm lowers both the national and the
local trend in concentration. Over the last ten years or so, it also shows that excluding the top firm reduces the
trend in national concentration significantly more than that in local concentration.

                                                       a) Average Change in HHI from First Year                                                                                     b) Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                   Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                  Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                                                                  .15
                     .1
   Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                            Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                   .05




                                                                                                                                                           .1
                            0




                                                                                                                                                .05
                   -.05




                                                                                                                                        0
            -.1




                                                                                                                               -.05
    -.15




                                             Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise                                                                            Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise
                                                                 ZIP Level                                                                                                                    ZIP Level
                                                               National Level                                                                                                               National Level
                     -.2




                                                                                                                                                -.1




                                           1990           1995            2000            2005        2010       2014                                                   1990           1995            2000            2005        2010       2014
                                                                                 Year                                                                                                                         Year

                                                                      Figure 3: The role of top firms in national and local concentration trends

              How can the growth of large firms contribute to the divergence in these trends? To a large extent, top enterprises
expand by adding new establishments in new locations. The new establishments tend to decrease local concentration
as they compete with existing establishments in the area, even as the top firm acquires a larger national market
share, increasing national concentration. Next, we explore the impact of local entry by a top firm.
  16
    We show in the appendix that we obtain similar results when we exclude the top 3 firms rather than only the top firm.
  17
    We also exclude industry-geography pairs whose first year of observed sales results from only one establishment belonging to the top
enterprise, since the change in market concentration cannot be computed in that case.




                                                                                                                        9
3.4      Fact 4: When a Top Firm Comes to Town
To further illustrate the impact of an industry’s top enterprise on market concentration at the local level, Figure (4)
presents an event study describing the effect of local entry by an establishment associated with a top firm (defined
by 2014 sales in an SIC 8 industry as in Fact 3) in a ZIP code. Specifically, Figure (4) examines the effect of a top
firm opening a new establishment in a ZIP code on local market concentration. The calculations here mimic those
in Figure (3). In Figure (4), the x−axis plots a 10−year window surrounding a top firm establishment opening in a
given ZIP code, with 0 denoting the opening year. To better highlight the net effect of entry on concentration, we
normalize the change in concentration to zero in the year prior to the establishment opening.
       Figure (4a) depicts the event study for all SIC 8 industries with increasing market concentration at the national
level and decreasing local market concentration, that is, SIC 8 industries with diverging trends. Figure (4b) illus-
trates findings for the remaining SIC 8 industries with increasing national concentration: those where both national
and local trends are positive over our sample period. The solid lines in both figures present the evolution of the
HHI index when the entering establishment is included; the dashed lines illustrate the same object when excluding
the opening establishment owned by the top enterprise within each industry.
       Among industries with diverging trends, the opening of an establishment in a ZIP code is associated with a fall
in market concentration. Moreover, this fall persists at about the same size for at least 7 years after the event.
In contrast, among industries with increasing local market concentration, the opening of an establishment leads to
a temporary decrease in market concentration but one that reverses quickly. After 4 to 5 years, concentration is
higher than it would have been absent the opening. Hence, in the former case, the establishment owned by the top
enterprise does not become dominant, while in the latter case it eventually dwarfs the establishments of other firms.
The data suggest that on the whole, the case where the top firm does not become dominant at the local level is
markedly more relevant.18
       The dashed lines in both panels of Figure (4) suggest that when all shares are re-calculated excluding sales of
the opening establishment belonging to the top enterprise in each industry, market concentration does not exhibit
a significant trend over the entire 10−year window. Thus, the dashed-lines lend credibility to a central assumption
underlying the event study, namely that entry by a top enterprise in a local market is the main event affecting
concentration in each market.

3.4.1      The Case of Walmart

The event study presented in Fact 4 averages the effect of entry by a top enterprise across many markets. It is
informative, therefore, to further delve into the data within a particular sector. In the last couple of decades, one
of the most widely studied cases of an expanding firm has been the case of Walmart.19 Hence, here we repeat the
calculations underlying Fact 4 but for the particular case of Walmart and the SIC 8 industries with which it is
  18
     Neumark, Zhang and Wall (2006) and Barnatchez, Crane and Decker (2017) argue that NETS dataset might at times be slow in
reporting the entry and exit of small firms. Given their findings, one might question the extent to which our results are driven by the
exit of small firms not being reported accurately. However, the fact that the fall in the HHI persists for up to 7 years diminishes this
potential concern. Another potential concern is that ZIP codes are too narrow a geographic definition of a market. In the appendix, we
show that the fall in the local HHI as a result of local entry by a top enterprise in industries with diverging trends holds and persists
when we using counties rather than ZIP codes.
  19
     See, for example: Basker (2007), Jia (2008), Ailawadi, Zhang, Krishna, Krueger (2010), Zhu, Singh, Manuszak (2009), Holmes (2011).



                                                                   10
                                                 a) Average Change in HHI after Top Enterprise Opening                                                                               b) Average Change in HHI after Top Enterprise Opening
                                                         Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                         Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends
                      .03




                                                                                                                                                          .03
    Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                        Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                  .01




                                                                                                                                                                      .01
                        -.01




                                                                                                                                                            -.01
                                                                                                    Including Top Enterprise
                                                                                                    Excluding Top Enterprise
               -.03




                                                                                                                                                   -.03
       -.05




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Including Top Enterprise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Excluding Top Enterprise
                      -.07




                                                                                                                                                          -.07
                                            -3      -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5         6       7                                                -3      -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5         6   7
                                                           Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code                                                                               Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code

                                                                           Figure 4: Effect on concentration when a top firm enters a local market


associated. The solid line depicted in Figure (5a) represents a weighted average of concentration within Walmart’s
primary industry (discount department stores) across all ZIP codes. The dashed line represents the same object
but excluding the opening establishment owned by Walmart (i.e. all shares are re-calculated excluding Walmart’s
sales from the new establishment).
               Our findings for Walmart are qualitatively similar to those in Fact 4 for industries with diverging trends (as
is the case for Walmart’s industries). Absent a Walmart opening, there is no trend in concentration, but there
is a significant fall in the HHI of a ZIP code in which Walmart opens a new establishment. This lower level of
concentration remains about constant for at least 7 years.
               One advantage of considering a particular firm and its industries is that we can also show, and easily interpret,
the effect of entry on the number of establishments in the local market. To do so, Figure (5b) illustrates the effect of
a Walmart establishment opening in a given ZIP code on the number of establishments in that ZIP code. The solid
line in the figure indicates that, when averaged across all ZIP codes (weighted by geography-SIC 8 employment,
as in all other figures), the opening of a Walmart establishment is associated with an increase in the number of
local establishments. This increase is somewhat less than one-for-one (roughly 0.75) which suggests that the entry
of Walmart is associated with some establishment exits across ZIP codes. Consistent with this observation, the
dashed line indicates that when the newly established Walmart is excluded from the calculation, the number of
establishments falls somewhat across ZIP codes.20


4                                Conclusions
We have shown, by way of four main facts, that the increase in market concentration observed at the national
level over the last 25 years is being shaped by enterprises expanding into new local markets. This expansion into
local markets is accompanied by a fall in local concentration as firms open establishments in new locations. These
    20
    Consistent with the findings in Jia (2008) and Basker (2007), carrying out these calculations at the county level reveals a more
pronounced effect of Walmart’s entry on firm exit. Nevertheless, the decline in the HHI is still large on impact and still negative after 7
years.



                                                                                                                                   11
                                            a) Average Change in HHI Before and After Walmart Openings                                                                         b) Avg. Number of Estab. Before and After Walmart Openings
                                                         Within SIC8 53119901, Discount Department Stores                                                                                 Within SIC8 53119901, Discount Department Stores
                   .05




                                                                                                                                                                         3.5
                                                                                                                                 Average Number of Establishments in ZIP
    Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                            3
                      -.05




                                                                                             With Walmart Entering                                                                                                            With Walmart Entering
                                                                                             Without Walmart Entering                                                                                                         Without Walmart Entering




                                                                                                                                            2.5
  -.15       -.1




                                                                                                                                 2
                                             -3   -2     -1     0       1      2      3        4       5     6          7                                                      -3    -2   -1     0       1      2      3        4       5     6          7
                                                               Years Since Walmart Opening in ZIP                                                                                               Years Since Walmart Opening in ZIP

                                                       Figure 5: Effect on concentration and the number of firms when Walmart enters a local market


observations are suggestive of more, rather than less, competitive markets.
                    The findings in this paper potentially help reconcile the observation of increasing concentration at the national
level and the more mixed evidence on increasing markups and profits. Virtually no theory of product market
competition associates decreasing concentration with either increasing markups or increasing profits. Our facts
also indicate that the rising trend in national concentration is not, in and of itself, necessarily a concern for anti-
trust policy. By decreasing local concentration, the growth of top firms has likely increased local competition and,
therefore, helped improve the quality and reduce the prices of much of what we buy.




                                                                                                                            12
References
 [1] Ailawadi, Kusum L., Aradhna Krishna, Michael W. Kruger, and Jie Zhang. 2010. “When Wal-Mart
    Enters: How Incumbent Retailers React and How This Affects Their Sales Outcomes.” Journal of Marketing
    Research. 47 (4): 577-93.

 [2] Anderson, Eric, Sergio Rebelo, and Arlene Wong. 2018. “Markups Across Space and Time.” NBER
    Working Paper 24434.

 [3] Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen. 2017.
    “The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms.” NBER Working Paper 23396.

 [4] Barkai, Simcha. 2017. “Declining Labor and Capital Shares.”
    http://facultyresearch.london.edu/docs/BarkaiDecliningLaborCapital.pdf.

 [5] Barnatchez, Keith, Leland D. Crane, and Ryan A. Decker. 2017. “An Assessment of the National
    Establishment Time Series (NETS) Database.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-110.

 [6] Basker, Emek. 2007. “The Causes and Consequences of Wal-Mart’s Growth.” Journal of Economic Perspec-
    tives 21 (3): 177-98.

 [7] Choi, Taelim, John C. Robertson, and Anil Rupasingha. 2013. “High-Growth Firms in Georgia.”
    Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 2013-20.

 [8] Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2017. “Declining Dy-
    namism: Allocative Efficiency, and the Productivity Slowdown.” American Economic Review: Papers & Pro-
    ceedings. 107 (5): 322-6.

 [9] De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2017. “The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic Implica-
    tions.” NBER Working Paper 23687.

[10] De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2018. “Global Market Power.” NBER Working Paper 24768.

[11] Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2018. “How Costly are Markups?” NBER
    Working Paper 24800.

[12] Fulton, Brent D. 2017. “Health Care Market Concentration Trends in the United States: Evidence and
    Policy Responses.” Health Affairs 36 (9): 1530-1538.

[13] Gutiérrez, Germán, and Thomas Philippon. 2017. “Declining Competition and Investment in the U.S.”
    NBER Working Paper 23583.

[14] Hall, Robert E. 2018. “New Evidence on the Markup of Prices Over Marginal Costs and the Role of Mega-
    Firms in the US Economy.” NBER Working Paper 24574.

[15] Holmes, Thomas J. 2011. “The Diffusion of Wal-Mart and Economics of Density.” Econometrica 79 (1):
    253-302.

                                                      13
[16] Jia, Panle. 2008. “What Happens When Wal-Mart Comes to Town: An Empirical Analysis of the Discount
    Retailing Industry.” Econometrica 76 (6): 1263-1316.

[17] Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2018. “Accounting for Factorless Income.” NBER Working
    Paper 24404.

[18] Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Brandon Wall. 2006. “Employment Dynamics and Business Relo-
    cation: New Evidence from the National Establishment Time Series.” NBER Working Paper 11647.

[19] Syverson, Chad. 2004. “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example.” Journal of Political
    Economy, 112 (6): 1181-1222.

[20] Syverson, Chad. 2008. “Markets: Ready-Mixed Concrete.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22 (1): 217-33.

[21] Traina, James. 2018. “Is Aggregate Market Power Increasing? Production Trends Using Financial State-
    ments.” Stigler Center New Working Paper Series No. 26.

[22] Walls & Associates. 2014. “National Establishment Time-Series (NETS) Database.”

[23] Zhu, Ting, Vishal Singh, and Mark D. Manuszak. 2009. “Market Structure and Competition in the
    Retail Discount Industry.” Journal of Marketing Research. 46 (4): 453-66.




                                                      14
Appendix

A        Data Description
A.1       NETS
The National Establishment Time Series (NETS) is made available through Walls & Associates, which relies on
data compiled by Dun & Bradstreet (D&B). D&B provides each business establishment, corresponding to a distinct
business activity by an enterprise at a specific location, a unique 9-digit Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS)
number, which remains with that establishment even in the case of broader corporate-level changes, name changes,
and relocations.21 Each year, D&B compiles data for its Duns Marketing Information file on business characteristics
of every establishment, including its sales, employment, location, primary industry, and the DUNS number of the
establishment to which it reports (i.e. its parent company).22 As described by Neumark, Zhang, and Wall (2006),
as well as Barnatchez, Crane, and Decker (2017), D&B makes an exhaustive effort to ensure that the file accurately
covers the entire universe of business establishments, relying on many sources of information including direct phone
calls, Yellow Pages, newspapers, and multiple government agencies. Furthermore, D&B and the establishments
from which they gather information both have incentives to ensure information is accurate.
       While D&B compiles annual cross-sections of establishment characteristics, Walls & Associates aggregates these
files into a longitudinal database that makes it possible to track the birth and death of establishments. Neumark et
al. (2007) note that this process requires imputation of sales and employment to many establishment-year pairings.
       We use the NETS database to gather data on employment, sales, and the primary industry (8-digit SIC code)
for each establishment for each year from 1990 through 2014, as well as the DUNS number of the establishment’s
headquarters in each year (HQ or enterprise number). In each year, an enterprise is then defined as a collection
of all the establishments with a given HQ number. We additionally collect the establishment’s county, ZIP code,
and legal status, as well as the most recent HQ number of the establishment.23 The data is provided in wide form,
with one observation per establishment and separate variables for establishment characteristics in each year, but we
reshape the data into long form with one observation per establishment-year. We then drop any observations that
have missing employment, sales, industry, or HQ numbers, and consider an establishment to “exist” in a given year
if it has an observation associated with it (i.e. it has non-missing employment, sales, industry, and HQ numbers).
We can then see the first year in which each establishment exists (its entry year) and the last year (its exit year).24
       Among these remaining establishment-year pairs, we identify the industry corresponding to the headquarters for
each enterprise, and drop any establishments belonging to an enterprise whose headquarters has an SIC 8 industry
code corresponding to the Public Administration division. We then drop any establishments which have an SIC 8
code either equal to 73899999 (Business Activities at Non-Commercial Sites), falling under Public Administration
(even if their enterprise headquarters do not), the Educational Services 2-digit SIC sector (SIC 2 82), the Health
Services 2-digit SIC sector (SIC 2 80), or the SIC 3-digit code 601, Central Reserve Depository. Additionally, we
  21
     If an establishment goes out of business, its DUNS number will not be re-used.
  22
     This file contains data on many other establishment characteristics that we do not consider in this paper.
  23
     The NETS database additionally has a variable for the business name, allowing us to identify the firms associated with specific HQ
numbers.
  24
     Establishments that exist in 1990 are assigned 1990 as their entry year, as we have no data on them prior to this year. Likewise,
establishments which exist in 2014 have that as their exit year.


                                                                  15
drop any establishments whose HQ number corresponds to the United States Postal Services (USPS), whose legal
status identifies them as a non-profit organization, or which are in counties located outside of the 50 U.S. states and
the District of Columbia. Among remaining establishments, we keep only those whose primary industry falls into
one of the following five divisions: Manufacturing; Wholesale Trade; Retail Trade; Finance, Insurance, and Real
Estate (FIRE); and Services.
                In the remaining dataset, we have roughly 38 million unique establishments spread across approximately 290
million establishment-year pairs. Figure (6a) shows the number of establishments in our sample in each year, while
Figure (6b) shows total employment. Employment increases steadily in the first 10 years of the sample but has
largely flattened out since 2000. The number of establishments, on the other hand, continues to increase considerably
through 2009.

                                                            Figure 6: Employment and Establishment Counts in NETS Database, 1990-2014
                                                  Number of Establishments in NETS Database                                                        Aggregate Employment in NETS Database




                                                                                                                         110
                   20
  Number of Establishments (Millions)




                                                                                                          Aggregate Employment (Millions)
                                                                                                                              100
         10              15




                                                                                                                90       80
                   5




                                        1990         1995        2000          2005   2010    2014                                          1990     1995      2000          2005    2010   2014
                                                                        Year                                                                                          Year




A.1.1                                          Data Quality

A number of researchers have attempted to compare the scope and accuracy of the NETS database to official
sources such as the County Business Patterns (CBP), the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW),
the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), and Census Nonemployer Statistics (CES). Neumark et al. (2006);
Neumark, Wall, and Zhang (2011); and Barnatchez et al. (2017) find that NETS reports substantially higher aggre-
gate employment than these sources. This discrepancy seems to arise primarily from the inclusion of nonemployer
establishments, which consist only of business owners and have no paid employees, in the NETS data; such estab-
lishments are generally not counted in government employment data. Since nonemployer establishments tend to
have very small employment numbers, NETS vastly overstates the number of establishments in the 1-4 employee bin
compared to Census counts of establishments with employment in this range, as noted by Neumark et al. (2006) and
Barnatchez et al. (2017). Using an extract of the NETS data covering Georgia, Choi, Robertson, and Rupasingha
(2013) find that, compared to the QCEW, NETS has nearly 75% more establishments in the state in 2000 and
roughly three times as many in 2009.
                In the main text, we include these nonemployer establishments because they do report positive sales. Following


                                                                                                     16
the advice of Barnatchez et al. (2017), however, we show later in this appendix that the results hold when modifying
the data to attempt to remove such establishments. While Neumark et al. (2006) argue that subtracting one from
establishments’ employment counts to remove business owners makes the NETS universe comparable to that of offi-
cial sources and eliminates most nonemployer establishments, Barnatchez et al. (2017) instead propose subtracting
one from employment counts at the headquarters of each enterprise, because enterprise owners will generally only
be counted at their headquarters. Along those lines, we present an alternative specification in which, for each year,
we exclude sales and employment from all enterprises that report only one employee.
            However, there is some evidence that dropping single-employee enterprises may not remove the entire set of
nonemployers. While over one-quarter of establishment-year pairs in our dataset have only one employee, nearly as
many report two employees. Furthermore, because the CBP and LBD report establishment counts in employment
bins, we can only compare the number of establishments with between 1 and 4 employees in NETS and these other
sources. In fact, Barnatchez et al. (2017) find that NETS still overcounts the number of establishments in this
range even after dropping single-employee enterprises. Consequently, we explore a second specification in which
we exclude sales and employment from all enterprise-year pairs reporting four or fewer employees.25 Surely there
are many employer establishments falling into this size range, so this specification should be interpreted as a very
conservative attempt to remove the influence of nonemployer establishments in the database. Figure (7) supports
this notion by showing that single-employee enterprises contain an immaterial percentage of aggregate sales and
employment but dropping enterprises with fewer than 5 employees removes shares well over four times as large.
Additionally, it is worth noting that while Neumark et al. (2006) and Barnatchez et al. (2017) note a high rate of
imputation in establishments’ reported employment and sales numbers, such imputation is mostly prevalent among
smaller establishments, and so dropping small enterprises should eliminate the main share of imputed values.
                                                Figure 7: Percent of Employment and Sales in Small Enterprises, 1990-2014
                                    Percent of Employment in Small Enterprises                                                       Percent of Sales in Small Enterprises
             25




                                                                                                                  15
                        20
  Percent of Employment




                                                                                                           Percent of Sales
                                                                                                                        10
       10       15




                                                                                                          5
             5
             0




                                                                                                                  0




                             1990     1995          2000           2005            2010       2014                            1990   1995         2000           2005            2010       2014
                                                           Year                                                                                          Year

                                         One Employee             Fewer than Five Employees                                            One Employee             Fewer than Five Employees




            There are two other potential issues regarding the NETS database to be addressed. First, Neumark et al. (2006)
observe that NETS can be slow to report the birth and death of establishments, often operating on a two-to-three
year lag in such cases. Second, the NETS data reported for each year are collected primarily in the prior year, and
  25
    Since the vast majority of enterprises only have one establishment, results removing establishments based on establishment size
rather than enterprise size should be roughly equivalent.


                                                                                                     17
unlike official government sources NETS data are collected throughout the year, with establishments potentially
reporting data at different months in different years.26 Because our dataset encompasses a 25-year period, such lags
and inconsistencies in data collection timing should not affect the long-term trends we observe in the main text.

A.2       SIC 8 Codes
Our benchmark definition of an industry is an 8-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code. The first four
digits of each SIC 8 code (SIC 4 codes) are created and determined by U.S. government agencies and assigned to
business establishments. D&B supplements these codes with an additional four digits, providing a much finer level
of detail regarding establishments’ primary activities; there are over 18, 000 unique 8-digit SIC codes compared to
only about 1, 000 unique SIC codes at the 4-digit level and 84 at the 2-digit level. Each SIC code is also assigned
to one of 11 divisions, five of which we consider in this paper.27
       To better illustrate this “hierarchy” of SIC codes, consider the case of Walmart. As mentioned in the main
text, the large majority of Walmart’s establishments in 2014 have SIC 8 53119901, Discount Department Stores,
as their primary industry. This SIC 8 is a subset of SIC 4 5311, Department Stores, which also contains three
other industries including SIC 8 53119902, Non-discount Department Stores. This SIC 4 code is further contained
within the General Merchandise sector, SIC 2 53, which encompasses other industries corresponding to, for instance,
Warehouse Club Stores and Miscellaneous General Merchandise. Finally, the Retail Trade division contains these
industries and others as diverse as Grocery Stores, Optical Goods Stores, Eating Places, and Hardware Stores.
       Individual SIC 8 codes vary widely in their sizes as measured by employment, sales, and the number of estab-
lishments. For instance, among the 15, 102 SIC 8 codes considered in the main text, over one-quarter of these have
reported 2014 employment of fewer than 100 employees across all establishments with that primary industry.28 On
the other hand, there are 182 industries with greater than 100, 000 reported employees, with the Discount Depart-
ment Stores industry having over 1.8 million. Overall, industries in Retail Trade, FIRE, and Services have much
higher employment on average than industries in Manufacturing and Wholesale Trade.
       To get a better sense of this heterogeneity across industries, Table (1) shows total employment and the number of
SIC 8 industries within each of our 50 SIC 2 sectors in 2014, as well as the division into which each SIC 2 code falls.
Even at the sector level, there are huge differences in these variables. Over 10 million employees work in the Business
Services sector, while many sectors in the Manufacturing division have only a few hundred thousand employees.
Sectors in Retail Trade, FIRE, and Services tend to have higher employment than sectors in Manufacturing and
Wholesale Trade, while the latter two divisions encompass over three-quarters of all SIC 8 codes.
  26
     Some researchers roll back NETS data one year, but Barnatchez et al. (2017) find more favorable comparisons with government
sources leaving years unchanged.
  27
     In addition to the primary 8-digit SIC code of each establishment, the NETS database reports the establishment’s primary North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code. While government agencies developed the SIC system in the early 1900s,
the Office of Management and Budget developed the NAICS system in 1992 to better reflect changes in the structure of the economy.
Although the NAICS system contains a higher share of codes in more service-oriented industries, the most detailed NAICS code level only
contains roughly 1, 100 industries, a level of aggregation much more comparable to the 4-digit than the 8-digit SIC code. Consequently,
we use SIC 8 codes as they offer by far the most granular available definition of an industry.
  28
     Approximately 90% of these industries are in the Manufacturing division.




                                                                  18
                                 Table 1: Employment and Number of SIC 8 Codes in Each SIC 2 Sector in 2014
SIC 2 Code           SIC 2 Description               Division       Employment in 2014 (Thousands)   Number of SIC 8 codes in 2014   Mean SIC 8 employment in 2014
                                                                                                                                             (Thousands)

20              Food and Kindred Products         Manufacturing                 1637                             805                              2
21                   Tobacco Products             Manufacturing                   25                              11                              2
22                  Textile Mill Products         Manufacturing                  343                             587                              1
23           Apparel, Finished Products from      Manufacturing                  386                             385                              1
               Fabrics and Similar Materials
24             Lumber and Wood Products,          Manufacturing                  699                             371                              2
                      Except Furniture
25                 Furniture and Fixtures         Manufacturing                  429                             262                              2
26               Paper and Allied Products        Manufacturing                 680                              328                              2
27            Printing, Publishing and Allied     Manufacturing                 1472                             299                              5
                          Industries
28            Chemicals and Allied Products       Manufacturing                 1345                             643                              2
29            Petroleum Refining and Related      Manufacturing                 189                               75                              3
                          Industries
30           Rubber and Miscellaneous Plastic     Manufacturing                  895                             334                              3
                           Products
31             Leather and Leather Products       Manufacturing                  101                             162                              1
32           Stone, Clay, Glass, and Concrete     Manufacturing                  576                             516                              1
                           Products
33                Primary Metal Industries        Manufacturing                  610                             345                              2
34               Fabricated Metal Products        Manufacturing                 1488                             736                              2
35               Industrial and Commercial        Manufacturing                 2144                             1123                             2
                  Machinery and Computer
                         Equipment
36            Electronic and Other Electrical     Manufacturing                 1967                             694                              3
                Equipment and Components
37               Transportation Equipment         Manufacturing                 1802                             373                              5
38                Measuring, Photographic,        Manufacturing                 1401                             784                              2
             Medical, and Optical Goods, and
                            Clocks
39             Miscellaneous Manufacturing        Manufacturing                  570                             627                              1
                          Industries
50           Wholesale Trade - Durable Goods      Wholesale Trade               4527                             1104                             4
51             Wholesale Trade - Nondurable       Wholesale Trade               2966                             653                              5
                            Goods
52             Building Materials, Hardware,       Retail Trade                 1400                              77                              18
                Garden Supplies and Mobile
                            Homes
53              General Merchandise Stores         Retail Trade                 3346                              11                             304
54                       Food Stores               Retail Trade                 3935                              61                              65
55           Automotive Dealers and Gasoline       Retail Trade                 2783                              68                              41
                       Service Stations
56             Apparel and Accessory Stores        Retail Trade                 1462                              78                              19
57           Home Furniture, Furnishings and       Retail Trade                 1279                             125                              10
                     Equipment Stores
58              Eating and Drinking Places         Retail Trade                 10446                             81                             129
59                  Miscellaneous Retail           Retail Trade                  4446                            358                             12
61           Nondepository Credit Institutions        FIRE                       749                              65                             12
62           Security and Commodity Brokers,          FIRE                       901                              56                             16
              Dealers, Exchanges and Services
63                   Insurance Carriers               FIRE                      1191                              77                              15
64            Insurance Agents, Brokers and           FIRE                      1373                              27                              51
                            Service
65                       Real Estate                  FIRE                      4217                              63                              67
67             Holding and Other Investment           FIRE                      1679                              48                              35
                            Offices
70           Hotels, Rooming Houses, Camps,          Services                   2736                              49                              56
                 and Other Lodging Places
72                    Personal Services              Services                   2501                             168                              15
73                    Business Services              Services                   10524                            487                              22
75           Automotive Repair, Services and         Services                   1822                             106                              17
                           Parking
76             Miscellaneous Repair Services         Services                    928                             227                              4
78                    Motion Pictures                Services                    535                             67                               8
79              Amusement and Recreation             Services                   2357                             306                              8
                           Services
81                      Legal Services               Services                   1869                             25                               75
83                      Social Services              Services                   2755                             109                              25
84              Museums, Art Galleries and           Services                   125                              15                                8
             Botanical and Zoological Gardens
86               Membership Organizations            Services                   3025                             125                              24
87                Engineering, Accounting,           Services                   7927                             198                              40
                Research, and Management
                           Services
89           Services, Not Elsewhere Classified      Services                    734                              46                              16




                                                                           19
A.2.1    Percent of Sector-Level Employment in Industries with Diverging Trends

Table (2) provides more detail for Figure (2) in the main text and further highlights this degree of heterogeneity by
displaying the exact percentages of employment in each sector and division across industries with diverging trends.
In the column headings, αn and αz refer to the coefficients obtained from regressing the weighted average change
in the HHI in each industry on the year with a constant at the national and ZIP code levels, respectively. The first
three columns to the right of the sector and division descriptions show the percentage of employment in industries
that have a positive national trend and positive, negative, and flat ZIP code trends, respectively. The last column
displays the percentage of employment in industries with positive national trends located in industries that also
have negative local trends. In all five divisions, over half of employment in industries with positive national trends
is also located in industries that have declining concentration over time at the ZIP code level.


B     Robustness
In the remainder of this appendix, we show that the benchmark results in the main text are robust to both different
measures of market concentration, and to various modifications of the NETS database.

B.1     Different Measures of Concentration
While the figures in the main text all rely on the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI), here we replicate them for
alternative measures of concentration. In particular, we look at the adjusted HHI, which modifies the HHI for
the number of enterprises in a market, as well as the share of the top enterprise, as measured by sales, for each
geography-industry-year grouping. For reasons discussed in more detail below, we believe the HHI used in the main
text remains the best measure of concentration; however, the results in this section show that all the findings in the
main text still hold using these alternative measures.

B.1.1    Adjusted HHI

Let Ci,g,t denote the HHI for industry i in geography g in year t, and let Ni,g,t denote the number of enterprises
in this industry-geography-year grouping. Then Ci,g,t ∈ [1/Ni,g,t , 1]. Because Ci,g,t is bounded below by the inverse
of the number of enterprises, comparisons of the HHI between groupings with different numbers of enterprises can
be somewhat difficult. A grouping with only a handful of enterprises will tend to have a much higher HHI than a
grouping with dozens of enterprises (or alternatively, the HHI in an industry-geography pair will tend to decrease
over time if the number of enterprises in that pair increases).
    In contrast, the adjusted Herfindahl-Hirschman Index for any pair with more than 1 enterprise can take on any
                                                                                                           ∗ , can
value between 0 and 1, inclusive. In particular, the adjusted HHI of industry i in geography g in year t, Ci,g,t
be defined as                                                       1
                                                       Ci,g,t − N
                                                                    i,g,t
                                                   
                                         ∗
                                                   
                                                         1− N    1          Ni,g,t > 1
                                        Ci,g,t =                i,g,t                    .                        (1)
                                                   
                                                    1                      Ni,g,t = 1

For groupings with a very large numbers of enterprises (for example, most groupings with a geography defined at


                                                              20
                  Table 2: Percent of Sector Employment in Industries with Diverging Trends
Division   SIC2             Description            Pct. Emp αn > 0, αz > 0   Pct. Emp αn > 0, αz < 0   Pct. Emp αn > 0, αz = 0   Pct. Emp αz < 0|αn > 0

D                         Manufacturing                     27.44                     33.82                     2.78                     52.82
D           20        Food and Kindred Prod.                36.94                     29.6                      3.66                     42.16
D           21             Tobacoo Prod.                    17.18                       0                       3.79                       0
D           22            Textile Mill Prod.                43.54                      29.4                     5.14                     37.65
D           23        Apparel, Finished Prod.               52.12                     23.91                     1.8                      30.72
                            from Fabrics
D           24       Lumber and Wood Prod.,                 26.47                     33.53                     1.28                     54.71
                             Exc. Furn.
D           25         Furniture and Fixtures               52.83                     18.31                     2.51                     24.86
D           26         Paper and Allied Prod.               22.74                     50.72                     5.67                      64.1
D           27        Printing and Publishing                45.8                     31.69                      .46                     40.65
D           28      Chemicals and Allied Prod.              16.81                      30.4                     2.78                     60.81
D           29           Petroleum Refining                 72.23                     11.37                      .85                     13.46
D           30       Rubber and Misc. Plastic               22.11                      49.7                     2.95                     66.48
                                Prod.
D           31       Leather and Leather Prod.              52.53                     26.01                      4.4                     31.36
D           32         Stone Clay, Glass, and               18.33                     39.32                     4.07                      63.7
                           Concrete Prod.
D           33           Primary Metal Ind.                  22.1                     34.83                     3.92                     57.24
D           34         Fabricated Metal Prod.               23.39                     32.32                     2.57                     55.46
D           35      Ind. and Comm. Machinery                24.94                     31.52                     2.61                     53.36
                         and Comp. Equip.
D           36         Electronic and Electric              14.41                     39.46                     2.26                     70.31
                                Equip.
D           37           Transport. Equip.                  13.73                     33.97                     2.94                     67.09
D           38        Instruments and Related               21.72                     43.76                     3.72                     63.24
                              Products
D           39          Misc. Manufact. Ind.                27.57                     25.11                     2.71                     45.33
F                         Wholesale Trade                   34.17                     39.01                      .18                     53.17
F           50       Wholesale- Durable Goods               31.65                     39.71                      .19                      55.5
F           51        Wholesale- Nondurable                 38.18                     37.89                      .16                      49.7
                              Goods
G                          Retail Trade                     14.57                     52.71                      .01                     78.33
G           52      Bldg. Materials and Garden.             47.91                     31.25                      .06                     39.45
                              Supp.
G           53          Gen. Merch. Stores                  1.83                      96.38                       0                      98.14
G           54              Food Stores                     21.69                     70.27                       0                      76.41
G           55       Auto. Dealers and Service              7.27                       77.5                      .01                     91.41
                             Stations
G           56      Apparel and Access. Stores              6.42                      77.24                       0                      92.33
G           57      Furn. and Homefurn. Stores              20.92                     55.51                      .02                      72.6
G           58      Eating and Drinking Places              4.66                      26.43                      .01                       85
G           59             Misc. Retail                     30.94                     42.54                       0                      57.89
H                   Finance, Insurance, and Real            14.26                     46.17                      .04                     76.35
                               Estate
H           60            Depository Inst.                  12.23                     75.44                      .01                     86.04
H           61          Nondepository Inst.                 11.27                     38.33                      .06                     77.19
H           62        Security and Commod.                  15.37                     13.58                      .03                     46.86
                              Brokers
H           63            Insurance Carr.                   42.88                     17.58                      .23                     28.97
H           64       Ins. Agents, Brokers, and              7.01                      12.78                       0                      64.6
                              Service
H           65              Real Estate                     6.77                      69.86                      .01                     91.16
H           67       Holding and Oth. Invest.               19.81                     27.48                      .04                     58.06
                              Offices
I                             Services                      10.14                     41.02                      .02                     80.15
I           70      Hotels and Lodging Places               13.51                     40.79                       0                      75.12
I           72            Personal Serv.                    5.11                      53.34                      .15                     91.03
I           73            Business Serv.                    20.89                     34.85                      .01                      62.5
I           75       Auto Repair, Serv., and                8.29                      43.55                      .01                       84
                              Park.
I           76         Misc. Repair Serv.                   18.42                     40.68                      .04                     68.78
I           78             Motion Pict.                     37.54                     47.23                      .05                     55.68
I           79      Amusement and Rec. Serv.                 5.12                     36.38                      .06                     87.52
I           81            Legal Services                     .11                      26.45                       0                      99.59
I           83            Social Services                     .66                     70.49                       0                      99.07
I           84      Museums, Art Gall., Zoos                 2.95                      3.99                      .18                      56.1
I           86          Membership Org.                       .67                     54.62                       0                      98.78
I           87       Engineering and Mgmt.                   4.77                     35.14                       0                      88.04
                             Services
I           88         Private Households                   3.76                      65.14                     23.72                    70.33
I           89              Misc. Serv.                     1.09                      17.75                       0                      94.22




                                                                      21
                                                                Figure 8: Adjusted HHI: Diverging national and local concentration trends
                                                 a) Average Change in Adjusted HHI from First Year                                                                  b) Average Change in Adjusted HHI from First Year
                                                                  Across All Divisions                                                                                              National and ZIP Levels, for Each Division
                    .05




                                                                                                                                                       .05
  Avg. Chg. in Adj. HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                 Avg. Chg. in Adj. HHI from First Year
                                    0




                                                                                                                                                 0
                          -.05




                                                                                                                                        -.05
                   -.1




                                                                                                                                 -.1
                                                                                                                                                               National                        ZIP
          -.15




                                                                                                                        -.15
                                                                                                                                                                           Manufacturing
                                                     National                                                                                                             Wholesale Trade
                                                     CBSA                                                                                                                   Retail Trade
   -.2




                                                                                                                  -.2
                                                     County                                                                                                                   FIRE
                                                     ZIP                                                                                                                     Services
                    -.25




                                                                                                                                     -.25
                                          1990          1995       2000            2005   2010       2014                                                    1990            1995              2000             2005             2010   2014
                                                                          Year                                                                                                                        Year




the national level), the adjusted and unadjusted HHIs will be very close. However, groupings defined at the ZIP
code level typically have a small number of enterprises, leading to potentially large differences between the adjusted
and unadjusted measures. In such cases, the unadjusted HHI is preferable because, in some sense, the number of an
enterprises in a market itself partly determines concentration. That is, a market with, say, 3 enterprises is arguably
more concentrated than a market with 10, even if all enterprises have equal sales in both markets.
                 The 5 figures below replicate the figures in the main text using the adjusted HHI. Overall, these results are
remarkably similar to the corresponding figures in the main text. The lines corresponding to concentration measured
at the national level in Figures (8) and (10) are not discernibly different from the corresponding lines calculated
using the unadjusted HHI in Figures (1) and (3), respectively, in the main text. This observation is unsurprising
given that most SIC 8 codes have a large number of enterprises at the national level. On the other hand, when
concentration is measured at the ZIP code level, these figures show that concentration actually falls slightly more
when using the adjusted HHI. Given that over 70% of ZIP code-SIC 8 pairs have only one enterprise in their first
year in the NETS dataset (i.e. have an adjusted and unadjusted HHI of 1), this trend reflects the fact that as
more firms enter ZIP code-industry pairs, the adjusted HHI will tend to fall more than its unadjusted counterpart,
because its lower bound is 0 regardless of the number of firms. In Figure (12), the average fall in the adjusted HHI
when Walmart enters a ZIP code within its primary industry is over 0.1 more than the fall in the HHI shown in
Figure (5) of the main text.

B.1.2                                        Share of Top Enterprise

Another common measure of market concentration is the concentration ratio, which looks at the total market share
accounted for by a certain number of top firms in a market. Here, we measure concentration in a geography-
industry-year grouping as that pair’s share of total sales in the top enterprise measured by sales. This share will
obviously equal 1 for any geography-industry-year groupings with only one enterprise.
                 We prefer the HHI as a measure of concentration because the HHI captures in a more precise way the entire
distribution of market shares. The share of the top enterprise fails to capture any variation in the structure of


                                                                                                            22
                                                                                                   Figure 9: Adjusted HHI: Pervasive diverging trends across 2-digit sectors
                                                                                                              Percent of Employment in SIC8s, within Each SIC2, with Increasing National Trends
                                                                                 100
                                                     Percent of Employment in SIC2
                                                                                 80
                                                                                 60
                                                                                 40
                                                                                 20
                                                                                 0




                                                                                            53 56 55 54 57 59 52 58   60 65 61 67 63 62 64   83 86 72 78 88 75 76 70 79 87 73 81 89 84                                       50 51   26 30 38 32 36 24 37 33 35 34 27 28 20 22 31 39 25 23 29 21

                                                                                                Retail Trade                FIRE                            Services                                                  Wholesale Trade                    Manufacturing

                                                                                                                                Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                                Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Decreasing ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                                Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Zero ZIP Trends




                                                                                     Figure 10: Adjusted HHI: The role of top firms in national and local concentration trends
                                                 a) Average Change in Adjusted HHI from First Year                                                                                                                            b) Average Change in Adjusted HHI from First Year
                                                  Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                                                                    Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends
                    .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .15
  Avg. Chg. in Adj. HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                                                          Avg. Chg. in Adj. HHI from First Year
                                   .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                        .1
                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                              .05
                  -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                       0
           -.1




                                                                                                                                                                            -.05
   -.15




                                            Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise                                                                                                                           Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise
                                                                ZIP Level                                                                                                                                                                   ZIP Level
                                                              National Level                                                                                                                                                              National Level
                    -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                              -.1




                                          1990                                       1995              2000               2005                2010            2014                                                    1990               1995                2000                2005              2010   2014
                                                                                                               Year                                                                                                                                                  Year




market shares among enterprises beyond the top enterprise. For instance, this measure would conclude that among
two markets in which the top enterprises control 60% of total sales, a market in which there is only one other
enterprise comprising the remaining 40% of sales is just as concentrated as one in which ten enterprises each have
4% of sales. In contrast, the HHI would indicate considerably more concentration in the first market.
                 Nevertheless, as shown in the 5 figures below, using the share of the top enterprise leaves our key results in the
main text unchanged. In Figures (13) and (15), we can see that the decline in concentration at the ZIP code level
is slightly less pronounced using this measure, while concentration generally increases slightly more as measured
at the national level. The overall movements and trends of concentration are the same here as in the main text.
As shown in Figure (14), it is also still the case that a substantial portion of employment (approximately 42%)


                                                                                                                                                                     23
                                                            Figure 11: Adjusted HHI: Effect on concentration when a top firm enters a local market
                                               a) Avg. Chg. in Adj. HHI after Top Enterprise Opening                                                                                                             b) Avg. Chg. in Adj. HHI after Top Enterprise Opening
                                                      Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                                                        Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends
                    .03




                                                                                                                                                                                      .03
  Avg. Chg. in Adj. HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                                                    Avg. Chg. in Adj. HHI from First Year
                                   .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                   .01
                           -.01




                                                                                                                                                                                         -.01
                                                                                                                                Including Top Enterprise
                   -.03




                                                                                                                                Excluding Top Enterprise




                                                                                                                                                                                 -.03
          -.05




                                                                                                                                                                       -.05
   -.07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Including Top Enterprise




                                                                                                                                                                                      -.07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Excluding Top Enterprise

                                          -3     -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5                                     6          7                                                -3      -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5         6       7
                                                        Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code                                                                                                              Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code



                                                             Figure 12: Adjusted HHI: Effect on concentration when Walmart enters a local market
                                                                                                                    a) Avg. Change in Adj. HHI Before and After Walmart Openings
                                                                                                                                       Within SIC8 53119901, Discount Department Stores
                                                                                                   .1
                                                                                   Avg. Chg. in Adj. HHI from First Year
                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  With Walmart Entering
                                                                                                    -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Without Walmart Entering
                                                                                        -.2        -.3




                                                                                                                           -3   -2      -1      0       1      2      3        4                                             5       6       7
                                                                                                                                               Years Since Walmart Opening in ZIP




resides in industries with increasing concentration at the national level and decreasing concentration at the local
level. Compared to Figure (2) in the main text, some SIC 2 sectors, such as SIC 2 87 (Engineering & Management
Services), have a slightly lower share of employment in industries with such diverging trends. Furthermore, Figure
(16a) shows that in industries with diverging trends, the share of the top enterprise in each industry-ZIP code pair
also falls upon entry of that industry’s top enterprise.

B.2                                       Removing Nonemployer Enterprises
As discussed above, this section contains two modifications to the NETS database in order to reduce the occurrence
of nonemployer establishments in the data. The first modification, removing enterprise-year pairs with only one
employee, likely leaves a large number of nonemployment establishments remaining, while dropping enterprise-year
pairs with four or fewer employees probably overstates the prevalence of such establishments.



                                                                                                                                                               24
                                                                                              Figure 13: Share of Top Enterprise: Diverging national and local concentration trends
                                                        a) Average Change in Top 1 Share from First Year                                                                                                                              b) Average Change in Top 1 Share from First Year
                                                                                                             Across All Divisions                                                                                                                      National and ZIP Levels, for Each Division
                                           .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .05
  Avg. Chg. in Top 1 Share from First Year




                                                                                                                                                                                 Avg. Chg. in Top 1 Share from First Year
                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                            -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                        -.05
                    -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               National                             ZIP
            -.15




                                                                                                                                                                                         -.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Manufacturing
                                                               National                                                                                                                                                                     Wholesale Trade
                                                               CBSA                                                                                                                                                                           Retail Trade
    -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                   -.2
                                                               County                                                                                                                                                                           FIRE
                                                               ZIP                                                                                                                                                                             Services
                       -.25




                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.25
                                                 1990                                      1995               2000               2005                2010            2014                                                    1990               1995                2000                2005              2010   2014
                                                                                                                      Year                                                                                                                                                  Year



                                                                                                  Figure 14: Share of Top Enterprise: Pervasive diverging trends across 2-digit sectors
                                                                                                                     Percent of Employment in SIC8s, within Each SIC2, with Increasing National Trends
                                                                                       100
                                                           Percent of Employment in SIC2
                                                                                       80
                                                                                       60
                                                                                       40
                                                                                       20
                                                                                       0




                                                                                                   53 55 54 57 56 59 58 52   60 65 61 67 63 64 62   83 72 86 88 78 87 76 79 75 73 81 70 89 84                                       50 51   26 28 32 38 30 36 34 27 24 20 37 35 33 22 39 31 23 25 29 21

                                                                                                       Retail Trade                FIRE                            Services                                                  Wholesale Trade                    Manufacturing

                                                                                                                                       Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                                       Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Decreasing ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                                       Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Zero ZIP Trends




B.2.1                                               Removing Enterprises with Only 1 Employee

The figures below present results excluding, in each year, the sales and employment of enterprises with only 1
employee.29 There are no substantial changes from the corresponding results in the main text.




  29
     That is, we exclude the sales of each establishment when calculating the HHI and exclude the employment when calculating geography-
industry-year employment for taking weighted averages.


                                                                                                                                                                            25
                                                       Figure 15: Share of Top Enterprise: The role of top firms in national and local concentration trends
                                                      a) Average Change in Top 1 Share from First Year                                                                                                                                    b) Average Change in Top 1 Share from First Year
                                                       Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                                                                          Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .15
                                         .1
Avg. Chg. in Top 1 Share from First Year




                                                                                                                                                                                    Avg. Chg. in Top 1 Share from First Year
                                 .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .1
                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .05
                 -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
          -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                       -.05
                                                 Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise                                                                                                                                   Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise
  -.15




                                                                     ZIP Level                                                                                                                                                                           ZIP Level
                                                                   National Level                                                                                                                                                                      National Level
                     -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.1
                                               1990             1995            2000                                                     2005            2010          2014                                                        1990            1995             2000             2005            2010         2014
                                                                                       Year                                                                                                                                                                                Year



                                                        Figure 16: Share of Top Enterprise: Effect on concentration when a top firm enters a local market
                                                 a) Avg. Chg. in Top 1 Share after Top Enterprise Opening                                                                                                                            b) Avg. Chg. in Top 1 Share after Top Enterprise Opening
                                                            Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                                                                         Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends
                                         .03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .03
Avg. Chg. in Top 1 Share from First Year




                                                                                                                                                                                    Avg. Chg. in Top 1 Share from First Year
                                .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .01
                      -.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                          -.01




                                                                                                                                                Including Top Enterprise
                                                                                                                                                Excluding Top Enterprise
             -.03




                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.03
   -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                       -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Including Top Enterprise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Excluding Top Enterprise
                     -.07




                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.07




                                                -3     -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5                                                6         7                                                        -3     -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5         6        7
                                                              Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code                                                                                                                               Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code



                                                            Figure 17: Share of Top Enterprise: Effect on concentration when Walmart enters a local market
                                                                                                                                 a) Avg. Chg. in Top 1 Share Before and After Walmart Openings
                                                                                                                                                       Within SIC8 53119901, Discount Department Stores
                                                                                                                                  .05
                                                                                         Avg. Chg. in Top 1 Share from First Year
                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          With Walmart Entering
                                                                                                           -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Without Walmart Entering
                                                                                               -.1          -.15




                                                                                                                                        -3      -2      -1       0       1      2      3        4                                                   5       6        7
                                                                                                                                                                Years Since Walmart Opening in ZIP




                                                                                                                                                                               26
                                               Figure 18: Removing Enterprises with One Employee: Diverging national and local concentration trends
                                                           a) Average Change in HHI from First Year                                                                                                                                b) Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                                                                    Across All Divisions                                                                                                                      National and ZIP Levels, for Each Division
                  .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                              .05
Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                                                        Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                        -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                              -.05
                 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                        -.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      National                             ZIP
         -.15




                                                                                                                                                                                -.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Manufacturing
                                                       National                                                                                                                                                                    Wholesale Trade
                                                       CBSA                                                                                                                                                                          Retail Trade
  -.2




                                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                                       County                                                                                                                                                                          FIRE
                                                       ZIP                                                                                                                                                                            Services
                  -.25




                                                                                                                                                                                            -.25
                                        1990                                       1995              2000               2005                2010            2014                                                    1990               1995                2000                2005              2010   2014
                                                                                                             Year                                                                                                                                                  Year




                                               Figure 19: Removing Enterprises with One Employee: Pervasive diverging trends across 2-digit sectors
                                                                                                            Percent of Employment in SIC8s, within Each SIC2, with Increasing National Trends
                                                                               100
                                                   Percent of Employment in SIC2
                                                                               80
                                                                               60
                                                                               40
                                                                               20
                                                                               0




                                                                                          53 55 56 54 57 59 52 58   60 65 61 67 63 62 64   83 88 72 86 78 75 70 79 87 73 81 76 89 84                                       50 51   26 30 38 32 36 27 33 37 24 35 28 34 20 22 31 39 23 25 29 21

                                                                                              Retail Trade                FIRE                            Services                                                  Wholesale Trade                    Manufacturing

                                                                                                                              Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                              Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Decreasing ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                              Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Zero ZIP Trends




                                                                                                                                                                   27
            Figure 20: Removing Enterprises with One Employee: The role of top firms in national and local concentration trends
                                                       a) Average Change in HHI from First Year                                                                                                   b) Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                 Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                                  Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends




                                                                                                                                                                            .15
                    .1
Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                      Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                .05




                                                                                                                                                                     .1
                         0




                                                                                                                                                          .05
                -.05




                                                                                                                                                  0
         -.1




                                                                                                                                         -.05
 -.15




                                          Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise                                                                                           Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise
                                                              ZIP Level                                                                                                                                   ZIP Level
                                                            National Level                                                                                                                              National Level
                    -.2




                                                                                                                                                            -.1
                                        1990              1995            2000             2005             2010        2014                                                        1990             1995             2000             2005             2010        2014
                                                                                 Year                                                                                                                                        Year



                      Figure 21: Removing Enterprises with One Employee: Effect on concentration when a top firm enters a local market
                                              a) Average Change in HHI after Top Enterprise Opening                                                                                       b) Average Change in HHI after Top Enterprise Opening
                                                      Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                                 Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends
                    .03




                                                                                                                                                            .03
Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                      Average Change in HHI from First Year
                              .01




                                                                                                                                                                    .01
                    -.01




                                                                                                                                                          -.01




                                                                                                  Including Top Enterprise
                                                                                                  Excluding Top Enterprise
           -.03




                                                                                                                                                 -.03
   -.05




                                                                                                                                         -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Including Top Enterprise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Excluding Top Enterprise
                    -.07




                                                                                                                                                            -.07




                                         -3      -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5         6        7                                                       -3      -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5         6        7
                                                        Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code                                                                                       Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code



                              Figure 22: Removing Enterprises with One Employee: Effect on concentration when Walmart enters a local market
                                        a) Average Change in HHI Before and After Walmart Openings                                                                                  b) Avg. Number of Estab. Before and After Walmart Openings
                                                          Within SIC8 53119901, Discount Department Stores                                                                                           Within SIC8 53119901, Discount Department Stores
                                                                                                                                                                              3.5
                                                                                                                                      Average Number of Establishments in ZIP
                                    0
Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                                                 3




                                                                                                  With Walmart Entering                                                                                                                       With Walmart Entering
                                                                                                  Without Walmart Entering                                                                                                                    Without Walmart Entering
                                                                                                                                      2          2.5
                -.2




                                         -3      -2       -1      0       1      2      3        4         5        6        7                                                      -3       -2       -1      0       1      2      3        4         5        6        7
                                                                 Years Since Walmart Opening in ZIP                                                                                                          Years Since Walmart Opening in ZIP




                                                                                                                                 28
                                  Figure 23: Removing Enterprises with Fewer than 5 Employees: Diverging national and local concentration trends
                                                          a) Average Change in HHI from First Year                                                                                                                              b) Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                                                                   Across All Divisions                                                                                                                    National and ZIP Levels, for Each Division
                    .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .05
  Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                                                       Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                          -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                            -.05
                   -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                      -.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   National                             ZIP
           -.15




                                                                                                                                                                               -.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Manufacturing
                                                      National                                                                                                                                                                  Wholesale Trade
                                                      CBSA                                                                                                                                                                        Retail Trade
    -.2




                                                                                                                                                                        -.2
                                                      County                                                                                                                                                                        FIRE
                                                      ZIP                                                                                                                                                                          Services
                    -.25




                                                                                                                                                                                          -.25
                                          1990                                    1995              2000               2005                2010            2014                                                  1990               1995                2000                2005              2010   2014
                                                                                                            Year                                                                                                                                                Year



                                          Figure 24: Removing Enterprises with Fewer than 5 Employees: Pervasive diverging trends across 2-digit sectors
                                                                                                           Percent of Employment in SIC8s, within Each SIC2, with Increasing National Trends
                                                                              100
                                                  Percent of Employment in SIC2
                                                                              80
                                                                              60
                                                                              40
                                                                              20
                                                                              0




                                                                                         65 60 61 67 62 63 64   55 53 56 54 52 57 59 58   75 72 83 78 86 76 87 70 79 73 89 88 81 84                                     50 51   26 30 38 32 24 36 27 20 28 33 37 31 34 22 35 23 25 39 29 21

                                                                                               FIRE                 Retail Trade                         Services                                                Wholesale Trade                    Manufacturing

                                                                                                                             Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                             Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Decreasing ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                             Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Zero ZIP Trends




B.2.2                                        Removing Enterprises with Fewer than 5 Employees

Here we reproduce the main text figures excluding, in each year, enterprises with fewer than five employees. Figure
(23) shows that the decrease in concentration at more local levels is somewhat less pronounced here than in Figure
(1) in the main text, while Figure (24) reveals some sectors, including General Merchandise Stores (SIC 2 53), have
a modestly lower share of employment in industries with diverging trends. On the other hand, in Figures (25) and
(26), the downward effect of top enterprises on local concentration in industries with diverging trends is actually
more pronounced.




                                                                                                                                                                  29
Figure 25: Removing Enterprises with Fewer than 5 Employees: The role of top firms in national and local concentration
trends
                                                         a) Average Change in HHI from First Year                                                                                                 b) Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                   Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                                Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends




                                                                                                                                                                              .15
                    .1
  Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                        Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                  .05




                                                                                                                                                                       .1
                           0




                                                                                                                                                            .05
                  -.05




                                                                                                                                                    0
           -.1




                                                                                                                                           -.05
   -.15




                                            Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise                                                                                         Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise
                                                                ZIP Level                                                                                                                                 ZIP Level
                                                              National Level                                                                                                                            National Level
                    -.2




                                                                                                                                                            -.1
                                          1990              1995            2000             2005            2010         2014                                                      1990             1995             2000             2005            2010         2014
                                                                                   Year                                                                                                                                      Year



Figure 26: Removing Enterprises with Fewer than 5 Employees: Effect on concentration when a top firm enters a local market
                                                a) Average Change in HHI after Top Enterprise Opening                                                                                     b) Average Change in HHI after Top Enterprise Opening
                                                        Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                               Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends
                    .03




                                                                                                                                                            .03
  Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                        Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                  .01




                                                                                                                                                                      .01
                         -.01




                                                                                                                                                            -.01




                                                                                                    Including Top Enterprise
                 -.03




                                                                                                    Excluding Top Enterprise
                                                                                                                                                   -.03
          -.05




                                                                                                                                           -.05
  -.07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Including Top Enterprise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Excluding Top Enterprise
                                                                                                                                                            -.07




                                           -3      -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5         6        7                                                     -3      -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5         6        7
                                                          Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code                                                                                     Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code




B.3                                        Including Health Services
All the figures in the main text exclude the health care sector, corresponding to SIC 2 80 (Health Services), because
there is some evidence that institutional and policy changes specific to this sector, including the Affordable Care Act,
have strongly affected concentration trends (Fulton (2017), for instance, finds an overall increase in concentration
in hospital and health insurance markets between 2010 and 2016). In this section, we repeat Figures (1)-(4) in the
main text including establishments whose primary SIC 2 code is 80.30 In Figure (29), we can see that slightly over
40% of employment in this sector resides in industries with increasing national trends, most of which is contained in
industries that also have decreasing local trends. Furthermore, Figure (28b) shows that including this sector, which
is contained in the Services division, makes the national and local trends for this division very slightly more and
less pronounced, respectively. The remaining figures illustrate that including this sector has almost no discernible
 30
                We do not repeat Figure (5) because including this sector has no effect on Walmart’s primary industry.


                                                                                                                                   30
Figure 27: Removing Enterprises with Fewer than 5 Employees: Effect on concentration when Walmart enters a local market
                                                      a) Average Change in HHI Before and After Walmart Openings                                                                                   b) Avg. Number of Estab. Before and After Walmart Openings
                                                                     Within SIC8 53119901, Discount Department Stores                                                                                              Within SIC8 53119901, Discount Department Stores
                      .05




                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                Average Number of Establishments in ZIP
  Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                      -.05




                                                                                                            With Walmart Entering                                                                                                                            With Walmart Entering
                                                                                                            Without Walmart Entering                                                                                                                         Without Walmart Entering
              -.1




                                                                                                                                                          2
     -.15




                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                      -.2




                                                       -3    -2      -1       0       1      2      3        4       5       6         7                                                           -3     -2       -1        0       1      2      3        4          5      6         7
                                                                             Years Since Walmart Opening in ZIP                                                                                                             Years Since Walmart Opening in ZIP



                                                                          Figure 28: Including Health Services: Diverging national and local concentration trends
                                                                  a) Average Change in HHI from First Year                                                                                                      b) Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                                                    Across All Divisions                                                                                                                  National and ZIP Levels, for Each Division
                                                .05
    Average Change in Adjusted HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                                  Average Change in Adjusted HHI from First Year
                                                                                                                                                                                            .05
                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                -.05




                                                                                                                                                                             -.05
                         -.1




                                                                                                                                                                      -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                     National                        ZIP
                -.15




                                                                                                                                                              -.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Manufacturing
                                                                  National                                                                                                                                      Wholesale Trade
                                                                  CBSA                                                                                                                                            Retail Trade
          -.2




                                                                                                                                                        -.2




                                                                  County                                                                                                                                            FIRE
                                                                  ZIP                                                                                                                                              Services
  -.25




                                                                                                                                                -.25




                                                      1990           1995            2000            2005             2010        2014                                                             1990            1995              2000             2005             2010        2014
                                                                                            Year                                                                                                                                            Year




effect on the aggregate trends observed in the main text.

B.4                                                     Results for Other Geographic Measures
As shown in Figure (1a) in the main text, while the decline in concentration is most pronounced at the ZIP code
level, concentration is also declining over time at the county and Core-Based Statistical Area (CBSA) levels.31 This
section reproduces Figures (1b) and (2) for these two geographic levels. At the county level, it is still the case
that concentration in all divisions is declining over time, while concentration is declining at the CBSA level in all
divisions except Manufacturing, which has a roughly flat trend. Figure (33) indicates that industries with diverging
trends are still prevalent in both cases, comprising approximately 29 and 23% of employment at the county and
  31
   A CBSA is defined as either a Metropolitan or Micropolitan Statistical Area and is a collection of counties. Although CBSA
boundaries can expand over time as new counties are added to them, for all years here we classify counties into CBSAs based on 2014
CBSA definitions. We also drop any observations not located in CBSAs.



                                                                                                                                           31
                                                                                        Figure 29: Including Health Services: Pervasive diverging trends across 2-digit sectors
                                                                                                              Percent of Employment in SIC8s, within Each SIC2, with Increasing National Trends
                                                                                 100
                                                     Percent of Employment in SIC2
                                                                                 80
                                                                                 60
                                                                                 40
                                                                                 20
                                                                                 0




                                                                                            53 55 56 54 57 59 52 58   60 65 61 67 63 62 64   83 88 86 72 78 75 70 76 80 79 87 73 81 89 84                                      50 51   26 30 38 36 32 33 37 24 34 27 35 28 20 22 31 39 23 25 29 21

                                                                                                Retail Trade                FIRE                              Services                                                  Wholesale Trade                    Manufacturing

                                                                                                                                Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                                Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Decreasing ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                                Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Zero ZIP Trends




                                                 Figure 30: Including Health Services: The role of top firms in national and local concentration trends
                                                             a) Average Change in HHI from First Year                                                                                                                                  b) Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                  Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                                                                     Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .15
                    .1
  Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                                                            Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                  .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1
                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                .05
                  -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                        0
           -.1




                                                                                                                                                                               -.05
   -.15




                                            Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise                                                                                                                             Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise
                                                                ZIP Level                                                                                                                                                                     ZIP Level
                                                              National Level                                                                                                                                                                National Level
                    -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                -.1




                                          1990                                       1995              2000                2005                2010            2014                                                     1990              1995                2000                 2005              2010   2014
                                                                                                               Year                                                                                                                                                    Year




CBSA levels, respectively. Among industries that have increasing national trends, 48% of employment is located in
industries that have declining employment at the county level and 38% at the CBSA level.

B.5                                        Using Sales Instead of Employment Weights
In the main text, we weight geography-industry-year groupings by their employment when taking averages of
changes in concentration across groupings. The below figures show that weighting instead by sales of each grouping
is relatively immaterial for our main findings.32
  32
     In this set of figures, the HHI and the change in the HHI is exactly the same for every geography-industry pair as in the main text,
with concentration defined in terms of sales. Only the weights used when averaging across groupings change.


                                                                                                                                                                      32
                                                       Figure 31: Including Health Services: Effect on concentration when a top firm enters a local market
                                                    a) Average Change in HHI after Top Enterprise Opening                                                                                     b) Average Change in HHI after Top Enterprise Opening
                                                            Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                               Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends
                      .03




                                                                                                                                                                .03
  Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                            Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                .01




                                                                                                                                                                          .01
                      -.01




                                                                                                                                                                -.01
                                                                                                        Including Top Enterprise
                                                                                                        Excluding Top Enterprise
             -.03




                                                                                                                                                       -.03
     -.05




                                                                                                                                               -.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Including Top Enterprise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Excluding Top Enterprise
                      -.07




                                                                                                                                                                -.07
                                               -3      -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5         6        7                                                     -3      -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5         6        7
                                                              Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code                                                                                     Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code



                                                                  Figure 32: County and CBSA Levels: Diverging national and local concentration trends
                                                                      (a) County Level                                            (b) CBSA Level

                                                            b) Average Change in HHI from First Year                                                                                                  b) Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                                   National and County Levels, for Each Division                                                                                             National and CBSA Levels, for Each Division
                                        .05




                                                                                                                                                                                  .05
  Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                            Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                           0
                        -.05




                                                                                                                                                                  -.05
                  -.1




                                                                                                                                                            -.1




                                                National                       County                                                                                                     National                       CBSA
          -.15




                                                                                                                                                    -.15




                                                             Manufacturing                                                                                                                             Manufacturing
                                                            Wholesale Trade                                                                                                                           Wholesale Trade
                                                              Retail Trade                                                                                                                              Retail Trade
   -.2




                                                                                                                                             -.2




                                                                FIRE                                                                                                                                      FIRE
                                                               Services                                                                                                                                  Services
                      -.25




                                                                                                                                                                -.25




                                              1990              1995            2000             2005              2010       2014                                                      1990             1995             2000             2005            2010         2014
                                                                                        Year                                                                                                                                     Year




B.6                                            Other Results
The results in this section expand on the figures in the main text.

B.6.1                                               Effect of Top Enterprises on Number of Establishments

Figure (39) expands on Figure (5b) in the main text by looking at the number of number of establishments in
industry-ZIP code pairs over time in response to the arrival of an industry’s top enterprise into that ZIP code. The
red line displays the weighted average number of establishments in the years before and after an opening of an
industry’s top enterprise across industries with diverging trends; the blue lines display the same number average
across industries with positive trends at the national and local levels. When a top enterprise opens in an industry
with positive local trends, there is on average no exit of existing establishments, while there is close to one-to-one


                                                                                                                                       33
                                               Figure 33: County and CBSA Level: Pervasive diverging trends across 2-digit sectors
                                                                             (a) County Level

                                                                  Percent of Employment in SIC8s, within Each SIC2, with Increasing National Trends
                                         100
             Percent of Employment in SIC2
                                         80
                                         60
                                         40
                                         20
                                         0




                                                60 65 67 61 64 62 63   88 83 86 72 79 78 76 81 87 75 73 89 70 84   53 56 54 59 57 58 55 52   32 38 20 24 35 26 27 37 36 28 31 34 30 39 25 22 33 23 29 21   51 50

                                                      FIRE                            Services                         Retail Trade                               Manufacturing                        Wholesale

                                                                                  Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and County Trends
                                                                                  Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Decreasing County Trends
                                                                                  Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Zero County Trends


                                                                                                            (b) CBSA Level

                                                                  Percent of Employment in SIC8s, within Each SIC2, with Increasing National Trends
                                         100
             Percent of Employment in SIC2
                                         80
                                         60
                                         40
                                         20
                                         0




                                                60 65 67 61 63 62 64   88 83 86 79 78 76 81 87 75 72 73 89 70 84   26 38 31 20 35 37 34 33 30 36 32 28 39 22 24 27 25 23 21 29   56 54 58 57 59 53 52 55   51 50

                                                      FIRE                            Services                                         Manufacturing                                 Retail TradeWholesale Trade

                                                                                  Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and CBSA Trends
                                                                                  Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Decreasing CBSA Trends
                                                                                  Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Zero CBSA Trends




exit of existing establishments in industries with diverging trends. Over time, however, for both sets of industries
the number of establishments both including and excluding establishments belonging to the top enterprise increases
following an opening. Because these lines are weighted by employment in a geography-industry-year grouping, which
is highly correlated with the number of establishments, the results of this figure should be interpreted with caution.




                                                                                                                        34
                                                                                                 Figure 34: Sales Weights: Diverging national and local concentration trends
                                                             a) Average Change in HHI from First Year                                                                                                                            b) Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                                                                      Across All Divisions                                                                                                                  National and ZIP Levels, for Each Division
                                        .05
  Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                                                          Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                           .05
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                        -.05




                                                                                                                                                                           -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05
                  -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    National                             ZIP
          -.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Manufacturing
                                                         National                                                                                                                                                                Wholesale Trade
                                                         CBSA                                                                                                                                                                      Retail Trade
   -.2




                                                         County                                                                                                                                                                      FIRE
                                                         ZIP                                                                                                                                                                        Services
                      -.25




                                                                                                                                                                                            -.25
                                              1990                                   1995              2000               2005                2010            2014                                                1990               1995                2000                2005              2010   2014
                                                                                                               Year                                                                                                                                              Year



                                                                                                  Figure 35: Sales Weights: Pervasive diverging trends across 2-digit sectors
                                                                                                              Percent of Employment in SIC8s, within Each SIC2, with Increasing National Trends
                                                                                 100
                                                     Percent of Employment in SIC2
                                                                                 80
                                                                                 60
                                                                                 40
                                                                                 20
                                                                                 0




                                                                                            53 56 55 54 59 57 58 52   60 65 67 61 63 64 62   88 83 86 72 78 76 79 75 87 73 81 89 70 84                                   26 30 38 32 36 24 33 37 28 35 34 20 22 31 39 27 23 25 29 21   50 51

                                                                                                Retail Trade                FIRE                            Services                                                                         Manufacturing                     Wholesale Trade

                                                                                                                                Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                                Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Decreasing ZIP Trends
                                                                                                                                Percent of Employment in SIC8s with Increasing National and Zero ZIP Trends




B.6.2                                            Replicating Figure (3) with Top 3 Enterprises

Here, we replicate Figure (3) in the main text using the top 3 enterprises (as measured by sales in 2014) in each
industry as opposed to just the top enterprise. That is, we look at geography-industry pairs where at least one
of these enterprises is present in at least one year. Within this subset of pairs, we drop geography-industry-year
groupings where there are no enterprises in that group remaining after dropping the top three enterprises in that
industry. We then calculate, for each grouping, the HHI both including and excluding the top 3 enterprises. Figure
(40a) shows that when averaged across SIC 8 industries with diverging trends, removing the top 3 enterprises makes
the increase in the national trend much less pronounced, but increases concentration at the local level. In contrast,
Figure (40b) shows that across industries with increasing trends at the national and local levels, excluding the top

                                                                                                                                                                     35
                                                               Figure 36: Sales Weights: The role of top firms in national and local concentration trends
                                                           a) Average Change in HHI from First Year                                                                                                   b) Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                     Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                                  Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends
                      .1
Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                          Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                                                                                                                                          .15
                                .05




                                                                                                                                                                   .1
                -.05     0




                                                                                                                                                           .05
         -.1




                                                                                                                                           -.05     0
 -.15




                                              Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise                                                                                           Including Top Enterprise Excluding Top Enterprise
                                                                  ZIP Level                                                                                                                                   ZIP Level
                                                                National Level                                                                                                                              National Level
                      -.2




                                                                                                                                                                -.1
                                            1990              1995            2000             2005             2010        2014                                                        1990             1995             2000             2005             2010        2014
                                                                                     Year                                                                                                                                        Year



                                                                Figure 37: Sales Weights: Effect on concentration when a top firm enters a local market
                                                  a) Average Change in HHI after Top Enterprise Opening                                                                                       b) Average Change in HHI after Top Enterprise Opening
                                                          Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                                 Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends
                      .03




                                                                                                                                          -.07 -.05 -.03 -.01 .01 .03 .05 .07 .09 .11
Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                                Average Change in HHI from First Year
                    -.01      .01




                                                                                                      Including Top Enterprise
                                                                                                      Excluding Top Enterprise
   -.05     -.03




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Including Top Enterprise
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Excluding Top Enterprise
                      -.07




                                             -3      -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5         6        7                                                       -3      -2      -1       0       1       2       3       4       5         6        7
                                                            Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code                                                                                       Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code



                                                                   Figure 38: Sales Weights: Effect on concentration when Walmart enters a local market
                                            a) Average Change in HHI Before and After Walmart Openings                                                                                  b) Avg. Number of Estab. Before and After Walmart Openings
                                                              Within SIC8 53119901, Discount Department Stores                                                                                           Within SIC8 53119901, Discount Department Stores
                  .05




                                                                                                                                                                                  3.5
                                                                                                                                          Average Number of Establishments in ZIP
    Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                     3
                     -.05




                                                                                                      With Walmart Entering                                                                                                                       With Walmart Entering
                                                                                                      Without Walmart Entering                                                                                                                    Without Walmart Entering
                                                                                                                                                     2.5
-.15       -.1




                                                                                                                                          2




                                             -3      -2       -1      0       1      2      3        4         5        6        7                                                      -3       -2       -1      0       1      2      3        4         5        6        7
                                                                     Years Since Walmart Opening in ZIP                                                                                                          Years Since Walmart Opening in ZIP




                                                                                                                                     36
                                                                           Figure 39: Number of Establishments When Top Enterprise Enters
                                                                                                                         Average Number of Establishments in SIC8-ZIP Pairs
                                                                                                                                      Across SIC8s with Positive National Trends




                                                                                                15
                                                                                 Average Number of Establishments
                                                                                         7     9       11     13




                                                                                                                     Including Top Enterprise            Excluding Top Enterprise
                                                                                  5




                                                                                                                                    SIC8s with Positive ZIP Trend
                                                                                                                                    SIC8s with Negative ZIP Trend
                                                                                                3




                                                                                                                    -3     -2    -1       0       1       2       3       4       5                                              6      7
                                                                                                                                Years Since SIC8's Top Enterprise Opening in ZIP Code



                                                                 Figure 40: The role of the top 3 firms in national and local concentration trends
                                                      a) Average Change in HHI from First Year                                                                                                                       b) Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                                  Across SIC8s with Positive National and Negative ZIP Trends                                                                                      .15           Across SIC8s with Positive National and Positive ZIP Trends
                    .1
  Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                                             Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                  .05




                                                                                                                                                                                            .1
                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                 .05
                  -.05




                                                                                                                                                                         0
           -.1




                                                                                                                                                                -.05
   -.15




                                            Including Top 3 Enterprises Excluding Top 3 Enterprises                                                                                                        Including Top 3 Enterprises Excluding Top 3 Enterprises
                                                                   ZIP Level                                                                                                                                                      ZIP Level
                                                                 National Level                                                                                                                                                 National Level
                    -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                 -.1




                                          1990           1995            2000                                       2005            2010         2014                                                    1990           1995            2000            2005         2010      2014
                                                                                Year                                                                                                                                                           Year




3 enterprises brings down concentration at both levels. These observations are consistent with Figure (3) in the
main text.

B.6.3                                        Effect on Concentration when Walmart Enters a County

While most industries within the retail sector have local markets, in some instances a ZIP code may be too narrow
a definition of a market. In the case of Walmart, for instance, it is likely that many Walmart stores draw shoppers
from beyond the immediate ZIP code and instead serve entire counties. Along these lines, Figure (41) reproduces
Figure (5) in the main text at the county level. That is, within SIC 8 53119901, we look only at counties where
Walmart is present in at least one year, and only look at county-year pairs in which concentration can be measured
after removing Walmart. We then calculate both the HHI and the number of establishments including and excluding
Walmart in the years before and after a Walmart opening, and take a weighted average across counties for each year
relative to Walmart openings. Figure (41a) shows that county-level concentration within this industry declines after


                                                                                                                                                        37
                                                             Figure 41: County Level: Effect on concentration when Walmart enters a local market
                                            a) Average Change in HHI Before and After Walmart Openings                                                                          b) Avg. Number of Estab. Before and After Walmart Openings
                                                        Within SIC8 53119901, Discount Department Stores                                                                                      Within SIC8 53119901, Discount Department Stores




                                                                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                             With Walmart Entering                                                                         With Walmart Entering




                                                                                                                                 Average Number of Establishments in County
                                        0




                                                                                             Without Walmart Entering                                                                      Without Walmart Entering
  Average Change in HHI from First Year




                                                                                                                                                               16
                       -.05




                                                                                                                                                    14
          -.1




                                                                                                                                         12
                   -.15




                                                                                                                                                     10
                                             -3    -2   -1      0        1     2       3       4      5      6          7                                                       -3    -2       -1     0        1     2       3       4      5    6   7
                                                              Years Since Walmart Opening in County                                                                                                 Years Since Walmart Opening in County




Walmart enters a county, and this effect still persists for at least 7 years. In Figure (41b), we see that the arrival of
Walmart into a county is associated with with exit of about three non-Walmart establishments, on average. This
result indicates substantially higher exit at the county than at the ZIP code level and is consistent with Jia (2008).

B.6.4                                             When a Top Enterprise Comes to Town: An Example in Manufacturing

Figure (2) in the main text indicates that a very high share of employment in Retail Trade resides in industries with
diverging national and local trends, while this phenomenon is much less prevalent in Manufacturing and Wholesale
Trade. However, the sector-level of aggregation presented in Figure (2) obscures considerable heterogeneity within
industries in a given sector. It is still the case that many Manufacturing industries have diverging trends and see
declining local concentration following the arrival of their top enterprise in a ZIP code. To use one example, Figure
(42) highlights the SIC 8 code 32730000, Ready-Mixed Concrete, whose top enterprise by sales in 2014 is Cemex,
a building materials company. Panel (42a) shows that the arrival of Cemex into a ZIP code decreases its HHI by
about 0.1. Although this effect dissipates after 7 years, the HHI measured excluding Cemex remains higher than
it would be including them, so that this company is still bringing local concentration down. Panel (42b) shows
that, as with the case of Walmart, there is some exit of existing establishments when Cemex opens a plant but the
overall number of establishments in the ZIP-industry pair rises, on average. Although Syverson (2008) documents
increasing national concentration within this industry, consistent with our findings, Syverson (2008) and Syverson
(2004) argue that high transport costs make local measures of concentration, which we show exhibit a downward
trend, more relevant.




                                                                                                                            38
                                                                    Figure 42: Effect on concentration when Cemex enters a local market
                                        a) Average Change in HHI Before and After Cemex Openings                                                                    b) Avg. Number of Estab. Before and After Cemex Openings
                                                        Within SIC8 32730000, Ready-Mixed Concrete                                                                                 Within SIC8 32730000, Ready-Mixed Concrete
                 .15




                                                                                                                                                              3.5
                                                                                                                      Average Number of Establishments in ZIP
Average Change in HHI from First Year
                                 .1




                                                                                                                                                   3
                        .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      With Cemex Entering
                                                                                                                                       2.5
                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Without Cemex Entering
         -.05




                                                                                                                             2
  -.1




                                                                      With Cemex Entering
                                                                      Without Cemex Entering
                 -.15




                                                                                                                                          1.5




                                        -3   -2    -1        0       1      2      3        4        5   6   7                                                      -3   -2   -1        0       1      2      3        4        5   6          7
                                                             Years Since Cemex Opening in ZIP                                                                                           Years Since Cemex Opening in ZIP




                                                                                                                 39
