NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBALIZATION, GOVERNMENT POPULARITY, AND THE GREAT SKILL
DIVIDE
Cevat G. Aksoy
Sergei Guriev
Daniel S. Treisman
Working Paper 25062
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25062

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

We would like to thank Dany Bahar, Pranab Bardhan, Paola Conconi, Georgy Egorov, Thiemo
Fetzer, Jack Hou, David Laitin, Anna Maria Mayda, William Olney, Kevin O’Rourke, Hillel
Rapoport, Victor Shih, Ekatarina Zhuravskaya and participants at the Beijing Forum (2017),
DEGIT (2017), Royal Economic Society (2018), CEPR-EBRD-EoT (2018), CESifo Venice
Summer Institute (2018), and Fudan University (2018) conferences for their helpful comments.
Guriev and Aksoy are employees of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Treisman acknowledges support from the UCLA College of Letters and Sciences. All three
declare that they have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper. Views presented are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
EBRD. All interpretations, errors, and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Cevat G. Aksoy, Sergei Guriev, and Daniel S. Treisman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Globalization, Government Popularity, and the Great Skill Divide
Cevat G. Aksoy, Sergei Guriev, and Daniel S. Treisman
NBER Working Paper No. 25062
September 2018
JEL No. F16,P16
ABSTRACT
How does international trade affect the popularity of governments and leaders? We provide the
first large-scale, systematic evidence that the divide between skilled and unskilled workers
worldwide is producing corresponding differences in the response of political preferences to trade
shocks. Using a unique data set including 118 countries and nearly 450,000 individuals, we find
that growth in high skill intensive exports (of goods and services) increases approval of the leader
and incumbent government among skilled individuals. Growth in high skill intensive imports has
the opposite effect. High skill intensive trade has no such effect among the unskilled. To identify
exogenous variation in international trade, we exploit the time-varying effects of air and sea
distances on bilateral trade flows. Our findings suggest that the political effects of international
trade differ with skill intensity and that skilled individuals respond differently from their
unskilled counterparts to trade shocks.
Cevat G. Aksoy
European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development
Broadgate, 1 Exchange Square
London EC2A 2JN
United Kingdom
aksoyc@ebrd.com
Sergei Guriev
Sciences Po
28 rue des Saints Peres
Paris 75007
France
sergei.guriev@sciencespo.fr

Daniel S. Treisman
Department of Political Science
UCLA
4289 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1472
and NBER
treisman@polisci.ucla.edu

1 Introduction
The politics of trade has recently dominated headlines. A US presidential election
turned in large part on one candidate’s promise to get tough against imports from
China and Mexico. Across Eastern Europe, populist leaders have taken stands
against EU integration, and in the UK a majority recently voted to leave the EU.
Although anxiety about immigration and weakened sovereignty are common
themes in the discontent, anger at the perceived loss of jobs to international
competition is also highly salient.
Some argue that attitudes toward globalization have emerged as a new dimension
of political alignment, alongside the traditional left-right redistribution axis. “The
new divide,” according to the Economist magazine (2016) “is not between left and
right but between open and closed.”2 If that is true, current political turbulence may
foreshadow lasting changes.
Yet, although some scholars have explored implications of classic trade theories for
preferences on trade policy (Scheve and Slaughter 2001, O’Rourke and Sinnott
2001, Mayda and Rodrik 2005), until very recently there has been little systematic
empirical analysis of the links between global trade and mass politics. A few papers
have examined whether import competition in the US has affected voting patterns
in national elections (Margalit 2011, Autor et al. 2016, Jensen et al. 2017), while
some others examine voting in Europe (Dippel, Gold, and Heblich 2015, Colantone
and Stanig 2016, 2017). The general finding has been that sharp import shocks
increase partisan polarization or voting for populist parties.
We contribute to this literature by examining whether international trade affects not
just voting at periodic elections but also the approval ratings of governments and
political leaders in between. Using annual data from the Gallup World Poll for

2

See also De Vries (2017) on the cosmopolitan-parochial divide in recent Dutch elections.

1

2005-15, we provide the first large-scale, systematic evidence on this issue. In line
with the factor endowment theory, we argue that attitudes toward globalization will
depend on both individuals’ skill levels and the skill-intensity of the country’s
exports and imports.3 To address the endogeneity of trade patterns, we use
instruments based on the time-varying bilateral air and sea transport costs,
originally proposed by Feyrer (2009) and later used by other trade scholars. The
panel structure of the data also allows us to control for country and year fixed
effects.
Our results reveal a causal impact of changing trade flows on approval of political
leaders. We find that the effects of trade shocks depend on the interaction between
individuals’ characteristics and their country’s trade structure. Highly skilled
workers respond to trade in high skill intensive goods and services differently than
do unskilled workers. This is true even though skilled and unskilled workers do not
respond differently to total trade. Specifically, highly skilled individuals approve
of their leader and government more when exports of high skill intensive goods and
services increase but approve of them less when imports of high skill intensive
items rise. The magnitudes are substantial: a 10 percent increase in skill-intensive
exports results in a 1.17 percentage point increase in the leader’s approval among
skilled individuals, while a 10 percent increase in skill-intensive imports prompts a
1.65 percentage point decrease in the leader’s approval among the skilled. Given
the closeness of certain recent elections, such changes could decide electoral
outcomes.
Our analysis offers the broadest cross-national evidence to date on the relationship
between trade and political attitudes. Whereas previous papers have mostly looked
at individual countries or smaller samples, our data cover 118 countries, both

3

Throughout the paper, we use the term ‘skilled’ or ‘highly skilled’ to refer to individuals with at
least tertiary education. Individuals with less than tertiary education are referred to as ‘unskilled’.

2

developed and developing, over an 11-year period. This allows greater confidence
in the generality of the findings. It also makes it possible to investigate
heterogeneity of responses to trade shocks based on various individual and countrylevel characteristics. Furthermore, by incorporating country and year fixed effects
and country-specific linear time trends and by instrumenting for changes in skillintensive trade, we address many potential concerns related to endogeneity and
reverse causality.4
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses related literature and motivates
our hypotheses. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 outlines our empirical
approach and instrumentation strategy. Section 5 presents the results. Section 6
concludes.

2 Trade and Politics
Classic theories of trade suggest that how international openness affects different
groups depends on their factor endowments. The Heckscher-Ohlin and StolperSamuelson theorems show that assuming perfect competition, constant returns to
scale, and costless factor mobility across sectors, openness benefits owners of each
country's abundant factors and hurts owners of scarce factors. In particular, free
trade should raise the wages of skilled workers in developed countries, where such
workers are plentiful, and the wages of unskilled workers in poor countries, where

4

Our identification strategy is only suitable for instrumenting high skill intensive trade, and does
not work for low skill intensive trade. In fact, when we construct instruments for low skill intensive
exports and imports following Feyrer (2009), we consistently find that first stage F-statistics are
below 4 in all models. This is expected given that low skill intensive goods are less likely to travel
by air and, accordingly, less likely to benefit from decreases in the cost of air transportation. In
ordinary least squares specifications (see Appendix Tables 9 and 10), we found no relationship
between low skill intensive exports and imports and differences in political approval between
unskilled and skilled individuals.

3

skilled labor is scarce. The main rival theory, the Ricardo-Viner specific factors
model, assumes certain factors are immobile between sectors. In this case, all
workers in a given industry—whether skilled or unskilled—have similar interests.
They do better under openness if their country has a comparative advantage in their
industry, and worse if it does not.
Economic interests imply policy preferences. In a Heckscher-Ohlin world, skilled
workers should favor free trade if they live in skill-rich countries, but protection if
they live in skill-poor ones.5 The opposite holds for unskilled workers. In a world
of specific factors, workers in internationally competitive industries should favor
open borders, while those in uncompetitive ones should demand high tariffs.
Empirical studies testing these hypotheses against survey data have found some
support for the Heckscher-Ohlin predictions, but less for Ricardo-Viner. In the US,
highly skilled workers—as proxied by education—are more likely to favor
openness, consistent with the factor endowment story (Scheve and Slaughter 2001).
However, education could affect policy preferences by many other pathways—for
instance, by inculcating greater tolerance toward foreigners, encouraging risk
acceptance, and increasing understanding of the benefits of commerce. Studies that
use other measures of skills such as the occupational wage have found no effect on
trade attitudes (Mansfield and Mutz 2009, p.429).
Two papers use cross-national surveys to investigate the interaction between skill
levels of the individual and the country more precisely. O'Rourke and Sinnott
(2001) and Rodrik and Mayda (2005) both found that, while highly skilled
individuals supported free trade in richer countries (where high skills are more
abundant), they opposed it in poorer countries. This evidence, consistent with
Heckscher-Ohlin, is somewhat surprising given that the assumptions of the model

5

For a classic investigation of the role of such factors in history, see Rogowski (1989).

4

are clearly not met in reality. Besides the lack of perfect competition in many
countries and the importance of economies of scale, observed patterns of trade do
not fit the expectation Heckscher-Ohlin theory generates of predominantly NorthSouth flows. As Baldwin (2008, p.8) notes, empirical tests have “revealed little
support for the HO [Heckscher-Ohlin] proposition that countries export their
relatively abundant factors (embodied in goods) and import their relatively scarce
productive factors.”
This research provides evidence on the link between skill levels and attitudes
towards trade. But it does not examine whether such attitudes influence political
preferences and behavior. It is natural to assume the material losers from increased
openness will not only favor protection but also vote and protest against incumbents
who fail to protect their markets. A small but growing literature looks for such
political effects.
Three recent papers evaluate the impact of international trade on voting in the US.
Margalit (2011) shows that job losses from import competition depressed the vote
share of the incumbent president in 2004 and 2008. Jensen et al. (2017) also find
that trade-related losses in manufacturing cost incumbents votes. They show, also,
that rising employment in high-skill export industries led to higher incumbent
support. Autor et al. (2016) examine the polarization of U.S. politics and find that
congressional districts exposed to greater increases in import penetration (due to
the “China import shock” following China’s accession to the World Trade
Organization) disproportionately removed moderate politicians from office in the
2000s.
Fewer papers have looked for political consequences of trade in a cross-national
context. One exception is Colantone and Stanig (2017), who examine how
globalization has affected electoral outcomes in 15 West European countries in
1988-2007. They find that greater exposure to the shock of Chinese import
5

competition predicts a shift to the right in voting, including greater support for
nationalist parties and the radical right. Margalit (2017), using data from the ISSP
survey, finds that those in advanced economies who feel they have suffered from
international trade tend to support parties that favor economic protection but sociocultural conservatism.
We build on both strands of this literature. Following the Heckscher-Ohlin-inspired
studies of policy preferences, we hypothesize that attitudes will depend on the
interaction between an individual’s skill level and the skill-intensity of the
country’s imports and exports. We disaggregate individuals and trade flows by
skills. As in the recent papers on political consequences, we reach beyond selfreported attitudes towards trade, which may be superficial for many citizens and
unlinked to political behavior, to study support for incumbent officials, which has
clearer consequences. At the same time, rather than assuming a particular pattern
of trade flows based on countries’ factor endowments—a pattern known to be at
best only partly accurate—we use a direct measure of trade disaggregated on the
basis of skill-intensity. Our main hypothesis is that skilled workers are more likely
to support the incumbent national leadership if high skill-intensive imports are
falling and skill-intensive exports are growing.

3

Data

The data used in this paper come from the Gallup World Polls, the United Nations
International Trade Statistics Database (COMTRADE), CEPII, the World Bank’s
World Development Indicators (WDI), the Integrated Network for Societal Conflict
Research Database, Polity IV, and Freedom House. The level of analysis is the
individual level, and the details on how the dataset was constructed are provided
below.
6

3.1

Individual Level Data from Gallup World Polls

Our primary data on individual characteristics and outcome variables come from
the 2005-2015 Gallup World Polls (GWP). These nationally representative surveys
are fielded every year in over 120 countries and interview approximately 1,000
individuals in each country on a wide range of topics. Our main sample includes
nearly 450,000 respondents, aged 25 to 64, from 118 countries.6 We restrict
attention to those aged 25 to 64 to focus on economically active individuals who
have most likely completed their education.7
The key outcome variables in this paper come from questions asked to all Gallup
respondents about the job performance of the ruling leader and confidence in
national government: (i) “Do you approve or disapprove of the job performance of
the leadership of this country?”; (ii) “In (this country), do you have confidence in
each of the following, or not: … How about national government?” We also
examine responses to four parallel questions, as placebo outcomes, about whether
the respondents have confidence in: (iii) the military; (iv) honesty of elections; (v)
the judicial system; and (vi) media (freedom). 8
The GWP also provides detailed information on individuals’ demographic
characteristics (age, gender, educational attainment, marital status, religion, and
urban/rural residence), labor market outcomes, and income. Controlling for
employment status and income allows us to measure the impact of trade on political
approval beyond trade’s direct effect on households’ material well-being.

6

We do not include observations for Nagorno-Karabakh, Northern Cyprus, Somaliland, and Puerto
Rico.
7
We tried lowering the minimum age to 18 years and found no qualitative change in the results.
8
These questions are part of a Gallup ‘national institutions index’. Note that if a respondent asks for
clarification or interpretation of the question, Gallup surveyors are trained to answer “However you
interpret the question,” or “It is whatever the question means to you.” If a respondent asks whether
there is a more neutral response option than “yes” or “no,” surveyors are trained to ask whether
“there is one that you lean more towards.”

7

The GWP’s main advantage for our purposes is that the poll allows us to assess the
effect of international trade on political approval across a broad spectrum of
countries over the past decade. This is important since, as noted, existing research
has mostly provided evidence on individual countries.
3.2

International Trade Data

We obtained product-level export and import data on goods and services from the
UN COMTRADE database for the years 2005-2015. More specifically, we use the
3-digit Standard International Trade Classification (SITC – revision 3) to categorize
manufactured goods by their skill intensity (that is, labor-intensive, low-skill
intensive, medium-skill intensive, and high-skill intensive).9 The data on exports
and imports of services employ the EBOPS classification. We use correspondence
tables provided by the Manual on Statistics of International Trade in Services
(2002) to classify trade in services by their skill intensity. In both datasets, values
are reported in nominal U.S. dollars. We adjust these values to 2011 dollars using
the consumer price index. Using these data, we calculate the variable Total Volume
of High Skill Intensive Exports (Imports). Some examples of high skill intensive
goods and services include electronics, parts and components for electronics,
medical and chemical products, optical goods, and auditing, financial, and legal
services. Goods such as cutlery, fencing grills, metal containers for storage or
transport, and office supplies are classified as low-skill intensive products. We
provide detailed information about the skill classification in the appendix.10

9

In what follows, we focus on high-skill intensive goods and services and describe other goods and
services as “low-skilled” (thus grouping together labor-intensive, low-skill intensive, and mediumskill intensive ones). Detailed information on product grouping of goods and services can be found
at: http://unctadstat.unctad.org/EN/Classifications.html.
10
Of course, some low-skilled as well as high-skilled individuals work in sectors such as electronics,
so these classifications rank sectors by the average level of skill-intensity.

8

To construct our instruments, we mainly use two datasets. The first is the special
license version of the UN COMTRADE data, which provides bilateral trade flows
between countries at the product and service level. The raw dataset includes more
than 250 million year-country-pair (exporter-importer) observations. We first
classify each trade flow based on its skill intensity. We then calculate the sum of
trade values by year-country-trade-partner for each country. The second dataset
comes from the CEPII. More specifically, we use the Historical Bilateral Trade and
Gravity Dataset (TRADHIST) that was compiled by Fouquin and Hugot (2016) to
obtain information on bilateral trade characteristics, including geographical
distance, common borders, and colonial and linguistic links. There are three main
measures of bilateral distance: a city population-weighted mean of the great-circle
distance between each pair of countries; the great-circle distance between the two
largest cities of each country pair; and the shortest maritime distance between two
countries (for landlocked countries, Fouquin and Hugot (2016) choose the closest
foreign port and report the distance accordingly).11
3.3

Time-Varying Country Characteristics

We also control for several time-varying country characteristics in our main
specification, including the country’s political regime (from the Polity IV dataset)
and population, Freedom House’s Press Freedom Index, GDP per capita, the import
to GDP ratio, and the export to GDP ratio obtained from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators database. As a robustness check, we also control for
leaders’ tenure (i.e., the number of consecutive years served in the top office). The

11

Fouquin and Hugot (2016) obtained information on all maritime distances from vesseltracker.com
(2014). They first identified the largest port in each country (two ports if the country was bordered
by two different seas or oceans) and chose the shortest maritime distance between any of the ports
of both countries.

9

data on this variable come from the Database of Political Institutions, with our
updates (Cruz, Keefer, and Scartascini 2016).
3.4

Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the outcome variables, country
characteristics, and individual demographic characteristics. Several patterns are
notable. First, nearly 50 per cent of respondents report that they approve of the
performance of the leader or have confidence in the national government. These
figures mask substantial heterogeneity within and across countries. For example,
over the sample period, the lowest approval ratings for leaders were recorded in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (17 per cent), Angola (21 per cent), Romania (22 per cent),
Ukraine (23 per cent), and Peru (23 per cent). At the other end of the scale, Bhutan
(95 per cent), Singapore (94 per cent), Vietnam (92 per cent), Azerbaijan (88 per
cent), and Kazakhstan (87 per cent) have the highest approval ratings in the sample.
Similar patterns emerge, perhaps not surprisingly, when we look at the figures about
confidence in national government. Respondents in Ukraine, Romania, Peru,
Moldova and Bosnia and Herzegovina report the lowest levels of confidence in
their national governments, ranging from 19 to 23 per cent. By contrast, more than
80 per cent of respondents report having confidence in their national government
in Namibia, Azerbaijan, Sri Lanka, Ethiopia, Singapore, Vietnam, and Bhutan.
These figures suggest that: (i) the two outcome variables (approval of leaders and
confidence in national government) are highly correlated; and (ii) respondents in
democratic countries tend to report lower levels of government approval.12 On
average, 47 per cent of skilled individuals report confidence in government and 49
per cent of skilled individuals approve the job performance of their leader.

12

This is consistent with Guriev and Treisman (2017).

10

The patterns of high skill intensive exports and imports vary substantially.
Luxembourg (52 per cent), Ireland (46 per cent), and Singapore (45 per cent) have
the highest shares of skill intensive exports (as a percentage of total exports of
goods and services), and China, the United States, and Germany have the highest
total volume of high skill intensive exports. By contrast, the shares are lowest in
Venezuela (1.1 per cent), Azerbaijan (0.8 per cent) and Nigeria (0.6 per cent) and
the volumes are lowest in Burundi, Rwanda, and Zimbabwe.
The shares of high-skill-intensive imports (as a percentage of total imports of goods
and services) range from highs of 50 to 72 per cent in Rwanda, Lebanon, Malawi,
Nepal and Burundi to lows of 5 to 10 per cent in Azerbaijan, Trinidad and Tobago,
Qatar, Oman, and Bahrain. When it comes to the volumes, the United States, China
and Germany are the top importing countries of high skill intensive goods and
services, while Burundi, Niger, and Togo have the lowest import volume of high
skill intensive goods and services in our sample. Looking at placebo outcomes, we
see that people tend to have confidence in the armed forces (72 per cent for the
military), while only about half of respondents worldwide have confidence in the
honesty of elections, the judicial system, and media. Moreover, differences in these
are very large, with about 20-50 percentage point gaps between democracies and
non-democracies.

4
4.1

Estimation Methodology
Empirical Strategy

To assess the effect of international trade on approval of the leader and confidence
in the national government, we start by estimating ordinary least squares models.
We use the following specification:

11

Yict = β0 + β1Xict + β2Skilledict*(Log High Skill Intensive Exports)ct

(1)

+ β3Skilledict*(Log High Skill Intensive Imports)ct + β4Skilledict +
+ β5*(Log High Skill Intensive Exports)ct +
+ β6*(Log High Skill Intensive Imports)ct +
+ β7Zct + β8Cc + β9Tt + β10Cc*t + εict

where Yict is a dummy variable indicating that the respondent approves of “the job
performance of the leadership of their country” or the respondent has “confidence
in national government” depending on the model, for individual i in country c at
time t. We estimate linear probability models for ease of interpretation.
To adjust for the effect of demographic and labor market structure on the outcome
variables,

we

directly

control

for

time-varying,

observable

individual

characteristics. More specifically, Xict is a vector of demographic variables that
(depending on the model) include: a male dummy; age and age squared; dummy
variables for marital status (married/civil partnership and divorced/separated); a
dummy variable for the presence of children in the household (any child under 15);
and a dummy variable for living in an urban area. To account for pro-cyclical
variation in labor market outcomes, we control for the log of household income.13
Note that we do not control for individual-level unemployment in our baseline
specification since this information is only available in the GWP from 2009. Below
we show that our results are robust to this choice.

13

Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using the World Bank’s individual
consumption PPP conversion factor. This makes income estimates comparable across all countries.

12

Skilled is an indicator variable equal to one for individuals with at least tertiary
education.14 The excluded category for education in all models consists of
individuals who report less than tertiary education, which we label unskilled. Log
High Skill Intensive Exports (Imports) is the natural log of the total volume of high
skill intensive exports (imports) of good and services. The main coefficients of
interest are the interaction terms β2 and β3, which capture the impact of growth in
the total volume of high skill intensive exports and imports on the approval levels
of high-skilled (relative to unskilled) individuals. The coefficients β5 and β6
measure the impact of growth in the total volume of high skill intensive exports and
imports on approval levels of unskilled individuals.

Zct is a vector of other

potentially relevant country-time varying characteristics that could be correlated
with political approval. These include political regime characteristics of a country
(Polity IV), the Freedom House Press Freedom Index, the log of GDP per capita,
the log of country population, the import to GDP ratio, and the export to GDP ratio.
To account for other unobservable characteristics, we include a full set of country
(Cc) and year (Tt) dummies. The country dummies control for all time-invariant
variation in the outcome variable caused by factors that vary cross-nationally. Year
dummies capture the impact of global shocks that affect all countries
simultaneously. We also include multiple language and interview type dummies
throughout, though we do not report them in equation 1. In addition, we control for
country-specific linear time trends, Cc*t, thus removing distinctive trends in
opinion in various countries that might otherwise bias our estimates if they
accidentally coincided with trade-related changes. In the fully saturated models, the
estimates are identified by exploiting within-country variation that has been

14

Gallup harmonized education variables and created a worldwide dataset with standardized
individual level education data. All responses regarding education are coded into the following
categories for global comparison: Elementary (up to 8 years of basic education); Secondary (9 to 15
years of education); and Tertiary (completed 4 years of education beyond “high school” and/or
received a four-year college degree).

13

stripped of any influence of constant and linearly changing country
characteristics.15 Finally, we cluster standard errors by country and use sample
weights provided by Gallup to make the data representative at the country level.
4.2

Instrumentation Strategy

To identify the causal effects of international trade on political approval, we need
to address the issues of omitted variables bias and reverse causality. If individuals
do not approve of the performance of their leader or do not have confidence in the
government, that might affect economic activity and eventually influence the
volume and composition of trade. Trade and political outcomes may also be jointly
affected by omitted variables (such as a change in institutions). Furthermore,
measurement error in high skill intensive exports (imports) may result in
attenuation bias. To tackle these issues, we use two-stage least squares (2SLS)
methodology with instrumental variables that affect high skill intensive exports
(imports) but are unrelated to the approval of or confidence in the incumbents.
To find a valid instrument, we focus on exogenous determinants of trade flows that
predict each country’s high skill intensive exports and imports. Specifically, we use
the changes in high skill intensive bilateral trade flows that have resulted from
advances in transportation technology.16 As documented in Hummels (2007),
substantial improvements in technology have sharply cut the cost of air shipping
relative to that of sea shipping. Put differently, a weight/value ratio of trade for air
transport has been declining much faster than a weight/value ratio of trade for sea
transport. Trade costs have therefore changed differently for country pairs with
different sea-distance-to-air-distance ratios. This means, for instance, that countries

15

Our results are also robust to inclusion of country-year fixed effects.
In a similar way, Pascali (2017) uses the adoption of the steamship in the late 19th century to
establish a causal relationship between trade and development, exploiting the differential impact of
this new technology on trade between countries separated by larger or smaller distances.
16

14

located far from their major export markets have a comparative advantage in
lightweight goods due to air shipping (Harrigan 2010).
According to annual global statistics from ICAO (2015), total air freight traffic,
expressed in terms of scheduled total freight tonne-kilometers performed, increased
sharply to 199 billion in 2015 from 152 billion in 2005, registering a 31 per cent
increase over our sample period. This shift in the mode of transport is particularly
important in our case given that the majority of high-value goods, which are likely
to be high skill intensive exports (imports), travel by air (Feyrer, 2009). In other
words, our instrumentation approach exploits the time-varying effects of air and sea
distances on the relative transportation costs of different types of products to
identify exogenous variation in bilateral trade flows. Our predicted measures of
trade flows (being a function of only geography and time) are exogenous with
respect to political approval and therefore allow us to identify causal effects.
Following Feyrer (2009), our key identification assumption is that advances in air
transportation technology are independent of any particular country and therefore
contain no information about government approval in specific countries.
Our approach is based on the gravity model (Anderson, 2011 and Anderson and
van Wincoop, 2003) and closely follows Feyrer (2009) and Blanchard and Olney
(2017). We interact bilateral sea and air distances with year fixed effects to identify
the impact of enhanced aircraft technology over the sample period. Formally, we
estimate the following equation:
log(Xijt) = αsea,tlog(seadistanceij) + αair,tlog(airdistanceij) + Yt + Yij + εijt

(2)

where Xijt is the bilateral flow of high skill intensive exports from exporter i to
importer j in year t. Yt indicates year dummies and Yij represents bilateral pair fixed

15

effects; seadistanceij is the shortest bilateral sea trade distance, and airdistanceij is
the weighted great circle distance between countries i and j.17
Using Equation (2), we calculate predicted bilateral trade flows for each country
pair, based on their exogenous sea and air distances. We sum these across trading
partners to construct our two instruments: the total predicted volume of high skill
intensive exports (imports) of goods and services for each country.18 We use these
two instruments (the total predicted volume of high skill intensive exports and the
total predicted volume of high skill intensive imports) to create two predicted
interaction terms: “the total predicted volume of high skill intensive
exports*tertiary education” and “the total predicted volume of high skill intensive
imports*tertiary education”. In the final regression, we include these four variables.
Importantly, Figure 1 demonstrates that our instruments are good predictors of
actual high skill intensive exports and imports.19

5

Results

This section presents three sets of results. We first show Ordinary Least Squares
(OLS) estimates. We then present IV results following the methodology introduced
in section 4.2 and conduct a counterfactual analysis to illustrate the quantitative

17

We also constructed alternatives instruments by controlling for country fixed effects and bilateral
controls (whether the two countries are contiguous, share a common language, have ever had a
colonial link, are currently in a colonial relationship, share a common language). IV specifications
using these alternative measures also produce qualitatively similar results reports. These results are
not reported but available upon request.
18
Since in our regressions the dependent variable is logged, we delog the estimates before summing
them across trading partners and then take the log of the total for subsequent analysis. Our main
models also include zero trade values. In models not reported, we tried excluding zero trade values
and found qualitatively similar results.
19
Appendix Table 6 (includes country-pair dummies) and Appendix Table 7 (includes country fixed
effects and bilateral controls) report the full set of coefficients on elasticity of trade with regards to
air and sea distance between 2005 and 2015. Corresponding estimates for low-skill intensive trade
are presented in Appendix Table 8.

16

implications of our results. We also investigate heterogeneity by socio-economic
subgroups and country income levels. Finally, we present a set of robustness
checks.
5.1

Ordinary Least Squares Specifications

In this subsection, we start by analysing the effects of international trade on political
approval among skilled workers relative to unskilled workers. Table 2 presents the
results from the OLS estimation where the dependent variable is a dummy variable
indicating that the respondent approves of “the job performance of the leadership
of his or her country” and Table 3 presents the results from the OLS estimation
where the dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating that the respondent
has “confidence in national government.”
In both tables, Column 1 reports the estimation with country and year fixed effects
and country level controls (Polity 2 scores, press freedom index, the log of country
population, and the log of GDP per capita) included; column 2 adds demographic
characteristics; column 3 adds the logarithm of household income; column 4 adds
country-specific linear time trends.
In all columns of Table 2, there is a positive relationship, marginally significant at
p < .01, between total imports (which here captures the effect among the unskilled)
and approval of the leader. Total imports are also positively related to approval of
the government (among unskilled respondents) in all columns of Table 3, though
these estimates are not statistically significant. Contrary to the conventional
wisdom, we find no evidence that unskilled workers oppose imports and blame their
leaders for failing to protect markets—rather the reverse. There is no sign that
growth in total exports affects political approval one way or the other.
Although the association between increased total imports and higher approval is
only significant among unskilled respondents, Tables 2 and 3 provide no evidence
17

that skilled and unskilled individuals react differently to such growth. Nor do they
respond differently to growth in total exports—none of the interaction terms is
significant. When skilled and unskilled respondents are combined, the average
effect of imports on approval is not significant (see Column 1 of Appendix Table
2). Nor are either high skill intensive imports or high skill intensive exports
significantly associated with approval if respondents are not disaggregated by skill
level (see Column 2 of Appendix Table 2). These results highlight the need for a
more granular approach analyzing the composition of trade.
Tables 4 and 5 present OLS estimates of the relationship between the total volume
of high skill intensive exports (imports) and political approval among skilled
individuals.20 In Table 4 we report results for approval of the leader’s performance.
The coefficients at the skill-intensive exports and imports variables are small and
statistically insignificant; this implies no effect of skill-intensive trade on unskilled
individuals. The interaction term between the tertiary education dummy and the
logarithm of total high skill intensive exports in the first column is positive and
statistically significant (with a magnitude of 0.045), and the interaction term
between the tertiary education dummy and the log of total high skill intensive
imports is negative and statistically significant (with a magnitude of -0.051). The
former is the estimated impact of growth in high skill intensive exports on political
approval among skilled individuals (relative to unskilled ones), and the latter is the
estimated effect of growth in high skill intensive imports on political approval
among skilled individuals (relative to unskilled ones). Columns 2 to 4 show that the
estimated effects are similar, and remain significant, as additional controls are
added. In our fully saturated regression (Column 4), a 10 percent increase in high
skill intensive exports leads to a 0.46 percentage point rise in confidence in the
country’s leader among the skilled relative to the unskilled. A 10 percent increase
20

In column 1, we add the same country level controls as in Tables 2 and 3 plus the log of the
imports to GDP ratio and the log of the exports to GDP ratio.

18

in high skill intensive imports results in a 0.53 percentage point fall in approval of
the leader among skilled individuals (relative to unskilled ones). Table 5 reports the
results for confidence in national government. The results have the same sign,
statistical significance, and similar magnitudes.
5.2

Instrumental Variables Specifications

In this section, we present the IV estimates of the relationship between the
composition of trade and political approval. We use the total predicted volume of
high skill intensive exports (imports) as instrument for the total actual volume of
high skill intensive exports (imports).
We first discuss the validity and the power of the instrument. Tables 6 and 7 present
the first stage estimates, which show a strong relationship between the total
predicted volume of skill intensive exports (imports) and the actual total volume of
high skill intensive exports (imports). This relationship is robust to the inclusion of
individual-level covariates as well as country-level controls. Overall, the
instruments are highly correlated with the relevant endogenous variables and have
predictive power. The results for the first stage F-test also show that the first-stage
relationships are strong for both individual regressions and joint significance of the
instruments. The Kleiberberg-Paap F-statistic is 26 in the sample for which data on
approval of the leader are available; for the sample with data on confidence in the
national government, the F-statistic is 25.
Tables 8 and 9 present the second-stage estimates, in which we replicate the OLS
specifications from Tables 4 and 5. We only report coefficients on the main
variables of interest. Column 4 of Table 8 presents the IV results with country and
year fixed effects, country-specific linear time trends, household income and
demographic characteristics, as well as time-varying country-level characteristics.
The impact of skill intensive exports on approval of the leader among skilled
19

individuals is positive and significant, with a point estimate of 0.117, while that of
skill intensive imports is negative and significant, with the point estimate -0.165.21
The magnitudes imply that a 10 percent increase in skill-intensive exports results
in a 1.2 percentage point increase in political approval among the skilled individuals
(relative to the unskilled). The respective decrease for skill-intensive imports is 1.7
percentage points. In our dataset, the maximum deviation of skill-intensive exports
from the country specific trend (averaged across all countries) was +3.4 percent;
the minimum deviation was -3.0 percent. The numbers for skill-intensive imports
are +3.0 and -2.6 percent respectively. Therefore, if we compare a year with
maximum skill-intensive exports (in terms of deviation from the country trend) and
minimum skill-intensive imports with a year with minimum skill-intensive exports
and maximum skill-intensive imports, the difference in approval comes to
0.117*(3.4+3.0)+0.165*(3.0+2.6)=1.7 percentage points. This is substantial: the
average absolute value of the deviation of approval from its country-specific trend
is 2.9 percentage points.
Our results also show that skilled individuals are on average more likely to approve
of their countries’ leaders (controlling for trade). The coefficient at tertiary
education is 1.22, so an increase of the share of skilled individuals in the population
by 10 percentage points should (on average) increase political approval by 12
percentage points.

21

One possible threat to identification might occur if changing fuel prices cause changes in exports
and imports of high skill intensive products between given country pairs in a way that depends on
their air and sea distances, and changing fuel prices also affect government approval through some
other channel. We checked, however, that our results are robust to controlling for per capita oil
revenue, oil prices, oil exports, oil production and their interactions with the high skilled dummy
(Appendix Table 12 reports the results while controlling for per capita oil revenue. Other estimates
are not reported but available upon request). The estimated effects are qualitatively and
quantitatively similar to the baseline results in Column 4 of Tables 8 and 9.

20

We find similar results in Table 9, where the dependent variable is confidence in
the national government. The impact of high skill intensive exports on confidence
in national government among skilled individuals (relative to the unskilled) is
positive and significant, with a magnitude of 0.113 (column 4). That of high skill
intensive imports is negative and significant, with a point estimate of -0.152. In
each specification, the IV coefficients are larger than the OLS estimates.22
In Table 10, we provide examples to develop a better understanding of the
quantitative implications of our results. Specifically, we choose four countries with
relatively large increases in skill-intensive exports and four with large increases in
skill-intensive imports over the sample period 2005-2015. Using the regression
coefficients from our preferred 2SLS specification (Column 4 of Table 8), we
predict the impact of these changes in trade on the approval rates of the country’s
leader among skilled respondents in the given country. We compare the predicted
changes in approval to the actual changes in approval among the skilled over the
same period. We find that for the countries with large increases in skill intensive
exports (Bulgaria, Lithuania, Nigeria, and Slovakia) trade effects explain a quarter
of the increase in political approval among high skill individuals on average. For
the countries with large increases in skill intensive imports (Chile, Paraguay, South
Korea, and Turkey) trade effects explain from one half to two thirds of the actual
decrease in political approval among high skill individuals.
To understand the heterogeneity of the effects, we consider the IV estimations for
various subsamples. First-stage F-statistics for heterogeneity estimates are above

22

There is no strong correlation between our instrument and low skill intensive exports and imports.
This is not surprising as our instrument is based on the idea that skill intensive goods are more likely
to be transported by air. This, however, makes it impossible to identify the causal effect of lowskilled trade on political approval. On the other hand, these results might suggest that Feyrer’s
(2009) instrument for total trade mainly relies on the variation generated by high skill intensive
trade. The raw correlation between high skill and low skill intensive exports (0.54) and imports
(0.65) - following UNCTAD definitions - is also relatively low in our sample.

21

10 in all models, though to conserve space we do not report these. Table 11, which
reruns the baseline specification in column 4 of Tables 8 and 9 for different
subgroups, shows that there are no meaningful differences in responses between
men and women and between younger and older cohorts. One might expect to find
stronger effects in rural areas, where labor markets are less competitive and so
workers have more to fear from trade shocks.23 Columns 1 and 2 in Table 12
confirm that this is, indeed, the case. Columns 3 through 5 show that low-income
and middle-income households are more responsive to trade shocks and that the
average results are mostly driven by these groups. For high-income households,
coefficients have the same signs and are statistically significant, but the effects are
smaller.24 The smaller effects for high-income individuals may be explained by the
fact that our indicator for skilled workers (i.e. tertiary education) de facto includes
the occupational dummies for professionals and executives, who are less likely to
be hurt by the labour market effects of trade shocks.
We also estimate the relationship between trade and political approval separately
for richer and poorer countries. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 13 show that the effect
of high skill intensive exports on high skilled workers in developed countries is
.077. While the corresponding effect in less developed countries could not be
estimated precisely, it is must be considerably larger to produce an estimate across
all countries of .117 (Table 8, column 4).

In Columns 3 and 4 of Table 13, we split the sample by the level of democracy.
Specifically, Column 3 reports the estimates for non-democracies (i.e. polity2 score
-10 to 5) and Column 4 presents results for democracies (polity2 score 6 to +10).
23

The share of skilled individuals living in rural areas in our estimation sample is 19 percent in
developed countries and 7 percent in developing ones.
24
The share of skilled individuals by income-groups in our estimation sample is as follows: (i) for
less developed countries: 03 in low-income tercile, .15 in middle-income tercile, .29 in upperincome tercile; (ii) for developed countries: .05 in low-income tercile, .14 in middle-income tercile,
.33 in upper-income tercile.

22

The effects seem to be slightly smaller in democracies than in the full sample.
Although we cannot estimate the effects precisely in the non-democracies subsample, they appear to be somewhat larger than among the democracies. Given the
country’s trade profile, skilled individuals have higher political approval than the
unskilled in democracies. Although estimated imprecisely, the opposite appears to
be true for non-democracies. This is consistent with Guriev and Treisman (2017).
In addition, we rank countries by returns to education (i.e. by estimating withincountry Mincer equations) in Appendix Table 11. The findings suggest that the
middle-tercile group mostly drives the average results.

5.3

Placebo and Robustness Checks

Table 14 presents our placebo analysis. We examine responses to four parallel
questions that should not, in theory, be affected directly by a change in trade
flows—whether the respondent had confidence in the military, the judicial system,
freedom of media, and honesty of elections. The results confirm that the significant
relationships documented in Tables 8 and 9 are specific to political approval. We
find no economically or statistically meaningful association between growth in high
skill intensive exports (imports) and confidence in any of the other institutions.
Tables 15 and 16 present additional robustness checks. The top panel of Table 15
controls for individual unemployment — at the cost of restricting the sample to
years after 2009. Notably, we find that unemployment leads to a 4.1 percentage
point fall in confidence in the national government and 4.7 percentage point fall in
approval of the leader. The bottom panel of Table 15 excludes election years to
investigate whether strategic respondents distort the polls. The top panel of Table
16 controls for leaders’ continuous tenure (since time in office can affect approval
ratings) and the bottom panel of Table 16 lowers the minimum age in the sample to
15 years. The results remain qualitatively the same.
23

We also test our results in a sample of countries that are the main recipients of
outsourcing business from developed nations. Outsourcing might be expected to
change the pattern of attitudes towards international openness. Political approval
among highly skilled workers in countries that benefit from considerable
outsourcing may be less sensitive to the level of exports and imports of high skillintensive products. Indeed, outsourcing and participation in global value chains
involves higher volumes of both exports and imports. In such countries, increases
in imports may be perceived as essential to subsequent increases in exports and
therefore need not be politically unpopular.
We use the AT Kearney Global Services Location Index (2017) to determine the
top 35 destination countries (excluding developed nations). The IV results are
shown in Table 17. As expected, the coefficient on the interaction between tertiary
education and high-skill imports (and exports) is no longer statistically significant
in the destination countries and now has the “wrong” sign. This is consistent with
the view that receiving outsourced jobs can insulate the educated population in
developing countries against the costs of freer trade.25 The second column of Table
17 shows that the coefficients for the subsample of non-outsourcing developing
countries are large and statistically significant.
In Table 18, we consider unemployment and individual income as economic
outcomes to investigate a potential link between trade, labour market outcomes and
political approval. OLS estimates in Column 1 suggest that increases in high skill
intensive exports lead to a fall in unemployment among skilled individuals and
growth in high skill intensive imports has the opposite effect. However, while the
coefficients are similar in IV specifications (Column 2), they are no longer
statistically significant. When it comes to individual income, we find that growth

25

As a robustness check, we also tried using an alternative definition of “high-skilled individuals”
in this estimation, including those with at least secondary education. The results do not change.

24

in high skill intensive exports increases income among skilled individuals, whereas
growth in high skill intensive imports reduces income (Columns 3 and 4). These
results provide suggestive evidence that labor market related shocks due to changes
in trade structure do—as we have hypothesized—influence political approval.
It is also important to note that our findings do not change: (i) when we use the
share of high skill intensive exports (imports) as a percentage of total exports
(imports) instead of the log of total volume of high skill intensive export (imports)
– reported in Appendix Tables 4 and 5 (the first stage F-statistics are above 26 in
all specifications); (ii) when we define skilled as “secondary education or above”
(Appendix Table 5); (iii) and when we exclude the top one per cent income group.26

6

Conclusions

How does international openness influence political attitudes and behavior? This
paper shows that the effect of openness on the popularity of incumbents depends
on the skill composition of trade. Analyzing data from 118 countries in 2005-15,
we used an instrument based on geography to estimate the causal impact of changes
in the skill-intensity of imports and exports. Our results suggest that growth in high
skill intensive exports increases both the incumbent government’s and the leader’s
approval among skilled individuals while growth in high skill intensive imports has
a negative effect. We find no effects of high skill intensive trade on political
approval among unskilled individuals. The effects are very similar when we split
the samples by age or gender. As expected, the results are stronger for rural
residents, who often have fewer alternatives when local firms are forced to close.

26

These results are not reported here but are available upon request.

25

We also find that outsourcing of jobs to developing countries may blunt the impact
of openness on attitudes of the skilled individuals in those countries.
Our results have different implications for countries with different skill-intensity
profiles of exports and imports; by definition, not all countries can export more skill
intensive products than they import. As education levels rise, political approval
should tend to increase in countries with faster growth of skill-intensive exports
than imports – but to trend lower in other countries. In democracies, rising
education levels have a direct positive effect on approval that will often offset any
negative effect of skill-intensive imports. However, no such countervailing effect
is evident in authoritarian states.

26

References
Anderson, J.E., 2011. The gravity model. Annual Review of Economics, 3(1),
pp.133-160.
Anderson, J.E. and Van Wincoop, E., 2003. Gravity with gravitas: a solution to the
border puzzle. American Economic Review, 93(1), pp.170-192.
Autor, D., Dorn, D., Hanson, G. and Majlesi, K., 2016. Importing political
polarization? the electoral consequences of rising trade exposure (No. w22637).
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Baldwin, R., 2008. The Development and Testing of Heckscher-Ohlin Trade
Models: A Review. MIT Press.
Blanchard, E.J. and Olney, W.W., 2017. Globalization and human capital
investment: Export composition drives educational attainment. Journal of
International Economics, 106, pp.165-183.
Colantone, I. and Stanig, P., 2016. Global Competition and Brexit, Baffi Carefin
No. 44.
Colantone, I. and Stanig, P., 2017. The trade origins of economic nationalism:
Import competition and voting behavior in western Europe. Baffi Carefin Centre
Research Paper Series No: 49.
Cruz, Cesi, Philip Keefer and Carlos Scartascini. 2016. Database of Political
Institutions

Codebook,

2015

Update.

Washington,

DC:

Inter-American

Development Bank.
De Vries, C.E., 2017. The Cosmopolitian-Parochial Divide: What the 2017 Dutch
Election Result Tells Us About Political Change in the Netherlands and Beyond.
Journal of European Public Policy, forthcoming.
27

Dippel, C., Gold, R. and Heblich, S., 2015. Globalization and its (dis-) content:
Trade shocks and voting behavior (No. w21812). National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Feyrer, J., 2009. Trade and income: exploiting time series in geography (No.
w14910). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fouquin, M. and Hugot, J., 2016. Back to the future: International trade costs and
the two globalizations. CEPII Document de travail, (2016-13).
ICAO (2015). The World of Air Transport. https://www.icao.int/annual-report2015/Pages/the-world-of-air-transport-in-2015.aspx
Guriev, S. and Treisman D., 2017. “The popularity of authoritarian leaders: An
empirical investigation.” Mimeo, UCLA.
Harrigan, J., 2010. Airplanes and comparative advantage. Journal of International
Economics, 82(2), pp.181-194.
Hummels, D., 2007. Transportation costs and international trade in the second era
of globalization. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3), pp.131-154.
Jensen, J.B., Quinn, D.P. and Weymouth, S., 2017. Winners and losers in
international trade: The effects on US presidential voting. International
Organization, pp.1-35.
Mansfield, E.D. and Mutz, D.C., 2009. Support for free trade: Self-interest,
sociotropic politics, and out-group anxiety. International Organization, 63(3),
pp.425-457.

28

Margalit, Y., 2011. Costly jobs: Trade-related layoffs, government compensation,
and voting in US elections. American Political Science Review, 105(1), pp.166188.
Margalit, Y., 2017. Commerce & Oppositions: The Political Responses of
Globalization’s Losers. Mimeo, Stanford University.
Mayda, A.M. and Rodrik, D., 2005. Why are some people (and countries) more
protectionist than others? European Economic Review, 49(6), pp.1393-1430.
O’Rourke, K.H. and Sinnott, R., 2001. What determines attitudes towards
protection? Some cross-country evidence. In Brookings Trade Forum (Vol. 2001,
pp. 157-206).
Pascali, L., 2017. The wind of change: Maritime technology, trade, and economic
development. American Economic Review, 107(9), pp.2821-54.
Rogowski, R., 1989. Commerce and coalitions: How trade affects domestic
political alignments. Princeton, NJ, pp.1965-1985.
Scheve, K.F. and Slaughter, M.J., 2001. What determines individual trade-policy
preferences?. Journal of International Economics, 54(2), pp.267-292.
The Economist, 2016. Drawbridges up.
https://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21702748-new-divide-rich-countriesnot-between-left-and-right-between-open-and
United Nations, 2002. Manual on Statistics of international trade in services. United
Nations Publications, Statistical Paper, Series M, No. 86.

29

Figure 1: Exports vs. Predicted Exports and Imports vs. Predicted Imports

Notes: The left panel plots actual high-skill intensive exports against predicted high-skill intensive
exports. The right panel plots actual high-skill intensive imports against predicted high-skill
intensive imports.

30

Table 1: Sample Characteristics - 2005-2015 Gallup World Poll Data
(1)
Mean (Standard deviation)

Variables
Dependent variables
Approval of the leader
Confidence in national government

0.49 (0.49) – N: 426132
0.48 (0.49) – N: 459986

International trade characteristics
Ln (Total High Skill Intensive Exports)
Ln (Total High Skill Intensive Imports)

22.75 (2.80)
23.50 (2.08)

Placebo outcomes
Have confidence in the military
Have confidence in the honesty of elections
Have confidence in the judicial system
Have confidence in the media

0.72 (0.44) – N: 440141
0.49 (0.49) – N: 445397
0.50 (0.49) – N: 446528
0.53 (0.49) – N: 190270

Individual level characteristics
Age
Male
Tertiary education
Partnered
Urban
Household income

42.57 (11.30)
0.45 (0.49)
0.19 (0.39)
0.71 (0.45)
0.53 (0.49)
27,836 (119,324)

Country characteristics
Polity 2
Press freedom index
Import to GDP Ratio
Export to GDP Ratio
GDP Per Capita
Ln (Country Population)

5.54 (5.72)
45.86 (22.43)
0.43 (0.26)
0.41 (0.29)
16,721 (19,435)
17.03 (1.77)

N
598100
Notes: Means (standard deviations). This table provides individual and aggregate level variables
averaged across the 11 years (2005-2015) used in the analysis. The sample sizes for some
variables are different either due to missing data or because they were not asked in every year.

31

Table 2: OLS Estimates with Aggregate Exports (Imports) and Tertiary Education Interactions
(1)
(2)
OLS
OLS
Outcome: Approval of the leader

(3)
OLS

(4)
OLS

TertiaryEducation*LogTotalExports

0.010
(0.017)

0.008
(0.016)

0.009
(0.016)

0.010
(0.016)

Log Total Exports

0.023
(0.022)

0.022
(0.022)

0.022
(0.022)

0.016
(0.036)

TertiaryEducation*LogTotalImports

-0.004
(0.019)
0.120*
(0.066)
-0.144
(0.117)

-0.003
(0.019)
0.120*
(0.066)
-0.129
(0.114)

-0.003
(0.019)
0.120*
(0.066)
-0.136
(0.114)

-0.005
(0.019)
0.166*
(0.087)
-0.116
(0.114)

Log Total Imports

Tertiary Education

R-squared
0.113
0.114
0.114
0.131
N
426132
426132
426132
426132
Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country level characteristics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Household income
No
No
Yes
Yes
Country-specific linear time trends
No
No
No
Yes
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All specifications include multiple language and interview type dummies,
though we do not report them above. Country characteristics include: Polity 2, press freedom index, the log of country population, and the log of
GDP per capita. Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, age and its square, dummy variables for marital status (married/civil
partnership and divorced/separated), a dummy variable for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child under
15). Household income includes all wages and salaries in the household, remittances from family members living elsewhere, and all other sources
before taxes. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using the World Bank’s individual consumption PPP conversion factor, which
makes it comparable across all countries. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level.

32

Table 3: OLS Estimates with Aggregate Exports (Imports) and Tertiary Education Interactions
(1)
(2)
OLS
OLS
Outcome: Confidence in Government

(3)
OLS

(4)
OLS

TertiaryEducation*LogTotalExports

0.013
(0.017)

0.012
(0.017)

0.012
(0.017)

0.010
(0.017)

Log Total Exports

0.014
(0.019)

0.016
(0.019)

0.016
(0.019)

0.048
(0.032)

TertiaryEducation*LogTotalImports

0.001
(0.020)

0.002
(0.019)

0.002
(0.019)

0.004
(0.019)

0.052
(0.054)
-0.353***
(0.129)

0.052
(0.054)
-0.325**
(0.127)

0.052
(0.054)
-0.323***
(0.127)

0.092
(0.073)
-0.317***
(0.120)

Log Total Imports
Tertiary Education

R-squared
0.127
0.130
0.130
0.142
N
459986
459986
459986
459986
Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country level characteristics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Household income
No
No
Yes
Yes
Country-specific linear time trends
No
No
No
Yes
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All specifications include multiple language and interview type dummies,
though we do not report them above. Country characteristics include: Polity 2, press freedom index, the log of country population, and the log of
GDP per capita. Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, age and its square, dummy variables for marital status (married/civil
partnership and divorced/separated), a dummy variable for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child under
15). Household income includes all wages and salaries in the household, remittances from family members living elsewhere, and all other sources
before taxes. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using the World Bank’s individual consumption PPP conversion factor, which
makes it comparable across all countries. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level.

33

Table 4: OLS Estimates with High-skill Intensive Exports (Imports) and Tertiary Education Interactions
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
OLS
Outcome: Approval of the leader
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
Log High Skill Intensive Exports

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports
Log High Skill Intensive Imports
Tertiary Education

(4)
OLS

0.045***
(0.007)

0.044***
(0.007)

0.045***
(0.007)

0.046***
(0.007)

-0.020
(0.019)

-0.021
(0.019)

-0.021
(0.019)

-0.011
(0.025)

-0.051***
(0.010)
0.020
(0.044)
0.162**
(0.079)

-0.050***
(0.010)
0.021
(0.044)
0.177**
(0.078)

-0.051***
(0.010)
0.021
(0.044)
0.171*
(0.078)

-0.053***
(0.009)
0.013
(0.049)
0.197**
(0.076)

R-squared
0.113
0.115
0.115
0.131
N
426132
426132
426132
426132
Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country level characteristics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Household income
No
No
Yes
Yes
Country-specific linear time trends
No
No
No
Yes
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All specifications include multiple language and interview type dummies,
though we do not report them above. Country characteristics include: Polity 2, press freedom index, the log of country population, the log of
import to GDP ratio, the log of export to GDP ratio and the log of GDP per capita. Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, age and
its square, dummy variables for marital status (married/civil partnership and divorced/separated), a dummy variable for living in an urban area
and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Household income includes all wages and salaries in the household, remittances
from family members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using the World
Bank’s individual consumption PPP conversion factor, which makes it comparable across all countries. Results use the Gallup sampling weights
and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level.

34

Table 5: OLS Estimates with High-skill Intensive Exports (Imports) and Tertiary Education Interactions
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
OLS
Outcome: Confidence in Government
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
Log High Skill Intensive Exports
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports
Log High Skill Intensive Imports

Tertiary Education

(4)
OLS

0.037***
(0.007)
-0.011
(0.016)

0.036***
(0.007)
-0.011
(0.016)

0.036***
(0.007)
-0.011
(0.016)

0.034***
(0.007)
0.010
(0.021)

-0.033***
(0.009)
0.026
(0.035)
-0.089
(0.079)

-0.032***
(0.009)
0.027
(0.035)
-0.063
(0.078)

-0.032***
(0.009)
0.027
(0.035)
-0.062
(0.078)

-0.030***
(0.009)
0.002
(0.037)
-0.065
(0.075)

R-squared
0.138
0.141
0.141
N
459986
459986
459986
Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country level characteristics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Household income
No
No
Yes
Country-specific linear time trends
No
No
No
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to Table 4.

35

0.142
459986
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 6: IV First Stage Results for Approval of the Leader Outcome
(1)
High-skill
Outcome 
Intensive Exports

Predicted High-skill Intensive Exports

First Stage F statistics

(2)
High-skill
Intensive Imports

(3)
TertiaryEduc*
High-skill Intensive Exports

(4)
TertiaryEduc*
High-skill Intensive Imports

--

--

--

--

--

2.068***
(0.556)
15.70

Predicted High-skill Intensive Imports
--

1.631***
(0.291)
10.50

First Stage F statistics

TertiaryEduc.*PredictedHighSkillIntensiveExports
--

--

6.155***
(0.294)

--

51.23

First Stage F statistics

TertiaryEduc.*PredictedHighSkillIntensiveImports
--

--

--

3.866***
(0.225)

47.88
First Stage F statistics
Observations
426132
426132
426132
426132
First Stage F Statistics for joint significance of the
26.83
26.83
26.83
26.83
instruments for Column 4 of Table 8
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to column 4 of Table 4. Since the country-year
coverage for the two dependent variables (approval of the leader and the confidence in government) have slightly different country-year coverage, we run the first stage
regressions separately for Table 8 (for approval of the leader) and Table 9 (for confidence in government). Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard
errors are clustered at the country level.

36

Table 7: IV First Stage Results for Confidence in Government Outcome
(1)
High-skill
Outcome 
Intensive Exports

Predicted High-skill Intensive Exports

First Stage F stat

(2)
High-skill
Intensive Imports

(3)
TertiaryEduc*
High-skill Intensive Exports

(4)
TertiaryEduc*
High-skill Intensive Exports

--

--

--

--

--

2.132***
(0.541)
12.93

Predicted High-skill Intensive Imports
--

1.703***
(0.296)
14.34

First Stage F stat

TertiaryEduc.*PredictedHighSkillIntensiveExports
--

--

6.045***
(0.320)

--

61.75

First Stage F stat

TertiaryEduc.*PredictedHighSkillIntensiveImports
--

--

--

3.797***
(0.240)

54.47
First Stage F stat
Observations
459986
459986
459986
459986
First Stage F Statistics for joint significance of the
25.21
25.21
25.21
25.21
instruments for Column 4 of Table 9
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to column 4 of Table 4. Since the country-year
coverage for the two dependent variables (approval of the leader and the confidence in government) have slightly different country-year coverage, we run the first
stage regressions separately for Table 8 (for approval of the leader) and Table 9 (for confidence in government). Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust
standard errors are clustered at the country level.

37

Table 8: IV Estimates with High-skill Intensive Exports (Imports) and Tertiary Education Interactions
(1)
(2)
(3)
IV
IV
IV
Outcome: Approval of the leader
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports

(4)
IV

0.123***
(0.037)

0.119***
(0.036)

0.122***
(0.036)

0.117***
(0.035)

-0.027
(0.021)

-0.027
(0.021)

-0.027
(0.021)

-0.017
(0.030)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

-0.172***
(0.055)

-0.167***
(0.053)

-0.171***
(0.054)

-0.165***
(0.052)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

0.033
(0.049)
1.251***
(0.476)

0.033
(0.049)
1.231***
(0.458)

0.033
(0.049)
1.256***
(0.466)

0.023
(0.063)
1.220***
(0.455)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

Tertiary Education

KP First Stage F-Stat
26.68
26.84
26.84
N
426132
426132
426132
Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country level characteristics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Household income
No
No
Yes
Country-specific linear time trends
No
No
No
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to Table 4.

38

26.83
426132
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 9: IV Estimates with High-skill Intensive Exports (Imports) and Tertiary Education Interaction
(1)
(2)
(3)
IV
IV
IV
Outcome: Confidence in Government
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
Log High Skill Intensive Exports
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports
Log High Skill Intensive Imports
Tertiary Education

(4)
IV

0.127***
(0.042)

0.123***
(0.041)

0.122***
(0.040)

0.113***
(0.039)

-0.018
(0.022)

-0.018
(0.022)

-0.020
(0.022)

-0.003
(0.025)

-0.171***
(0.062)
0.040
(0.041)
1.116**
(0.532)

-0.165***
(0.060)
0.045
(0.041)
1.097**
(0.508)

-0.165***
(0.059)
0.040
(0.041)
1.093**
(0.502)

-0.152***
(0.058)
0.014
(0.049)
1.000**
(0.489)

KP First Stage F-Stat
25.06
25.59
25.22
N
459986
459986
459986
Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country level characteristics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Household income
No
No
Yes
Country-specific linear time trends
No
No
No
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to Table 4.

39

25.21
459986
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 10: Predicted and Actual Effects
% Change in % Change in Predicted effects
Predicted effects
Total
Actual change in approval
Proportion
high skill
high skill
due to change in
due to change in
predicted
of the leader among high
explained
Country
exports
imports
high skill exports high skill imports trade effects
skill individuals
Positive effect
Bulgaria
143.52
66.75
16.79
-11.02
5.77
20.92
0.28
Lithuania
156.99
88.53
18.36
-14.60
3.76
16.32
0.23
Nigeria
75.44
45.75
8.82
-7.54
1.28
9.18
0.14
Slovakia
270.98
172.84
31.70
-28.52
3.18
10.65
0.30
Negative effect
Chile
60.59
114.93
7.09
-18.96
-11.87
-21.97
0.54
Paraguay
157.57
199.83
18.44
-32.97
-14.53
-25.88
0.56
South Korea
74.94
97.94
8.77
-16.16
-7.39
-11.14
0.66
Turkey
120.43
100.23
14.09
-16.53
-2.44
-3.88
0.63
Notes: Counterfactual estimates are calculated using the point estimates from the baseline IV specification (Column 4 of Table 7). % Change in high
skill exports (imports) is the percentage change in high skill-intensive exports (imports) between the earliest and the latest available data points from
the UN COMTRADE dataset. Actual change in approval of the leader is the population-weighted difference in approval of the leader among skilled
individuals between the earliest and latest available data points from Gallup World Polls. Proportion explained reflects how much change in approval
of the leader among skilled individuals can be attributed to the change in skill composition of trade.

40

Table 11: IV Estimates - Sub-sample Analysis by Gender and Age
(1)
IV
Male
Outcome: Approval of the leader
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
0.121***
(0.025)

(2)
IV
Female

(3)
IV
25-44

(4)
IV
45-64

0.109***
(0.024)

0.125***
(0.025)

0.108***
(0.026)

-0.014
(0.027)

-0.020
(0.024)

-0.009
(0.025)

-0.035
(0.026)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

-0.171***
(0.037)

-0.154***
(0.036)

-0.178***
(0.037)

-0.150***
(0.038)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

0.035
(0.050)
1.274***
(0.305)

0.013
(0.049)
1.129***
(0.313)

0.029
(0.050)
1.346***
(0.318)

0.022
(0.050)
1.069***
(0.303)

193590

232542

242572

183560

0.107***
(0.024)

0.116***
(0.026)

0.117***
(0.025)

0.118***
(0.027)

-0.004
(0.023)

0.009
(0.020)

0.004
(0.021)

0.004
(0.023)

-0.140***
(0.036)

-0.160***
(0.040)

-0.159***
(0.038)

-0.156***
(0.038)

0.006
(0.039)

0.022
(0.037)

0.025
(0.037)

-0.002
(0.039)

0.882***
(0.304)

1.108***
(0.341)

1.082***
(0.335)

0.984***
(0.310)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

Tertiary Education

N
Outcome: Confidence in Government
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
Log High Skill Intensive Exports

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports
Log High Skill Intensive Imports

Tertiary Education

N
208811
251175
259980
200006
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to column 4 of Table 4.

41

Table 12: IV Estimates - Sub-sample Analysis by Urbanity Status and Household Income
(1)
(2)
(3)
IV
IV
IV
Urban
Rural
Low-income HH
(bottom tercile)
Outcome: Approval of the leader
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
Log High Skill Intensive Exports
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports
Log High Skill Intensive Imports
Tertiary Education
N
Outcome: Confidence in Government

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
Log High Skill Intensive Exports
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports
Log High Skill Intensive Imports

Tertiary Education

(4)
IV
Middle-income HH
(middle tercile)

(5)
IV
High-income HH
(top tercile)

0.097***
(0.023)

0.164***
(0.031)

0.127*
(0.067)

0.124***
(0.031)

0.038**
(0.018)

-0.038
(0.034)

-0.010
(0.025)

0.008
(0.025)

-0.021
(0.031)

-0.005
(0.051)

-0.144***
(0.034)

-0.228***
(0.046)

-0.185*
(0.100)

-0.185***
(0.048)

-0.058**
(0.026)

0.070
(0.064)

-0.005
(0.047)

0.006
(0.057)

0.065
(0.056)

-0.008
(0.081)

1.175***
(0.300)

1.631***
(0.383)

1.409*
(0.827)

1.517***
(0.430)

0.512**
(0.233)

183335

242797

120404

138273

155550

0.084***
(0.022)

0.174***
(0.035)

0.173**
(0.083)

0.103***
(0.028)

0.050***
(0.018)

0.008
(0.025)

-0.001
(0.022)

0.009
(0.023)

0.021
(0.024)

0.025
(0.048)

-0.114***
(0.032)
0.020
(0.044)
0.772***
(0.284)

-0.239***
(0.051)
0.007
(0.038)
1.651***
(0.424)

-0.257**
(0.125)
0.037
(0.043)
2.052**
(1.035)

-0.150***
(0.044)
0.004
(0.043)
1.166***
(0.408)

-0.063**
(0.027)
-0.069
(0.063)
0.362
(0.242)

N
197817
262169
125191
144288
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to column 4 of Table 4.

42

170936

Table 13: IV Estimates - Sub-sample Analysis by Country Income Levels and Political Regime by Country
(1) IV
(2) IV
(3) IV
Less-developed countries Developed countries
Non-democracies
Outcome: Approval of the leader

(4) IV
Democracies

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports

0.377
(0.251)

0.077***
(0.018)

0.199
(0.189)

0.102***
(0.027)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

0.004
(0.028)

-0.059
(0.049)

0.046
(0.031)

-0.054
(0.057)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

-0.571
(0.402)

-0.114***
(0.026)

-0.346
(0.316)

-0.135***
(0.037)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

-0.042
(0.073)

0.120
(0.078)

-0.030
(0.077)

0.062
(0.097)

Tertiary Education

4.724
(3.647)

0.913***
(0.224)

-3.631
(3.222)

0.843***
(0.280)

N
Outcome: Confidence in Government
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports

166246

259886

112363

313769

0.388
(0.242)

0.067***
(0.017)

0.200
(0.135)

0.101***
(0.033)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

0.005
(0.025)

0.023
(0.037)

0.041
(0.028)

-0.029
(0.047)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

-0.601
(0.390)

-0.087***
(0.025)

-0.337
(0.221)

-0.127***
(0.045)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

0.065
(0.054)

-0.028
(0.057)

-0.015
(0.063)

0.054
(0.073)

Tertiary Education

5.169
(3.590)

0.532**
(0.222)

-3.403
(2.233)

0.691***
(0.347)

N
178900
281086
122311
337765
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. World Bank country-income group definitions used in this analysis. Countries with
Polity2 score of 5 or below classified as non-democracies and countries with Polity2 score of 6 or higher classified as democracies.

43

Table 14: IV Estimates - Placebo Outcomes
(1)
IV
Outcome: Confidence in the military
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports

-0.001
(0.098)

(2)
IV
Outcome: Confidence in the judicial system
TertiaryEducation* LogHighSkillIntensiveExports

0.118
(0.128)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

-0.006
(0.013)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

-0.010
(0.017)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

0.008
(0.133)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

-0.122
(0.176)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

-0.008
(0.026)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

0.039
(0.031)

Tertiary Education

-0.184
(0.904)
408206

Tertiary Education

0.177
(0.211)
413780

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports

0.332
(0.263)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports

0.149
(0.230)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

-0.026
(0.022)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

0.023
(0.030)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

-0.420
(0.365)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

-0.194
(0.312)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

0.096
(0.086)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

-0.054
(0.054)

Tertiary Education

-0.695
(1.155)

Tertiary Education

1.103
(2.061)

N
Outcome: Confidence in honesty of elections

N
Outcome: Confidence in media (freedom)

N
415654
N
179432
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to Column 4 of Table 4.

44

Table 15: IV Estimates – Robustness
(1)
IV
Approval of the leader

(2)
IV
Confidence in government

0.119***
(0.023)

0.132***
(0.026)

-0.006
(0.025)

0.001
(0.024)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

-0.169***
(0.035)

-0.180***
(0.039)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

-0.118**
(0.048)

-0.068*
(0.040)

Tertiary Education

1.215***
(0.301)

1.218***
(0.336)

Unemployed

-0.047***
(0.005)

-0.041***
(0.005)

348306

371620

0.130***
(0.038)

0.120***
(0.046)

-0.038
(0.044)

0.001
(0.034)

-0.188***
(0.058)
0.066
(0.075)

-0.166***
(0.069)
0.029
(0.056)

1.451***
(0.503)

1.182**
(0.601)

Outcome is 
Controls for individual unemployment
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
Log High Skill Intensive Exports

N
Excluding election years

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
Log High Skill Intensive Exports
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports
Log High Skill Intensive Imports
Tertiary Education

N
302148
324805
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables,
see notes to Column 4 of Table 4. A respondent is defined as unemployed if he/she reports not being
employed in the last seven days, either for an employer or for himself or herself. The respondent must also
report actively looking for a job in the past four weeks and being able to begin work in the last four weeks.
Election years refer to having a parliamentary or presidential election in a given calendar year.

45

Table 16: IV Estimates - Robustness

Outcome is 
Controls for leaders’ continuous tenure

(1)
IV
Approval of the leader

(2)
IV
Confidence in Government

0.114***
(0.022)

0.109***
(0.023)

-0.010
(0.000)

0.008
(0.021)

-0.162***
(0.034)

-0.146***
(0.034)

0.034
(0.048)

0.022
(0.035)

1.191***
(0.294)

0.954***
(0.294)

416121

452476

0.109***
(0.021)

0.116***
(0.022)

-0.011
(0.024)

0.003
(0.021)

-0.157***
(0.032)

-0.161***
(0.033)

0.027
(0.048)

0.028
(0.036)

1.200***
(0.272)

1.126***
(0.289)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
Log High Skill Intensive Exports
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports
Log High Skill Intensive Imports

Tertiary Education

N
Lowering minimum age in the sample to 15
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
Log High Skill Intensive Exports
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports
Log High Skill Intensive Imports
Tertiary Education

N
545361
586075
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables,
see notes to Column 4 of Table 4.

46

Table 17: IV Estimates for Outsourcing Destination Countries
(1)
IV
Outsourcing
destination
countries
Sample is 
Outcome: Approval of the leader

(2)
IV
Non-outsourcing
developing
countries

(3)
IV
Other uppermiddle or high
income countries

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensviveExports

-0.501
(1.068)

0.219*
(0.120)

0.050***
(0.017)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

-0.183*
(0.101)

0.010
(0.024)

0.059
(0.052)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

1.254
(2.581)
-0.117
(0.292)
-18.18
(36.63)

-0.292*
(0.173)
-0.102
(0.069)
1.862
(1.335)

-0.066***
(0.023)
-0.017
(0.079)
0.422**
(0.173)

N
Outcome: Confidence in Government

160669

94247

171216

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports

-0.544
(1.715)

0.262**
(0.118)

0.031*
(0.017)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

-0.078
(0.111)

0.003
(0.022)

0.100***
(0.044)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

1.330
(4.162)
-0.151
(0.420)

-0.349**
(0.172)
0.022
(0.060)

-0.030
(0.023)
-0.102
(0.064)

-18.980
(59.147)

2.229*
(1.344)

0.022
(0.177)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports
Tertiary Education

Log High Skill Intensive Imports
Tertiary Education

N
176001
97619
186366
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see
notes to Column 4 of Table 4. Outsourcing destination countries (35) are as follows (based on A.T. Kearney
Global Services Location Index): Argentina, Bangladesh, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Sri
Lanka, Ukraine, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Vietnam.

47

Table 18: Estimates for Individual Economic Outcomes
(1)
OLS
Unemployed

(2)
IV
Unemployed

(3)
OLS
(ln) Income

(4)
IV
(ln) Income

-0.007***
(0.002)

-0.007
(0.012)

0.090***
(0.019)

0.587***
(0.205)

0.007
(0.006)

0.007
(0.008)

0.014
(0.037)

0.054
(0.050)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

0.011***
(0.003)

0.009
(0.018)

-0.066***
(0.025)

-0.842***
(0.318)

Share of high skill intensive imports

0.015
(0.014)
-0.122***
(0.033)

0.017
(0.019)
-0.040
(0.149)

0.122
(0.088)
1.036***
(0.197)

0.054
(0.122)
5.912**
(2.920)

Outcome 

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
Share of high skill intensive exports

Tertiary Education

N
323486
323486
397036
397036
Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country-specific linear time trends
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country-level characteristics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to Table 4. The estimation
sample includes observations with no missing responses for both “approval of the leader” and “confidence in national government” variables.

48

Appendix Table 1: Expanded Set of Coefficients, Fully Saturated Model (i.e. Column 4 of Table 7 and 8)
(1)
(2)
IV
IV
Outcome is 
Approval of the leader
Confidence in Government
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
0.117***
0.113***
(0.035)
(0.039)
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports
-0.165***
-0.152***
(0.052)
(0.058)
Log High Skill Intensive Exports

-0.017
(0.030)

0.003
(0.025)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

0.023
(0.063)

0.014
(0.049)

Tertiary Education

1.220***
(0.455)

1.000**
(0.489)

Male

-0.009***
(0.003)

-0.006
(0.004)

Age

-0.002***
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.0001)

Age-squared

0.000***
(0.000)

0.000***
(0.000)

Married/CP

0.014***
(0.003)

0.014***
(0.003)

Divorced or Separated

-0.017***
(0.004)
0.008**
(0.003)

-0.029***
(0.004)
0.016***
(0.003)

-0.031***
(0.005)
0.005
(0.003)

-0.037***
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.003)

Presence of Children Under 15
Urban
Log of Household Income

Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Country-specific linear time trends
Yes
Yes
Country characteristics
Yes
Yes
N
426132
459986
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes
to Column 4 of Table 4.

49

Appendix Table 2: OLS Estimates with Aggregate and High-skill Exports and Imports without Interactions
(2)
(1)
OLS
OLS
Outcome: Approval of the leader
Outcome: Approval of the leader
Log Total Exports

0.017
(0.040)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

-0.009
(0.031)

Log Total Imports

0.126
(0.087)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

0.019
(0.062)

R-squared
N
Outcome: Confidence in Government

0.133
426,132

R-squared
N
Outcome: Confidence in Government

0.130
426,132

Log Total Exports

0.049
(0.035)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

0.010
(0.026)

Log Total Imports

0.057
(0.075)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

0.009
(0.051)

R-squared
0.144
R-squared
0.142
N
459,986
N
459,986
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All specifications include multiple language
and interview type dummies and control for the log of household income throughout, though we do not report them
above. Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, age and its square, dummy variables for marital status
(married/civil partnership and divorced/separated), educational attainment (tertiary and secondary), a dummy
variable for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Country
characteristics include: Polity 2, press freedom index, the log of country population, and the log of GDP per capita.
Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level.

50

Appendix Table 3: IV Estimates with Share of High-skill Intensive Exports (Imports) as a Percentage of Total Exports (Imports)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
IV
IV
IV
IV
Outcome: Approval of the leader
TertiaryEducation*ShareofHighSkillIntensiveExports

0.280***
(0.045)

0.268***
(0.044)

0.273***
(0.044)

0.274***
(0.044)

0.007
(0.245)

0.007
(0.245)

0.011
(0.245)

0.043
(0.247)

TertiaryEducation*ShareofHighSkillIntensiveImports

-0.657***
(0.128)

-0.636***
(0.126)

-0.656***
(0.128)

-0.656***
(0.128)

Share of high skill intensive imports

0.095
(0.143)
0.139***
(0.034)

0.098
(0.143)
0.145***
(0.033)

0.097
(0.143)
0.146***
(0.034)

0.039
(0.144)
0.146***
(0.034)

Share of high skill intensive exports

Tertiary Education

KP First Stage F-Stat
28.62
28.10
28.26
N
426132
426132
426132
Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country-specific linear time trends
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Household income
No
No
Yes
Country-level characteristics
No
No
No
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to Table 4.

51

28.28
426132
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Appendix Table 4: IV Estimates with Share of High-skill Intensive Exports (Imports) as a Percentage of Total Exports (Imports)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
IV
IV
IV
IV
Outcome: Confidence in Government
TertiaryEducation*ShareofHighSkillIntensiveExports
Share of high skill intensive exports
TertiaryEducation*ShareofHighSkillIntensiveImports
Share of high skill intensive imports
Tertiary Education

0.370***
(0.047)

0.353***
(0.046)

0.353***
(0.046)

0.354***
(0.046)

0.079
(0.166)

0.076
(0.166)

0.076
(0.166)

0.096
(0.168)

-0.565***
(0.119)
0.0738
(0.110)
0.095***
(0.032)

-0.542***
(0.117)
0.078
(0.110)
0.106***
(0.032)

-0.542***
(0.117)
0.078
(0.110)
0.106***
(0.032)

-0.543***
(0.117)
0.045
(0.110)
0.106***
(0.032)

KP First Stage F-Stat
26.92
26.78
26.66
N
459986
459986
459986
Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country-specific linear time trends
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Household income
No
No
Yes
Country-level characteristics
No
No
No
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to Table 4.

52

26.79
459986
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Appendix Table 5: IV Estimates with Alternative Skilled Definition (Secondary education or above)
(1)
(2)
OLS
IV
Outcome: Approval of the leader

Secondary educ. or above*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports

0.026***
(0.006)

0.113***
(0.033)

-0.018
(0.025)

-0.054
(0.028)

-0.033***
(0.009)

-0.172***
(0.051)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

0.018
(0.050)

0.078
(0.051)

Secondary educ. or above

0.147*
(0.079)

1.432***
(0.454)

N
Outcome: Confidence in Government

426132

426132

0.017***
(0.005)

0.136***
(0.039)

0.007
(0.021)

-0.045
(0.026)

-0.020***
(0.008)

-0.207***
(0.061)

0.004
(0.038)

0.088**
(0.042)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports
Secondary educ. or above*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

Secondary educ. or above*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
Log High Skill Intensive Exports
Secondary educ. or above*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

Log High Skill Intensive Imports
Secondary educ. or above

0.029
1.724***
(0.069)
(0.553)
N
459986
459986
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.. For details on control variables,
see notes to Column 4 of Table 4.

53

Appendix Table 6: The Changing Elasticity of Sea and Air Distance Over Time within Country Pairs (High-skill trade)
(1)
(2)
Outcome 
(ln) High-skill intensive exports
(ln) High-skill intensive imports
ln(Sea Distance)*2006
ln(Sea Distance)*2007
ln(Sea Distance)*2008
ln(Sea Distance)*2009
ln(Sea Distance)*2010

ln(Sea Distance)*2011
ln(Sea Distance)*2012
ln(Sea Distance)*2013
ln(Sea Distance)*2014
ln(Sea Distance)*2015

0.037
(0.034)
0.062
(0.038)
0.038
(0.039)
0.088**
(0.041)
0.076*
(0.043)
0.074
(0.046)
0.074
(0.047)
0.101**
(0.048)
0.103**
(0.048)
0.089*
(0.049)

-0.036
(0.045)
0.070
(0.043)
0.038
(0.043)
0.088
(0.043)
0.060
(0.042)
0.039
(0.043)
0.046
(0.042)
0.040
(0.043)
0.050
(0.044)
0.080*
(0.044)

ln(Air Distance)*2006

-0.064*
0.032
(0.034)
(0.045)
ln(Air Distance)*2007
-0.120***
-0.092**
(0.039)
(0.043)
ln(Air Distance)*2008
-0.082**
-0.075*
(0.041)
(0.042)
ln(Air Distance)*2009
-0.153***
-0.105**
(0.042)
(0.042)
ln(Air Distance)*2010
-0.076*
-0.043
(0.045)
(0.042)
ln(Air Distance)*2011
-0.096**
-0.048
(0.047)
(0.043)
ln(Air Distance)*2012
-0.022
-0.006
(0.048)
(0.043)
ln(Air Distance)*2013
-0.087*
-0.018
(0.050)
(0.044)
ln(Air Distance)*2014
-0.087*
-0.001
(0.050)
(0.044)
ln(Air Distance)*2015
-0.045*
-0.016
(0.022)
(0.045)
Country pair fixed effects
Yes
Yes
R-squared
0.610
0.749
N
96,887
103,743
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Regressions on yearly data, 2005-2015. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the county pair level.

54

Appendix Table 7: The Changing Elasticity of Sea and Air Distance Over Time - Controlling for Bilateral Factors (High-skill trade)
(1)
(2)
Outcome 
(ln) High-skill intensive exports
(ln) High-skill intensive imports
ln(Sea Distance)*2005
-0.014
0.313***
(0.069)
(0.104)
ln(Sea Distance)*2006
0.027
0.300***
(0.069)
(0.104)
ln(Sea Distance)*2007
0.048
0.460***
(0.068)
(0.105)
ln(Sea Distance)*2008
0.024
0.381***
(0.068)
(0.104)
ln(Sea Distance)*2009
0.042
0.397***
(0.067)
(0.102)
ln(Sea Distance)*2010
0.050
0.365***
(0.067)
(0.105)
ln(Sea Distance)*2011
0.062
0.418***
(0.069)
(0.106)
ln(Sea Distance)*2012
0.039
0.363***
(0.068)
(0.106)
ln(Sea Distance)*2013
0.063
0.392***
(0.067)
(0.106)
ln(Sea Distance)*2014
0.092
0.360***
(0.067)
(0.107)
ln(Sea Distance)*2015
0.066
0.360***
(0.067)
(0.105)
ln(Air Distance)*2005
-1.526***
-1.726***
(0.072)
(0.104)
ln(Air Distance)*2006
-1.601***
-1.736***
(0.071)
(0.104)
ln(Air Distance)*2007
-1.659***
-1.880***
(0.071)
(0.104)
ln(Air Distance)*2008
-1.162***
-1.846***
(0.071)
(0.103)
ln(Air Distance)*2009
-1.659***
-1.860***
(0.070)
(0.102)
ln(Air Distance)*2010
-1.618***
-1.779***
(0.071)
(0.105)
ln(Air Distance)*2011
-1.649***
-1.905***
(0.071)
(0.105)
ln(Air Distance)*2012
-1.571***
-1.793***
(0.070)
(0.106)
ln(Air Distance)*2013
-1.640***
-1.816***
(0.069)
(0.105)
ln(Air Distance)*2014
-1.669***
-1.848***
(0.070)
(0.105)
ln(Air Distance)*2015
-1.163***
-1.857***
(0.069)
(0.104)
Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
R-squared
0.520
0.673
N
96,887
103,743

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Regressions on yearly data, 2005-2015. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the county pair level. All specifications include dummy variables for: speaking a common
language, being contiguous, being in a colonial relationship at present, being in a colonial relationship in the past.

55

Appendix Table 8: The Changing Elasticity of Sea and Air Distance Over Time within Country Pairs (Low-skill Trade)
(1)
(2)
Outcome 
(ln) Low-skill intensive exports
(ln) Low-skill intensive imports
ln(Sea Distance)*2006
ln(Sea Distance)*2007
ln(Sea Distance)*2008
ln(Sea Distance)*2009

ln(Sea Distance)*2010
ln(Sea Distance)*2011
ln(Sea Distance)*2012
ln(Sea Distance)*2013
ln(Sea Distance)*2014
ln(Sea Distance)*2015

ln(Air Distance)*2006

ln(Air Distance)*2007
ln(Air Distance)*2008
ln(Air Distance)*2009
ln(Air Distance)*2010
ln(Air Distance)*2011
ln(Air Distance)*2012

ln(Air Distance)*2013
ln(Air Distance)*2014
ln(Air Distance)*2015
Country pair fixed effects
R-squared
N

-0.022
(0.033)
0.032
(0.036)
-0.022
(0.038)
0.034
(0.040)
0.074
(0.041)
0.071
(0.042)
0.012
(0.047)
0.093**
(0.046)
0.068
(0.047)
0.128**
(0.046)

0.003
(0.032)
0.014
(0.036)
0.026
(0.037)
0.035
(0.041)
-0.010
(0.042)
-0.059
(0.043)
-0.021
(0.044)
0.008
(0.045)
0.019
(0.047)
0.006
(0.046)

0.011
(0.032)
-0.048
(0.035)
-0.037
(0.037)
-0.086*
(0.039)
-0.059
(0.040)
-0.038
(0.041)
-0.028
(0.044)
-0.017
(0.044)
-0.005
(0.045)
-0.047
(0.045)
Yes
0.916
102,801

0.031
(0.034)
-0.010
(0.037)
-0.009
(0.038)
-0.017
(0.041)
0.052
(0.043)
0.090**
(0.043)
0.095**
(0.044)
0.077*
(0.046)
0.080*
(0.048)
0.133**
(0.047)
Yes
0.919
110,705

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Regressions on yearly data, 2005-2015. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the county pair level. Low skill intensive trade is defined as the sum of labour intensive, low skill intensive and
medium skill intensive trade.

56

Appendix Table 9: OLS Estimates with Low-skill Intensive Exports (Imports) and Secondary Education or Less Interactions
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
OLS
Outcome: Approval of the Leader

(4)
OLS

SeconEduc. or Less*LogLowSkillIntensiveExports

0.012
(0.009)

0.013
(0.009)

0.013
(0.009)

0.014
(0.009)

Log Low Skill Intensive Exports

0.029
(0.020)

0.030
(0.020)

0.030
(0.020)

0.010
(0.015)

SeconEduc. or Less*LogLowSkillIntensiveImports

0.007
(0.010)
0.082*
(0.047)
0.131
(0.069)

0.008
(0.010)
0.081*
(0.047)
0.103
(0.093)

0.008
(0.010)
0.080*
(0.047)
0.112
(0.092)

0.009
(0.010)
0.169**
(0.069)
0.095
(0.090)

Log Low Skill Intensive Imports
Secondary Education or Less

R-squared
0.113
0.115
0.115
0.131
N
426132
426132
426132
426132
Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country level characteristics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Household income
No
No
Yes
Yes
Country-specific linear time trends
No
No
No
Yes
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to Table 4. Low skill intensive exports
(imports) is defined as sum of labour intensive exports (imports), low skill intensive exports (imports) and medium skill intensive exports (imports).

57

Appendix Table 10: OLS Estimates with Low-skill Intensive Exports (Imports) and Secondary Education or Less Interactions
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
OLS
Outcome: Confidence in Government

(4)
OLS

SeconEduc. or Less*LogLowSkillIntensiveExports

-0.000
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.006)

Log Low Skill Intensive Exports

0.030*
(0.011)

0.031***
(0.011)

0.031***
(0.011)

0.022*
(0.012)

-0.016**
(0.008)
0.047
(0.029)
0.410***
(0.074)

-0.014*
(0.008)
0.044
(0.029)
0.367***
(0.073)

-0.014*
(0.008)
0.044
(0.029)
0.365***
(0.073)

-0.012
(0.007)
0.116***
(0.036)
0.349***
(0.069)

SeconEduc. or Less*LogLowSkillIntensiveImports

Log Low Skill Intensive Imports
Secondary Education or Less

R-squared
0.127
0.131
0.131
0.142
N
459986
459986
459986
459986
Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country level characteristics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Household income
No
No
Yes
Yes
Country-specific linear time trends
No
No
No
Yes
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to Table 4. Low skill intensive exports
(imports) is defined as sum of labour intensive exports (imports), low skill intensive exports (imports) and medium skill intensive exports (imports).

58

Appendix Table 11: IV Estimates - Sub-sample Analysis by Returns to Education by Country
(1) IV
(2) IV
Returns to educ.: bottom tercile Returns to educ.: middle tercile
Outcome: Approval of the leader

(3) IV
Returns to educ: top tercile

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports

-0.048
(0.083)

0.136***
(0.043)

0.501
(3.308)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

-0.062
(0.117)

-0.010
(0.057)

0.024
(0.130)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

0.066
(0.117)

-0.177***
(0.061)

-0.856
(5.694)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

0.100
(0.141)

0.063
(0.111)

-0.043
(0.405)

Tertiary Education

-0.428
(0.875)

1.042**
(0.467)

-8.751
(8.493)

N
Outcome: Confidence in Government
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports

128115

154310

143707

-0.084
(0.105)

0.153***
(0.042)

0.646
(4.368)

Log High Skill Intensive Exports

-0.021
(0.088)

0.021
(0.042)

0.029
(0.171)

TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

0.139
(0.146)

-0.196***
(0.060)

-1.084
(7.492)

Log High Skill Intensive Imports

-0.123
(0.088)

0.069
(0.088)

-0.041
(0.526)

Tertiary Education

-1.324
(1.080)

1.117**
(0.475)

-10.840
(6.603)

N
145965
165630
148391
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. In bottom tercile wage premia ranges from .08 to .39 with a mean of .28, in middle
tercile wage premia ranges from .39 to .78 with a mean of .57, and in top tercile wage premia ranges from .78 to 2.44 with a mean of 1.03.

59

Appendix Table 12: IV Estimates - Controlling for Oil Revenue
(1)
IV
Approval of the leader

(2)
IV
Confidence in Government

0.117***
(0.032)

0.111***
(0.037)

-0.003
(0.030)

0.012
(0.026)

-0.163***
(0.047)

-0.147***
(0.053)

0.028
(0.067)

0.035
(0.047)

1.152***
(0.398)

0.916**
(0.449)

Log Oil Revenue

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

TertiaryEducation* LogOilRevenue

0.000
(0.000)

-0.000
(0.000)

Outcome is 
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveExports
Log High Skill Intensive Exports
TertiaryEducation*LogHighSkillIntensiveImports

Log High Skill Intensive Imports
Tertiary Education

N
395127
428177
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For details on control variables, see notes to
Column 4 of Table 4.

60

Appendix Table 13: Classification of High-Skill Intensive Goods (SITC Rev. 3)
TDRE1

High-skill: Electronics (excluding parts and components)

751

Office machines

752

Automatic data processing machines, n.e.s.

761

Television receivers, whether or not combined

762

Radio-broadcast receivers, whether or not combined

763

Sound recorders or reproducers

TDRE2

High-skill: Parts and components for electrical and electronic goods

759

Parts, accessories for machines of groups 751, 752

764

Telecommunication equipment, n.e.s.; & parts, n.e.s.

776

Cathode valves & tubes

TDRE3

High-skill: Other, excluding electronics

511

Hydrocarbons, n.e.s., & halogenated, nitr. derivative

512

Alcohols, phenols, halogenat., sulfonat., nitrat. der.

513

Carboxylic acids, anhydrides, halides, per.; derivati.

514

Nitrogen-function compounds

515

Organo-inorganic, heterocycl. compounds, nucl. acids

516

Other organic chemicals

522

Inorganic chemical elements, oxides & halogen salts

523

Metallic salts & peroxysalts, of inorganic acids

524

Other inorganic chemicals

525

Radio-actives and associated materials

531

Synth. organic colouring matter & colouring lakes

532

Dyeing & tanning extracts, synth. tanning materials

533

Pigments, paints, varnishes and related materials

541

Medicinal and pharmaceutical products, excluding 542

542

Medicaments (incl. veterinary medicaments)

551

Essential oils, perfume & flavour materials

553

Perfumery, cosmetics or toilet prepar. (excluding soaps)

554

Soaps, cleansing and polishing preparations

562

Fertilizers (other than those of group 272)

571

Polymers of ethylene, in primary forms

572

Polymers of styrene, in primary forms

573

Polymers of vinyl chloride or halogenated olefins

574

Polyethers, epoxide resins; polycarbonat., polyesters

61

575

Other plastics, in primary forms

579

Waste, parings and scrap, of plastics

581

Tubes, pipes and hoses of plastics

582

Plates, sheets, films, foil & strip, of plastics

583

Monofilaments, of plastics, cross-section > 1mm

591

Insectides & similar products, for retail sale

592

Starche, wheat gluten; albuminoidal substances; glues

593

Explosives and pyrotechnic products

597

Prepared addit. for miner. oils; lubricat., de-icing

598

Miscellaneous chemical products, n.e.s.

792

Aircraft & associated equipment; spacecraft, etc.

871

Optical instruments & apparatus, n.e.s.

872

Instruments & appliances, n.e.s., for medical, etc.

873

Meters & counters, n.e.s.

874

Measuring, analysing & controlling apparatus, n.e.s.

881

Photographic apparatus & equipment, n.e.s.

882

Cinematographic & photographic supplies

883

Cinematograph films, exposed & developed

884

Optical goods, n.e.s.

885

Watches & clocks

891

Arms & ammunition

892

Printed matter

896

Works of art, collectors' pieces & antiques

897

Jewellery & articles of precious materia., n.e.s.

898
Musical instruments, parts; records, tapes & similar
Note: The Standard International Trade Classification (SITC) is a statistical classification of the commodities
entering external trade, which is provided by UNCTADstat. The current international standard is the SITC,
Revision 3.

62

Appendix Table 14: Classification of High-Knowledge Intensive Services
ISIC Code
EBOPS Code
Service Industry
642
247
Telecommunications services
65
260
Financial services
66
253, 254, 255, 256, 257, 258
Insurance services
Life insurance and pension funding
Freight insurance
Other direct insurance
Reinsurance

72
73
74

263
279
275, 276, 277, 278, 280, 284

Auxiliary services
Computer services
Research and development
Legal services
Business and management consulting and
public relations services
Accounting, auditing, bookkeeping, and tax
consulting services
Advertising, market research, and public
opinion polling
Architectural, engineering, and other
technical services

Other business service
Notes: EBOPS data from UN COMTRADE do not classify exports and imports of services by skills. Therefore,
we use ISIC-EBOPS conversion tables to identify “high-knowledge intensive services” using the definitions
provided by the United Nations Manual on Statistics of International Trade in Services (2002).

63

