NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMISTS (AND ECONOMICS) IN TECH COMPANIES
Susan Athey
Michael Luca
Working Paper 25064
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25064

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

We thank Duncan Gilchrist and Guido Imbens for valuable feedback. Stephanie Chan and Byron
Perpetua provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25064.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Susan Athey and Michael Luca. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Economists (and Economics) in Tech Companies
Susan Athey and Michael Luca
NBER Working Paper No. 25064
September 2018
JEL No. A11,D4,L0,M2
ABSTRACT
As technology platforms have created new markets and new ways of acquiring information,
economists have come to play an increasingly central role in tech companies – tackling problems
such as platform design, strategy, pricing, and policy. Over the past five years, hundreds of PhD
economists have accepted positions in the technology sector. In this paper, we explore the skills
that PhD economists apply in tech companies, the companies that hire them, the types of
problems that economists are currently working on, and the areas of academic research that have
emerged in relation to these problems.

Susan Athey
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
athey@stanford.edu
Michael Luca
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
mluca@hbs.edu

PhD economists have started to play an increasingly central role in tech
companies, tackling problems such as platform design, pricing, and policy. Major
companies, including Amazon, eBay, Google, Microsoft, Facebook, Airbnb, and Uber,
have large teams of PhD economists working to engineer better design choices. For
example, led by Pat Bajari, Amazon has hired more than 150 Ph.D. economists in the
past five years, making them the largest employer of tech economists. In fact, Amazon
now has several times more full time economists than the largest academic economics
department, and continues to grow at a rapid pace. Companies such as Coursera, Expedia,
Netflix, Microsoft, Pandora, Uber, Yelp, and Zillow have also hired economists. Figure 1
shows a list of technology companies that have hired PhD economists, although the list is
not comprehensive.
Hiring of PhD economists has happened at all levels, from newly minted PhDs
heading directly to the tech sector up through chief economists plucked from tenured
positions at prestigious academic departments. The types of positions also vary greatly.
Much of the recent growth has focused on economists working directly on business
problems, with only a small fraction of the work resulting in academic papers. In
contrast, some companies, such as Microsoft, have a chief economist managing teams
focused directly on business problems, but also have many economists working out of
research centers, publishing self-guided research in academic journals comparable to that
of economists working in business schools or economics departments. These research
centers, at their best, provide frontier insights, some of which will guide the future
direction of the company.
Many tech companies now recruit directly through the American Economic
Association’s Job Openings for Economists platform, which is where much of the
recruiting for PhD economists begins. During the 2017-18 academic year, 21 tech
companies were hiring through the JOE website. To put this into context, there are
roughly two-thirds as many tech companies hiring through JOE as there are policy
schools. Taking into account the fact that many of these companies had multiple
positions, the number of positions available for economists in tech companies exceeded
those at policy schools.
Moreover, Figure 2 shows that the number of tech companies with job postings
has consistently risen in recent years, in contrast to policy schools (which have gone up
and down) and economics departments (which have gone down). Some of the same
forces driving tech economist job growth have also influenced the academic job market:
as technology platforms play an increasing role in the economy, topics relevant to them
have become more important to the business school curriculum and to academic research
in business schools.
Business schools have seen increased demand for faculty specializing in online
platforms and digitization, as well as in areas crucial to understanding data analysis, such
as experimental methods and machine learning. For example, groups in business schools
that historically focused on operations research or management of information systems
have recently begun to focus more on economic problems such as marketplaces, pricing
algorithms, and empirical studies of economic questions.
These shifts are partially driven by a growing need to prepare MBA students for a
career in the technology sector. For example, Amazon was the largest employer of
Harvard Business School’s most recent graduating class of MBA students.

Corresponding to the shifting career paths of MBA studnets, recent additions to the
Harvard Business School curriculum in the past few years include courses on
experimental methods, designing online marketplaces, digital marketing, technology
strategy, and data science. Stanford has seen similar growth. More broadly, there has
been a rapid expansion in courses directly related to the technology industry. Content
related to the digital economy has increasingly been added to more traditional courses
(such as core strategy and marketing courses) as well.
Within industry, there is little precedent for private companies recruiting
academic economists as well as new PhDs with strong research skills so heavily for fulltime positions. Organizations like the RAND Corporation and Mathematica Policy
Research recruit economists at scale, but focus mainly on research and policy
evaluations. Consulting firms like Cornerstone and the Analysis Group also recruit large
numbers of economists, primarily to support and serve as expert witnesses in legal
matters in areas such as antitrust and intellectual property litigation.
Considering the tech firms that hire into research labs, such as Microsoft
Research, perhaps the closest historical analog would be Bell Labs, which was operating
as a division of AT&T when it created an economics team in 1968. The team grew to
include about 30 economists, including high-profile economists such as Elizabeth Bailey,
Roy Radner, and Robert Willig. In 1970, it launched the Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science (which lives on through the date of this publication as the highly
regarded Rand Journal of Economics). The team was phased out in 1983, coinciding with
the breakup of AT&T. Some of its economists were folded into other parts of the
company, while others left for other industry or academic jobs – including at Columbia
University, Harvard Business School, New York University, Princeton University, and
the University of Pennsylvania.
Although some tech companies hire economists using a lab model, the majority of
economists in tech companies work on managerially relevant problems with data from
the company, and many are in business roles. For example, outside of Microsoft
Research, Microsoft has a business-focused chief economist whose team actively recruits
PhD economists to work on problems ranging from cloud computing to search
advertising. Amazon assigns economists to specific business problems across divisions,
ranging from the e-commerce platform to digital content to the experimentation platform
used to evaluate changes and innovations. Uber has teams of economists focused on
understanding policy issues in addition to pricing and incentive design – some of these
teams produce outward facing research published in academic journals while others are
completely inward facing. More broadly, many economists at tech companies do a
combination of external research and internal work, continuing to attend conferences and
publish in leading economics journals; they often hire summer interns from top PhD
programs or collaborate with academic economists on such projects. Since many of the
problems faced by tech companies are on the frontier of academic research, close ties to
academics and rigorous, original thinking are highly valued in the tech sector.
Indeed, the interaction between tech companies and economists has given rise to
new intellectual questions and a new field within economics—the “economics of
digitization.” The field has explored a wide range of questions. For example, how does
the advent of artificial intelligence and the use of large-scale consumer datasets affect
industry structure and market power? How should tech companies be regulated? How

should data from the tech sector inform policy? How do aggregators, search engines,
reputation systems, and social media affect the decisions we make and the news we read?
How should online marketplaces be designed to ensure safe and efficient transactions?
Online platforms have also created novel datasets and testing grounds that have been
used to inform virtually every field of economics, from market design to industrial
organization to labor economics to behavioral economics.
We’ve had the opportunity to spend our careers thus far with one foot in academia
studying and teaching about online platforms and the other in practice helping to shape
them. Outside of our academic roles, we work closely with tech companies. Susan
previously served as consulting chief economist at Microsoft and currently sits on the
boards of Expedia, Lending Club, Rover and Ripple. While working with Microsoft, she
also helped build the economics group at Microsoft’s research arm in New England.
Mike works with a variety of tech companies, and created an economic research initiative
at Yelp. As academics, we have taught hundreds of students and executives who now
work in tech companies. Doctoral students have become interested in tech companies as
well – our own students have worked at companies ranging from Facebook, Microsoft,
and Amazon to Wealthfront, Uber, and Airbnb.
The core skills that economists use in tech companies have been important to
economic research for decades prior to the tech era. The field of market design has been
combining novel theoretical insights, empirical work and experiments to solve real-world
problems since Bob Wilson’s pioneering work on auctions in the 1960s. Assessing
causal relationships and understanding incentives have been central themes in applied
microeconomics and industrial organization for decades. With the advent of new
technologies, the expertise developed by PhD economists have found new and influential
uses in the tech sector. Furthermore, the frontiers of economic research in these areas has
been advanced as the tech sector has simultaneously introduced new economic problems,
provided new ways to bring ideas from economic theory into practice, and provided
opportunities for new types of statistical analysis.
With the rise of economists in tech companies, we’re frequently contacted by tech
companies for recommendations about whom to hire and what types of roles economists
should take on. We are also asked how undergraduates and PhD students can prepare for
such careers, as well as what these careers will be like. Faculty are often interested in
how they can get involved with tech companies, and what types of problems they might
work on there. In this paper, we describe the skills that PhD economists apply in tech
companies, the companies that hire them, the types of problems that economists are
currently working on, and the areas of academic research that have emerged in relation to
these problems.

What Tech-Relevant Skills Do PhD Economists Have?
To draw inspiration from Liam Neeson’s line in the movie Taken, economists
have “a very particular set of skills.” Here, we focus on three broad skillsets that are part
of the economics curriculum that allow economists to thrive in tech companies: the
ability to assess and interpret empirical relationships and work with data; the ability to
understand and design markets and incentives, taking into account the information
environment and strategic interactions; and the ability to understand industry structure

and equilibrium behavior by firms.
Assessing Empirical Relationships
Relative to other disciplines, economists have several strengths in thinking about
data. First, economists are interested in understanding which relationships are causal—
and which are not. Over the past 30 years, economics has developed a toolkit to identify
causal relationships in real-world data. As the Internet age has helped to usher in an era
of unprecedented amounts of data, this has also contributed to the growing demand for
economists.
For example, empirical applied microeconomics has developed tools for using
“natural experiments” and evaluating policies - such as instrumental variables, causal
panel data models, and regression discontinuity (see Angrist and Pischke, 2009 for a
review of some of these tools). As we describe further in the next section, these tools are
widely used in technology firms to answer questions about the impact of interventions
such as price changes, the introduction of new products, changes to the user interface,
and advertising effectiveness. Economists’ attention to identifying causal effects, as well
as to both the statistical and economic significance of findings, are important
contributions to the practice of empirical analysis in tech firms. Industrial organization
economists and market design economists have also developed methods for estimating
the impact of counterfactual price changes or changes to market design. Perhaps
surprisingly, these tools are less widely used in tech firms than the tools of empirical
applied microeconomics, although there are notable exceptions.
Experiments are central to the decision making process within the tech sector.
Most large tech companies evaluate product changes through “A/B testing,” or
randomized controlled trials - conducting thousands or tens of thousands of A/B tests per
year. Experiments pose important managerial and technical questions, ranging from how
to choose an appropriate sample to how to design the intervention itself to how to move
from experimental results to a managerial decision.
With many experiments seeking to identify small effects over a massive number
of users, changes to the methodology of A/B testing can be impactful. The science of
experimental design has therefore become an important topic within tech companies,
often pushing the research frontier. For example, Blake and Coey (2014) highlight
challenges in running experiments in marketplaces where equilibrium effects create
interference between treatment and control groups – motivated by challenges they faced
at eBay and Facebook. Athey, Imbens, and Eckles (2018) examine issues that arise in
evaluating experiments in a network setting - motivated by challenges they faced at
Amazon and Facebook.
The widespread use of experiments in the tech sector has at times proved
controversial, as when Facebook ran an experiment to test how users would react to
seeing more posts with positive emotions (e.g. happy posts), relative to negative
emotions. In the experiment, Facebook varied whether users were shown more positive or
negative posts in their newsfeeds (Kramer et al 2014). Although the experiment
ultimately found very small effects, it generated considerable public backlash against
Facebook (Meyer 2014) and an expression of editorial concern from PNAS - which is the
journal that published the experiment (Verma 2014). In response to public pressure and

broader concerns about the ethics of experimentation within companies, Facebook
updated its internal procedure for deciding which experiments to run. Companies and
policymakers are still exploring ways to establish best practices that allow for productive
experimentation and uses of data, while protecting the privacy and safety of participants.
The widespread use of machine learning in tech firms has also created new
challenges and opportunities. Initially, academic economists were slow to take up
machine learning for reasons ranging from the lack of asymptotic results behind many
approaches to machine learning to questions about whether prediction problems are
important from an economics perspective. Thus, some economists came to tech firms
unfamiliar with machine learning, requiring them to learn a new set of methods in order
to communicate with the machine learning community. More recently, the interaction of
economists with technology firms has contributed to an expansion of interest among
economists in machine learning – focusing both on prediction problems and causal
inference problems.
Motivated by the need to bring causal inference techniques to the large datasets of
technology firms as well as the desire to make full use of these rich datasets, a recent
literature has developed combining machine learning and causal inference (Athey,
forthcoming), and this literature in turn has influenced the business practice of
technology firms (e.g. Hitsch and Misra (2018) apply Wager and Athey’s (forthcoming)
causal forest method in an application to targeted promotions, while Athey and Imbens’
(2016) approach to recursive partitioning for causal effects has been applied in
technology firms’ A/B testing platforms). From a practical perspective, the intersection of
machine learning and economics allows economists to understand what works, what
doesn’t, and why.
While experiments have played an important role within tech companies, they
also have limitations. Economists have helped to bring a broader causal inference toolkit
to supplement experiments within tech, using methods such as instrumental variables,
causal panel data models, and regression discontinuity. This has allowed companies to
obtain treatment effects in contexts where experiments might be difficult or costly to run.
In addition to their focus on causal relationships, economists are interested in
understanding the tradeoffs involved in different outcome metrics. In many technology
firms, decisions about product design, marketing, and even human resources are
determined by empirical analysis (rather than subjective evaluation), and the choice of
metrics will guide incentives throughout the companies. Economists have sought to better
understand the relationship between short-term metrics such as clicks on an
advertisement (also called “surrogates,” as in Athey, Chetty, Imbens and Kang, 2016)
which are easy to observe, and longer-term metrics (like revenue or the lifetime value of
a customer), which are more difficult to observe, but better represent company goals.
For example, a large technology company made the following change in
measurement for email marketing. The old measure, customer sales, was noisy.
Consumers might take weeks before making a purchase. The new measure, opening the
email, was immediately observable, and could be incorporated to adjust the content of the
email very quickly. The company found that within months, the number of sales per
email declined precipitously, because the marketing emails evolved to maximize email
opening rates without regard to final sales. For example, the successful emails (using the
opening rate metric) had catchy subject lines and somewhat misleading promises. For

economists, it is natural to think about a metric not only as a statistical measure, but also
as implicitly governing worker incentives, and to suggest ways to provide incentives for
long-term innovation as well as short-term metrics that better capture long-term effects.
More broadly, economists are interested in the difference between short-term and longterm objectives, which can often lead to dramatically different conclusions in making
product and market design choices, and in developing algorithms. Economists have
focused on the link between experiments, algorithms, and managerial decisions.
Finally, the theoretical and empirical training of economists prepares them to
think carefully about both intended and unintended consequences of different decisions.
For example, Airbnb made it very easy for landlords to reject guests after seeing their
name and picture. While this extent of flexibility may have led to short-term user growth
(the metric that Airbnb had been focusing on), an experiment run by Edelman, Luca, and
Svirsky (2017) showed that it also led to widespread racial discrimination against
African-Americans on the platform. Thus, Airbnb’s market design choices raised the
possibility of reintroducing discrimination to a market that had worked hard to reduce it.
Fisman and Luca (2016) proposed a series of market design choices that might reduce
discrimination in online markets more generally – such as further automating transactions
on platforms. As a result of this work, the company created a task force that weighed the
different options, which led to a full-time team of data scientists to explore discrimination
on an ongoing basis. Regulators also became involved, prompting Airbnb to continue
these efforts. Ultimately, Airbnb implemented a variety of changes that balanced their
desire for short term growth against the company’s goal of reducing discrimination on the
platform, which were not always aligned.
Designing Markets and Incentives
The rise of economists in tech companies has coincided with the rise of market
design, a field that was pioneered by Stanford economist Bob Wilson and extended into a
variety of application areas by economists such as Paul Milgrom and Al Roth (who won
the Nobel Prize for his pioneering work in this field). Market design has shifted
economists away from using a primarily descriptive lens to a more prescriptive one, using
the tools of economics to engineer better-functioning markets. These economists – and
Roth in particular - have promoted the idea of the “economist as engineer”, whereby the
economist gets deeply involved in the implementation of economic ideas and tailors
recommendations to the fine details of the problem. While market design research
initially focused on offline marketplaces such as spectrum auctions, residency matching
programs, and kidney exchange, economists have more recently taken the market design
mindset into the tech sector. For example, the lens that Roth has long used in offline
markets - exploring issues around market thickness, congestion, and safety of participants
- has gained further prominence in online marketplaces, where design choices are front
and center.
Applications of market design in tech firms range from Google, Yahoo! and
Microsoft’s marketplaces for selling advertisements (Varian, 2007; Edelman, Ostrovsky,
and Schwarz, 2007; Athey and Ellison 2011; Agarwal, Athey, and Yang 2009; Athey and
Nekipelov, 2013) to Uber’s market for rides (Cohen et al. 2016). Much of this literature
has examined pricing and allocation mechanisms, as well as reputation systems. Other

work has focused on search costs (Athey and Ellison 2011; Fradkin 2017; Cullen and
Farronato, 2018). Multi-sided platforms are especially ripe for an economist's skills, since
these are exactly the kinds of settings in which it is critical to think through strategic
behavior, interactions, and equilibrium effects.
Bringing together economists’ unique perspectives on assessing empirical
relationships with their expertise in market design, economists offer particular value to
technology firms by bringing together theory and data to predict not just the immediate
effect of a decision, but how a decision affects equilibrium behavior in a market.
Analyzing Equilibrium Market Structure
Tech companies think a lot about which markets to enter, taking into account the
current and potential competitive landscape. For example, questions about market
structure have arisen in the battle between Uber and Lyft, and helped to shape expansion
and acquisition strategies. Economic theory, including the theory of platforms and market
design, speaks to the forces that might lead a market to be highly competitive, as well as
the forces that make monopoly more likely. This is helpful for platforms deciding a
strategy about which markets to enter, and also for policymakers and regulators.
Currently, the question of market power is hotly debated in the technology industry, and
economists can help by putting structure on the debate, even if they cannot perfectly
predict the future.

Applications of Economics in Technology Firms
Economists now work on a variety of issues pertaining to tech companies. In this
section, we highlight several exemplars of economics in tech companies: designing
advertising auctions, estimating the returns to advertising, designing review and
reputation systems, and studying the effects of reviews on firms.
Design of Online Advertising
Advertising has changed dramatically with the advent of online technology, and
with the involvement of economists. This involvement has been concentrated in two
areas: the design of advertising auctions and estimating the returns to advertising.
The involvement of economists in online advertising auctions dates back to the
late 1990s, when Simon Wilkie, an economics professor at Cal Tech, started advising
GoTo, a company that later became Overture and eventually powered Yahoo!’s search
advertising auctions. In 2002, Hal Varian received a call from Eric Schmidt, the
chairman of a young company called Google. Schmidt was intrigued by Information
Rules, a book Varian had coauthored with Carl Shapiro, his fellow economist and
colleague at the University of California, Berkeley. After speaking with Schmidt, Varian
became a consultant for Google, and ultimately, the company’s chief economist, the first
academic microeconomist to become chief economist of a major technology firm.
Preston McAfee, another market design economist, joined Yahoo! Research from Cal

Tech a few years later, while Susan became consulting chief economist at Microsoft
while on leave from Harvard in 2008. Susan and Preston McAfee also initially focused
on market design and strategy questions surrounding online advertising.
To understand some of the issues involved with search advertising, consider the
way it works. Search engines, ranging from general engines like Google and Bing to
more specialized search engines like Yelp, generally sell advertising through auctions for
specific terms. Bids are expressed in terms of a willingness to pay per outcome, such as a
a click, and advertisers with higher bids are rewarded with more favorable ad placement.
Thus, firms must make choices about auction formats and parameters.
One complexity arises because it is well-known that in a traditional second-price
auction with a single winner, the winner pays the bid of the second-highest bidder, which
in turn means that the best strategy is to bid one’s true value (and not to worry about
being an outlying high bidder). However, in ad sales, the result is a ranking of bidders,
not a single winner. The auction used by Google, Microsoft, and Yahoo! is a generalized
second-price auction, where each advertiser pays the price bid by the next lowest bidder.
Work by Schwarz (of Yahoo! Research), Edelman, and Ostrovsky (2007) show that the
generalized second-price auctions lack the same dominant strategy as a second-price
auction with a single winner, but remain useful in search engine advertising applications.
Athey and Ellison (2011) incorporate rational consumer search into the market
design of auctions, motivating the use of reserve price not only as an instrument for
raising revenue, but also as a tool for managing advertising quality and thus increasing
users’ incentive to search. One of us, Susan, used this as a framework for advising
Microsoft to improve the ad quality on Microsoft’s search engine. Later she took the
theoretical models to the data and built an econometric model (Athey and Nekipelov
2012) that could be used to infer advertiser valuations and profits from their bidding
behavior. This type of model can be used to understand how changes in algorithms affect
advertiser well-being and thus forecast the future engagement of advertisers on the
platform.
At Yahoo!, Ostrovsky and Schwarz (2016) observed that the reserve prices the
company was setting were lower than what auction theory predicted would be revenuemaximizing for the seller. The pair assigned search keywords to a treatment and a control
group. Keywords in the treatment group received a theoretically optimal reserve price
calculated by the authors, while keywords in the control group used a default reserve
price of $0.10 per click. The treatment group increased ad revenue by several percentage
points, leading Yahoo! to change its reserve price policies for all of its search advertising
– and making the company millions of dollars in additional revenue.
Tech firms have also hired economists to solve challenges relating to the choice
of outcome of advertising, such as pay-per-click versus alternatives. Agarwal, Athey, and
Yang (2009) explore the benefits and drawbacks of pay-per-click compared to pay-peraction, in which advertisers only pay each time an individual performs an action after
clicking the ad link—such as buying a product. Pay-per-action helps to address the
problem of click fraud, in which a site has an incentive to click the ads they host with no
intention of buying the product. However, if pay-per-action is implemented as an ability
to bid on multiple types of actions, firms may bid high on an action that is less likely to
occur than the search engine believes, either because of inside knowledge or
manipulation, thus gaining a high search position at low cost.

Finally, although not much academic work has analyzed Facebook’s online
advertising auctions, Facebook’s early decision to adopt a Vickrey auction to sell its
advertising space was heavily influenced by the training of a Facebook employee, John
Hegeman, in the graduate program at the economics department at Stanford, which has
considerable expertise in auctions (Amit et al., 2013).
The Role of Ranking and Incentives in Marketplaces
Equilibrium effects can be especially challenging to understand in the platforms
and marketplaces that are common in the tech industry; for example, at eBay, a change to
the user interface that made it easier for consumers find the products they want, and thus
to do price comparisons, affected consumer choice behavior (Dinerstein et al, 2018), but
that in turn can affect the prices charged by sellers. Over the long term, changes in
pricing behavior by sellers affect consumers’ desire to shop on eBay at all, which in turn
influences seller behavior. Similar issues arise in many marketplaces. In general, the way
marketplaces and intermediaries rank offers from sellers or service-providers can be
thought of as an incentive system. Marketplaces like Airbnb incentivize owners to
maintain their calendars accurately and accept booking requests from travelers by
prioritizing owners who behave as desired, and demoting those that do not. Economists
are well-positioned to analyze issues that arise in ranking offers from sellers, not just on
short-term user behavior, but also the equilibrium impact on the marketplace as a whole.
Estimating the Returns to Advertising
Estimating the returns to advertising has traditionally been difficult. Older media,
such as print and television, do not allow showing different advertisements or tracking
behavior at the individual consumer level, which makes designing randomized
experiments difficult. Non-randomized observational studies are biased due to selection
issues. Thus, most traditional studies of advertising were plagued by poor identification
strategies, limited data on outcomes, and small sample sizes.
The digital age has allowed a better understanding of the returns to advertising.
Platforms such as Facebook, Google and Microsoft collect vast amounts of data on user
behavior, and regularly run experiments to test the effectiveness of their online
advertising systems – allowing them to make progress on understanding the conditions
under which advertising is most effective. Economists at such firms can thus draw on
existing theories of market design, generate new ideas, and rapidly test and evaluate those
ideas.
Economists at companies that advertise online have also made significant
progress in understanding the effectiveness of advertising. For example, while working at
eBay Research Labs, Blake, Nosko, and Tadelis (2015) conducted field experiments that
allowed them to understand the impact of eBay’s advertising campaigns on Google and
Bing. They found that search engine marketing – purchasing ads to be displayed on
search engines when certain search terms are entered – was only effective when ads are
viewed by new or infrequent eBay customers and when the search terms already contain
the firm being searched for. Since frequent customers drive most of their sales, the

overall returns were negative, a significant result given that eBay’s yearly US search
engine marketing budget was over $50 million at the time of the experiment.
In other contexts, advertising appears to be a positive investment. Johnson, Lewis,
and Reiley (2016) report a 3.6 percent increase in sales among consumers shown
advertisements for a large retailer on Yahoo!, with a point estimate, though not
statistically significant, of positive returns. Their experiment used a sample size in the
millions, a control group shown an irrelevant ad (in addition to a group shown no ads),
and a large set of individual covariates. Dai, Kim, and Luca (2018) collaborated with
Yelp to display ads randomly for a set of previously non-advertising restaurants – a
design that allowed them to include many small businesses rather than a small number of
well-known businesses. Restaurants for which ads were shown had 25 percent more page
views and 5 percent more reviews (which can be viewed as a proxy for actual visits to the
restaurant) – a back of the envelope calculation suggests a positive return on investment.
Economists have also designed long-term experiments that examine the impact of
ads on user engagement; Huang, Riabov, and Reilly (2017) study Pandora consumers
over a 21-month period, estimating a fairly linear relationship between the quantity of
advertisements shown to each consumer and usage, and further showing that increasing
the advertising load increases purchases of paid, ad-free subscriptions.
But it remains challenging to measure the returns to advertising. Lewis and Rao
(2015), two economists formerly at Yahoo!, discuss the challenges in a meta-analysis
spanning 25 online advertising field experiments. They argue that even studies of returns
to advertising that can use online data are still held back by the signal-to-noise ratio in
individual sales data, where standard deviations are often an order of magnitude higher
than means. Even studies with hundreds of thousands of users tend to produce confidence
intervals too wide even to distinguish highly profitable ads from wholly ineffective ones,
and identifying a more realistic effect size could only be done at prohibitive cost.
Designing Review and Reputation Systems
Online reviews and reputation systems have become increasingly prevalent in the
past decade. Platforms like Yelp and TripAdvisor contain hundreds of millions of
reviews for businesses ranging from plumbers to hotels. Uber, Airbnb, and other online
marketplaces also rely heavily on reputation systems to facilitate trust between strangers,
and traditional retailers ranging from Home Depot to Gap have developed review systems
of their own.
Economists have been involved in the design of reputation systems – focusing on
understanding the systematic biases that can occur in review ecosystems, and the design
choices that might mitigate these biases. One bias that has been documented in review
systems in online marketplaces arises from reciprocal reviewing, in marketplaces where
buyers and sellers review each other. While reciprocal reviewing can be a valuable way
to build trust on both sides of the market, it has the potential to create incentives for
upward-biased reporting. When Airbnb allowed the reviews of renters to be posted before
those of the hosts, guests might have been hesitant to leave bad reviews out of concern
that hosts would reciprocate. Bolton, Greiner, and Ockenfels (2013) propose a fix to this
dilemma in the context of eBay, which offered reciprocal reviewing where both buyer
and seller reviews were immediately posted. The solution eBay (and Airbnb) explored is

to postpone displaying reviews until both sides have left a review, or until a certain
amount of time has expired. Under this system, however, buyers may still be reluctant to
provide negative feedback if they suspect that it would discourage future sellers from
transacting with them. Therefore, eBay added an anonymous, one-way review component
called a “detailed seller rating,” where buyers assign sellers several numerical scores and
the results are only viewable in aggregate form. Fradkin, Grewal, and Holtz (2017) study
this issue using a randomized experiment at Airbnb (working within the company), and
find results consistent with the hypothesis that reducing the possibility of retribution
increases the informativeness of reviews.
A second bias can arise because reviews in online marketplaces are voluntary and
so may suffer from selection bias. In particular, users may be more likely to leave a
review after an especially positive or negative experience. For example, a group from
eBay’s team of economists found evidence that eBay users were more likely to leave a
review after a positive experience, relative to a negative one (Masterov, Meyer, and
Tadelis 2015). Review platforms have a variety of tools to tackle the selection problem,
such as sending emails to encourage consumers to leave reviews and even paying
reviewers. Alternatively, platforms can incorporate information about buyer and seller
review frequency into reputation scores – for example, penalizing sellers who receive low
rates of feedback. Upon the recommendation of an in-house economist, a large online
labor market developed a system that allowed for both private and public feedback,
finding that private feedback was less inflated than public-facing reviews.
A third bias in online reviews occurs when businesses, or individuals hired by
businesses, surreptitiously leave reviews about themselves or their competitors. Luca and
Zervas (2016) explore the role of economic incentives in a business’s decision to commit
review fraud, finding that independent restaurants and restaurants with a declining
reputation are more likely to commit review fraud, and restaurants with high competition
are more often targeted with fake negative reviews. One mechanism for reducing
fraudulent reviews is to verify whether a transaction has occurred before allowing a
review, as is policy on Airbnb, for example; other sites, such as Amazon, label reviews
that come from a verified purchase. While this precaution may reduce fake reviews, it
may also prevent legitimate reviews on some platforms by increasing the barriers to
contributing content. Mayzlin, Dover, and Chevalier (2014) find evidence of this in the
context of TripAdvisor (which does not verify that reviewers have stayed at a property)
and Expedia (which does). They find that relative to chains, independent hotels tend to
have more five star reviews on TripAdvisor (relative to Expedia). Moreover, the
competitors of independent hotels tend to have more one star reviews on TripAdvisor
relative to Expedia.
In addition to creating incentives for people to leave high quality reviews,
platforms face a problem of how to aggregate reviews once they are in place (Dai et al.
2018). In practice, review platforms such as Yelp and TripAdvisor use algorithms to
identify and remove content that is thought to be fake or of low quality. Platforms can
also adjust and weight ratings to account for the informational content of each review,
increasing the overall informational content of average ratings being presented to users.
In practice, platforms also have to consider the incentive effects that different approaches
to filtering and aggregating content might have.

Another perspective on reviews that is natural from an economist’s training is to
consider the cost of a user’s time in writing a review as balanced against the value of
information from a review. For example, Uber makes a decision about whether to require
all riders to leave a review, or whether to only request reviews in some situations. It may
not be worthwhile to request a review from every user who interacts with a highly
experienced and well-rated seller on the marketplace. On the other hand, it is important to
continue to collect some reviews to provide continued incentives for the seller to provide
quality. In addition, there may be aspects of the user experience that can be directly
measured by a marketplace (for example, time it took for the seller to ship, whether an
Uber rider exceeded the speed limit, or how much a rider tips the driver). In such cases,
it may be more efficient to ask the buyer to review aspects of the service that are more
difficult to directly observe or infer.
The Effects of Reviews
The effects of online reviews on demand for products can be hard to identify. For
example, hotels with higher TripAdvisor ratings may have higher demand either because
ratings drive demand or simply because better hotels have higher ratings. However,
economists have now used a variety of methods to identify the causal impact of online
reviews.
As one example, consider a book that that is sold both on Amazon and on the
Barnes & Noble website. The book would almost certainly have different ratings on the
two platforms. Moreover, if an Amazon user left a review, the rating would change on
Amazon, but not on Barnes and Noble, leading to variation in ratings across platforms
and over time. Arguing that the exact timing of incoming reviews is plausibly exogenous,
Chevalier and Mayzlin (2006) use this variation to estimate the impact of reviews on
online book purchases. Specifically, they look for increases in sales on Amazon (relative
to Barnes and Noble) after a review was left on Amazon (but not on Barnes and Noble) –
implementing a difference-in-differences strategy. Using a regressions discontinuity
approach, Luca (2011) finds that higher ratings lead to higher sales for independent
restaurants but finds no evidence of this for chains. Anderson and Magruder (2012) find
similar effects of Yelp ratings on restaurant reservations. Ghose et al. (2012) uses a
similar approach to understand the impact of TripAdvisor reviews. Beyond the average
rating, other aspects of reviews are potentially important. For example, Sun (2012)
explores the impact of the variance of product reviews, and highlights that if the variation
in reviews of a product is driven by heterogeneous preferences, than higher variance
ratings may be a better match for some customers, conditional on average rating.
Consumer reviews also have important implications for market structure and
consumer welfare. Clemons et al. (2006) argue that information provided in reviews can
help to grow demand for products with more differentiated products by increasing the
quality of the match, and find generally consistent evidence when looking at reviews for
beer and growth in demand. Bar-Isaac et al. (2012) theoretically show that introducing
new information into a market can lead to a higher degree of product differentiation in
markets. This finding suggests that the existence of online reviews may lead to a greater
variety of products and services. Lewis and Zervas (2018) estimate the welfare effects of

TripAdvisor reviews, focusing on the reduced search costs in markets with more review
content.
Acquisitions, Exclusive Deals, and Strategy
The first question Susan was asked at Microsoft was whether internet search and
search advertising was an industry that could sustain two or three players, or whether it
was destined to be a monopoly. Her analysis of scale economies and indirect network
effects in search suggested that sufficient scale was necessary for a second search engine
to be viable; this analysis was used to value Microsoft’s acquisition of Yahoo!’s search
business, as well as other large business deals involving search. Later, the question arose
of whether the smartphone market could sustain three platforms, something that has
proved difficult to achieve. Questions about vertical integration also arise in these
markets; for example, Google acquired the ITA travel search engine in 2010, where prior
to that, ITA was providing the technology powering the travel search results for
Microsoft’s competing search engine, setting the stage for Google to dramatically
increase its share of travel searches. This acquisition was closely reviewed by the
Department of Justice and was eventually approved with certain conditions (Miller 2011).
Later, the European Commission imposed large fines on Google for biasing search results
in favor of its own vertically integrated specialized search services (Scott 2017), and later
for tying its search engine and mapping services to the applications store for Android
(Satarino and Nicas 2018). Banks around the world have complained that Apple gives
the Apple Wallet exclusive access to the NFC radio, a crucial component of mobile
payments, in the iPhone. Apple then takes a fee for every credit card transaction that
takes place on the Apple Wallet, a fee that is large (up to .15%) relative to the profits of
the credit card networks (Zhu, Athey, and Lane, 2018). Banks faced difficult strategic
questions about whether to enable Apple Wallet in light of these fees as well as the
control they would give up to Apple. Tech economists have been involved in analyzing
all of these issues from both a business and regulatory perspective.
Economic theory and empirical approaches can also be critical in analyzing
exclusive deals in the tech industry. For example, when gaming platforms such as
Microsoft’s Xbox and Sony’s Playstation release new generations, they typically sign
exclusive deals for games. Economic theory and empirical methods (e.g. Lee 2013) can
be used to value these exclusive deals, incorporating the direct impact of those games on
the sales of consoles at the time of launch, but also the indirect effect of those additional
consoles on the subsequent incentives of game developers to develop for a platform,
which in turn affects consumers, and so on.

Positions for Economists at Tech Companies
Economists have had mixed reception in tech companies. While some companies
like Amazon have been quick to bring economists into the highest levels of decisionmaking, others have been slower, with economists sitting within data science teams or
policy teams with less influence over the direction of the firms. In practice, economists
within technology companies take on a number of roles ranging from Chief Economist to

Product Manager. Economists often work within inward-facing groups at companies,
including forecasting and planning, pricing, testing, and data science teams as well as
outward-facing groups including policy, public relations, and marketing teams. We
outline some examples of these roles.
Data science/analytics is one of the fastest-growing job areas as tech companies
become more data-driven. Economists use observational and experimental data to answer
business questions, such as whether to introduce new products, how to understand the
effectiveness of large initiatives, and how to evaluate the impact of competitors. Because
this work directly informs the decisions of many other departments, some firms have
embedded data scientists in product teams while others have centralized data science
teams. For example, Amazon currently embeds data scientists within product teams,
while Yelp has a centralized data science team. Economists often help to manage teams
of data scientists as well, for example at Coursera, or for a period of time at HomeAway.
Tech companies are increasingly using experimentation or A/B testing to answer
product or platform design questions, such as the launch of a new product or advertising
campaign. Economists can help to manage the design, process, and analytics around
randomized controlled experiments. Some firms have embedded A/B testing specialists
within their functional teams (for example, in marketing teams) while others have a
separate team to manage a larger testing platform. For example, Uber and Facebook have
economists involved in managing experimentation platforms and process in a context
with strong network effects and many experiments. Other economists have developed and
applied techniques for estimating heterogeneous treatment effects in A/B testing
platforms (for example, Athey and Imbens 2016; Wager and Athey, forthcoming).
Some tech firms have embedded experimentation or data scientists into their
advertising/marketing analytics. These teams typically evaluate the effectiveness of
advertising, design experiments around advertising, optimize advertising spending, and
predict the success of advertising campaigns. For example, Netflix has a team working on
these issues.
Economists working as product managers can also design experiments and
surveys that answer questions that guide product designs and other strategic decisions,
including ranking algorithms in search platforms or presentation of information in
stores. These tasks often involve drawing causal inferences from observational data – for
example, using difference-in-differences methods to evaluate the impact of a new product
or feature.
In regulation/litigation settings, the role of an economist includes writing policy
white papers that translate theory and empirical work for a legal or policy audience,
contributing knowledge of specific subject areas such as telecommunications policy,
intellectual property, and antitrust from an economic perspective. Chief economists often
spend a share of time on these issues as well. Airbnb has economists trying to understand
housing markets and policy. Uber has economists investigating the impact of Uber on the
taxi industry and quality of rides. Google (and previously, Yahoo! and Microsoft) has had
economists studying antitrust issues related to Google’s dominant position in the search
industry.
Tech companies also have economists in a public policy role, helping to partner
with policymakers, often through data sharing and analysis. For example, Yelp partnered
with the City of Boston to develop an algorithm that allowed the city to help target

inspections for restaurant health code violations (Glaeser et al. 2016). Yelp data has been
used to forecast government statistics (Glaeser, Kim, and Luca 2017), understand how
neighborhoods change during gentrification (Glaeser, Kim, and Luca 2018), and estimate
the impact of the minimum wage on restaurant exit and prices (Luca and Luca 2017).
Yelp also partnered with cities (and a third party data provider) to display hygiene
violations online, helping to update a canonical example of disclosure policy (Jin and
Leslie 2003) for the digital age. This initiative helped to steer customers away from
restaurants with the most violations of health code policy (Dai and Luca 2018). Zillow,
the online real estate company, creates reports of local housing markets. Search data from
Yahoo! and Google has used its data to help forecast economic activity (Goel et al 2010,
Choi and Varian 2012, Wu and Brynjolffson 2015). LinkedIn is exploring the ways in
which its data can help to shed light on labor markets. Uber’s public policy team
examines issues such as the impact of driving for Uber on driver welfare (Chen et al.
2017), the impact of Uber on labor markets and local economies (Hall, Horton, and
Knoepfle 2017), and the role of gender in labor markets (Cook et al, 2018).
Several leading technology companies, including Zillow and Houzz, employ
economists to do research designed for public and media relations, to inform potential
customers and create awareness for the company. For example, a primary mechanism for
Zillow to attract consumers in its early years was that its chief economist created analyses
of real estate markets to be covered by local and national news media. As another
example, Houzz employs PhD economists who analyze and publish trends and data
relevant to home remodeling.
Members of the chief economist team conduct and oversee many of the roles
outlined above and also may make strategic decisions for the company. These decisions
might include acquisitions and partnerships (one of us, Susan, worked on strategy and
empirical analysis for Microsoft’s investment in Facebook, the acquisition of Yahoo!’s
search business, and the company’s strategy for cloud computing), as well as pricing and
market entry.
Depending on the size of the company, economists have also gone into
forecasting and planning teams (using time-series econometrics and modeling), pricing
teams (using market design and supply-and-demand modeling), and academic relations
(recruiting academics to fill the economic roles and build academic awareness
surrounding policy and public relations issues).

Discussion
While we have focused mainly on economists working directly in tech firms, the
rise of tech companies and emergence of the economics of digitization has important
implications for academia as well. The shifting field leads not only to new research
questions, but also to new academic positions, opportunities for collaborations, and
potential career shifts. In this section, we address these opportunities.

Partnerships with Academics
While a growing number of economists now work within tech companies,
collaborations with academics remain central to the strategy of tech firms and to the
diffusion of economics within companies. For example, Airbnb, Amazon, eBay,
Facebook, Indeed, LinkedIn, Microsoft, Rover, TaskRabbit, Uber, Upwork, Yelp, and
Zillow, have all collaborated with academic economists. These collaborations have
several advantages for companies.
First, academics often have deep expertise in focused areas, including the key
areas highlighted in this paper, and many others; for example, a behavioral economist
might shed light on the role of habit formation in user behavior. A market design
economist might have unique insight into mechanisms driving market thickness. An
econometrician might offer new ways to run experiments in a market with complicated
network effects. Academics are also well-positioned to draw on insight from different
contexts, since their work is less concentrated on a single platform.
Second, economists working full time within companies are often under pressure
to deal with immediate issues (such as whether to change prices in a given quarter, or
whether a specific advertising campaign was productive). Academics are insulated from
these pressures, and so can explore longer-term strategic issues such as whether a
company is even tracking the right metrics, or whether it makes sense to shift product
composition.
Third, the hiring of economists by tech companies has brought forth a related
risk—little research is being conducted internally on the shortcomings of tech companies
and the negative implications of their models. For example, Airbnb did not examine
racial discrimination on the platforms until academics documented it in academic
research, bringing it to the attention of policymakers, Airbnb users, and ultimately,
Airbnb managers. Working with academics and allowing a broad degree of autonomy can
help to get more credible and objective assessments of issues that companies are dealing
with.
At the same time, there are challenges that arises with academic partnerships. For
example, academics often sign agreements with firms guaranteeing the ability to publish
their results regardless of the result. In principle, this helps to reduce publication bias.
However, firms may choose not to sign agreements around research topics where they are
concerned about what the answers might be, potentially creating a bias towards papers
favorable towards firms and creating an incomplete snapshot of an issue. This issue is not
new, since economists have obtained data from firms and government agencies at their
discretion for many years. However, as collaborations become more standard, this issue
becomes more important.
Academic Jobs for Digitization Economists
The number of academic positions for digitization economists is growing. While
some of these are in economics departments, digitization economists now also teach in
business schools in strategy, marketing, information systems, entrepreneurship, and other
departments. Doctoral students with interests in these areas should be aware that while
some of these positions recruit through AEA, other departments – such as marketing,

operations, and information systems – are on other timelines and often recruit outside of
AEA.
Tech companies have also created strong demand for undergraduate economics
majors, who take roles ranging from product management to policy. Leading universities
including Dartmouth, Harvard, MIT, Princeton, Stanford, and Yale teach about online
platforms in their introductory microeconomics courses, or have created entire courses
related to the “economics of digitization” (including courses on e-commerce, online
platforms, and related areas). MIT’s economics and computer science departments have
partnered to create a new major in computer science, economics, and data science.
Harvard, MIT, and other universities have developed data science initiatives, drawing in
computer scientists, economists, and other social scientists. We see opportunities to
expand these course offerings, and to combine them with additional course material for
students looking for a career at tech companies. Courses about marketplaces and
platforms, taught from an economics perspective, have also proliferated among business
schools, such as Boston University, Harvard, New York University, and Stanford.
While PhD economists are well suited to tech careers in many ways, we also see
areas for the field to improve the preparation of PhD economists for working with or in
tech companies. First, with the importance of prediction, targeting, and precise estimates
in tech companies, machine learning plays an important role in tech companies. While
the field of economics has long been a leader in causal inference, the field is still in the
process of incorporating machine learning into its standard toolkit. Second, economists
have historically received less training, relative to computer scientists, at coding and at
optimizing code to run statistical algorithms at large scale. Investing in these skills (and
incorporating them into the PhD curriculum) can help to prepare economists to work in
this area. At the same time, it remains important that economists have a strong conceptual
understanding of economic issues like incentives and equilibrium effects, as well as
strong empirical skills in the areas such as causal inference that we have described in this
paper.
Shifts Between Academia and Practice
Economists in this area have growing opportunities to shift between academia and
practice. Microsoft, Google, Yahoo!, Facebook, Amazon, eBay, Yelp, Uber, and other
companies have all hosted faculty during sabbaticals. Tenured faculty members have left
academia for positions at Amazon, Google, and elsewhere. Practitioners have also
transitioned into academia – for example, leaving Facebook and Microsoft for MIT and
Stanford. We believe this is the beginning of a larger movement in which a greater share
of academic economists spend time in practice, acquiring a deeper understanding of what
issues are most important for efficiency and profitability in technology firms as well as
getting exposure to unsolved business problems that may highlight fruitful academic
research questions. As more PhD economists accept positions at tech companies, clearer
paths for spending time (or re-entering) academia will likely appear, for those who are
interested in this option. Firms that allow their economists to continue to publish will
likely have an advantage in recruiting and retaining economists who want to retain
flexibility in their career paths.

Acknowledgements
We thank Duncan Gilchrist and Guido Imbens for valuable feedback. Stephanie Chan
and Byron Perpetua provided excellent research assistance.

References
Agarwal, Nikhil, Susan Athey, and David Yang. “Skewed bidding in pay-per-action
auctions for online advertising.” American Economic Review 99, no. 2 (2009): 441-47.
Amit, Alon, Yaron Grelf, and John Hegeman. Advertisement selection and pricing using
discounts based on placement. U.S. Patent 2013/0325585 A1 file June 4 2012, and
publichsed December 5, 2013.
Anderson, Michael, and Jeremy Magruder. "Learning from the crowd: Regression
discontinuity estimates of the effects of an online review database." The Economic
Journal 122, no. 563 (2012): 957-989.
Angrist, Josh and Steve Pischke. Mostly Harmless Econometrics. Princeton University
Press: 2009.
Athey, Susan. “The impact of machine learning on economics.” Forthcoming in The
Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda, University of Chicago Press, Ajay K.
Agrawal, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb, editors, forthcoming.
Athey, Susan, Raj Chetty, Guido Imbens, and Hyunseung Kang, “Estimating treatment
effects using multiple surrogates: The role of the surrogate score and the surrogate
index.” Working paper. (2016).
Athey, Susan, Guido Imbens, and Dean Eckles, “Exact p-values for network
interference.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 113, no.521 (2018): 230240.
Athey, Susan, and Glenn Ellison. “Position auctions with consumer search.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, no. 3 (2011): 1213-1270.
Athey, Susan, and Guido Imbens. “Recursive partitioning for heterogeneous causal
effects.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113, no. 27 (2016): 73537360.
Athey, Susan and Denis Nekipelov. “A structural model of sponsored search
advertising.” Working paper. (2013).

Bar-Isaac, Heski, Guillermo Caruana, and Vicente Cunat. “Search, design, and market
structure.” American Economic Review. 102, no. 2 (2012): 1140-60.
Blake, T and Dominic Coey. “Why marketplace experimentation is harder than it seems:
The role of test-control interference.” In Proceedings of the fifteenth ACM conference on
Economics and computation, (2014):pp. 567-582.
Blake, Thomas, Chris Nosko, and Steven Tadelis. "Consumer heterogeneity and paid
search effectiveness: A large-scale field experiment." Econometrica 83, no. 1 (2015):
155-74.
Blake, Thomas, Chris Nosko, and Steven Tadelis. "Returns to consumer search: Evidence
from eBay." In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Economics and
Computation, pp. 531-545. ACM, 2016.
Bolton, Gary, Ben Greiner, and Axel Ockenfels. "Engineering trust: Reciprocity in the
production of reputation information." Management Science 59, no. 2 (2013): 265-285.
Chandar, Bharat, Ali Hortacsu, John List, Ian Muir, and Jeffrey Wooldridge, 2018.
"Evaluating Market Outcomes in a Nationwide Experiment on Tipping: Evidence from
Uber." Working paper.
Chen, M. Keith, Judith A. Chevalier, Peter E. Rossi, and Emily Oehlsen, “The value of
flexible work: Evidence from Uber drivers.” Working paper. (2017).
Chevalier, Judith A., and Dina Mayzlin. “The effect of word of mouth on sales: Online
book reviews." Journal of Marketing Research 43, no. 3 (2006): 345-354.
Choi, Hyunyoung and Hal Varian (2012). “Predicting the present with Google trends.”
Economic Record, 88(1): 2-9.
Clemons, Eric, Guodong Gao, and Lorin Hitt. “When online reviews meet
hyperdifferentiation: A study of the craft beer industry,” Journal of Management
Information Systems, Vol. 23, no. 2 (2006):149-171.
Cohen, Peter, Robert Hahn, Jonathan Hall, Steven Levitt, and Robert Metcalfe. “Using
big data to estimate consumer surplus: The case of Uber.” Working paper. (2016).
Cook, Cody, Rebecca Diamond, Jonathan Hall, John A. List, and Paul Oyer. "The
Gender Earnings Gap in the Gig Economy: Evidence from over a Million Rideshare
Drivers." Working paper. (2018).
Cullen, Zoe and Chiara Farronato. “Outsourcing tasks online: matching supply and
demand on peer-to-peer internet platforms.” Working paper. (2018).

Dai, Weijia, Ginger Jin, Jungmin Lee, and Michael Luca.“Aggregation of consumer
ratings: an application to Yelp.com.” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 16, no. 3
(2018): 289-339.
Dai, Weijia, and Michael Luca. “Digitizing disclosure: The case of restaurant hygiene
scores.” Working paper. (2018).
Dai, Weijia, Hyunjin Kim, and Michael Luca. “Effectiveness of paid search advertising:
Experimental evidence." Working paper. (2018).
Dinerstein, Michael, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan. "Consumer price
search and platform design in internet commerce." American Economic Review 108, no. 7
(2018): 1820-859.

Edelman, Benjamin, Michael Luca, and Dan Svirsky. “Racial discrimination in the
sharing economy: Evidence from a field experiment.” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 9, no. 2 (2017): 1-22.
Edelman, Benjamin, Michael Ostrovsky, and Michael Schwarz. “Internet advertising and
the generalized second-price auction: Selling billions of dollars worth of
keywords.” American Economic Review 97, no. 1 (2007): 242-259.
Fisman, Raymond and Michael Luca. “Fixing discrimination in online marketplaces.”
Harvard Business Review 94, no. 12 (2016): 88-95.
Fradkin, Andrey. “Search, matching, and the role of digital marketplace design in
enabling trade: Evidence from Airbnb.” Working paper. (2017).
Fradkin, Andrey, Elena Grewal, and David Holtz. “The determinants of online review
informativeness: Evidence from field experiments on Airbnb.” Working paper. (2017).
Ghose, Anindya, Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis, and Beibei Li. "Designing ranking systems for
hotels on travel search engines by mining user-generated and crowdsourced
content." Marketing Science 31, no. 3 (2012): 493-520.
Glaeser, Edward, Andrew Hillis, Scott Kominers, and Michael Luca. “Crowdsourcing
city government: Using tournaments to improve inspection accuracy.” American
Economic Review 106, no. 5 (2016): 114-118.
Glaeser, Edward L., Hyunjin Kim, and Michael Luca. “Nowcasting gentrification: Using
Yelp data to quantify gentrification.” American Economic Association: Papers and
Proceedings. (2018): 77-82.
Glaeser, Edward L., Hyunjin Kim, and Michael Luca. “Nowcasting the local economy:
Using Yelp data to measure economic activity.” Working paper. (2017).

Goel, Sharad, Jake M. Hofman, Sébastien Lahaie, David M. Pennock, and Duncan J.
Watts, 2010. “Predicting consumer behavior with Web search,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 107 (41): 17486-17490.
Hall, Jonathan, John Horton, and Dan Knoepfle, “Labor market equilibration: Evidence
from Uber.” Working paper. (2017).
Hitsch, Günter J., and Sanjog Misra. "Heterogeneous treatment effects and optimal
targeting policy evaluation." Working paper. (2018).
Hu, Nan, Jie Zhang, and Paul A. Pavlou. “Overcoming the J-shaped distribution of
product reviews.” Communications of the ACM 52, no. 10 (2009): 144-147.
Huang, Jason, Nickolai Riabov, and David Reilly. “Measuring consumer sensitivity to
audio advertising: A field experiment on Pandora Internet Radio." Working paper.
(2017).
Johnson, Garrett A., Randall A. Lewis, and David H. Reiley. “When less is more: Data
and power in advertising experiments.” Marketing Science 36, no. 1 (2016): 43-53.
Johnson, Garrett, Randall A. Lewis, and David Reiley. "Location, location, location:
repetition and proximity increase advertising effectiveness." Working paper. (2016).
Johnson, Garrett A., Randall A. Lewis, and Elmar I. Nubbemeyer. “Ghost ads: Improving
the economics of measuring online ad effectiveness.” Journal of Marketing Research 54,
no. 6 (2017): 867-884.
Kramer, Adam, Jamie Guillory, and Jeffrey Hanckock (2014). “Experimental evidence of
massive-scale emotional contagion through social networks.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 111 (24).
Lee, Robin S. "Vertical integration and exclusivity in platform and two-sided
markets." American Economic Review 103, no. 7 (2013): 2960-3000.
Lewis, Gregory and Giorgos Zervas. “Welfare Impact of Consumer Reviews: A Case
Study of the Hotel Industry.” Working paper. (2018)
Lewis, Randall A., and Justin M. Rao. “The unfavorable economics of measuring the
returns to advertising.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, no. 4 (2015): 19411973.
Luca, Michael. “Reviews, reputation, and revenue: The case of Yelp.com.” Working
paper. (2011).
Luca, Michael, and Georgios Zervas. “Fake it till you make it: Reputation, competition,
and Yelp review fraud.” Management Science 62, no. 12 (2016): 3412-27.

Luca, Dara Lee, and Michael Luca. “Survival of the fittest: The impact of the minimum
wage on firm exit.” Working paper. (2017).
Masterov, Dimitriy V., Uwe F. Mayer, and Steven Tadelis. “Canary in the e-commerce
coal mine: Detecting and predicting poor experiences using buyer-to-seller messages.”
In Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM Conference on Economics and Computation,
(2015): pp. 81-93.
Mayzlin, Dina, Yaniv Dover, and Judith Chevalier. “Promotional reviews: An empirical
investigation of online review manipulation.” American Economic Review 104, no. 8
(2014): 2421–55.
Meyer, Robinson. “Everything We Know About Facebook's Secret Mood Manipulation
Experiment.” The Atlantic, June 28, 2014.
Miller, Claire Cain. “U.S. clears Google acquisition of travel software.” New York Times,
April 8, 2011.
Ostrovsky, Michael, and Michael Schwarz. “Reserve prices in internet advertising
auctions: A field experiment.” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming. (2016).
Satariano, Adam and Jack Nicas, “E.U. fines Google $5.1 billion in Android antitrust
case.” New York Times, July 18, 2018.
Scott, Mark. “Google fined record $2.7 billion in E.U. antitrust ruling,” New York Times,
June 27, 2017.
Shapiro Carl and Hal Varian (1999). “Information rules: A strategic guide to the network
economy.” Harvard Business School Press.
Sun, Monic. "How does the variance of product ratings matter?." Management
Science 58, no. 4 (2012): 696-707.
Varian, Hal R. “Position auctions.” International Journal of industrial Organization 25,
no. 6 (2007): 1163-1178.
Verma, Inder, 2014. “Editorial Expression of Concern: Experimental evidence of
massivescale emotional contagion through social networks.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 111 (29).
Wager, Stefan, and Susan Athey. “Estimation and inference of heterogeneous treatment
effects using random forests.” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
forthcoming.

Wu, Lynn and Erik Brynjolffson (2015). “The Future of Prediction: How Google
Searches Foreshadow Housing Prices and Sales,” Economic Analysis of the Digital
Economy, 89-118.
Zhu, Feng, Susan Athey and David Lane. “Apple pay and mobile payments in Australia
(A).” HBS No.N9-619-010. Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 2018.

Figure 1: Examples of tech companies that have hired PhD economists
Alibaba
AirBnB
Amazon
AppNexus
CoreLogic
Coursera
Dstillery
Didichuxing
Digonex
eBay
ECONorthwest
Expedia
Facebook
Forkcast
Glassdoor
Google
Granular
Groupon
Houzz
Huawei
IBM
Indeed
ING
Intel
Kensho
Lending Club

LinkedIn
Lyft
Microsoft
Netflix
Nuna
Oath
OpenAI
Pandora
Pinterest
PoliticalSheepdog.com
Prattle
Quantco
Quora
Redfin
Ripple
Rover
Trulia
Uber
Upwork
Vericred
Visa
Walmart
Wealthfront
Yahoo!
Yelp
Zillow

Figure 2: The number of positions in tech companies, policy schools, business schools,
and economics departments

Tech
companies
Feb 2017-Jan 2018
Feb 2016-Jan 2017
Feb 2015-Jan 2016
Feb 2014-Jan 2015

21
20
18
15

Policy
schools

Business
schools
34
23
31
26

162
149
150
133

Economics
departments
194
199
218
232

