                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE ECONOMIC EFFECT OF IMMIGRATION POLICIES:
                   ANALYZING AND SIMULATING THE U.S. CASE

                                     Andri Chassamboulli
                                        Giovanni Peri

                                     Working Paper 25074
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25074


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 2018, Revised October 2019




We are grateful to Annie Hines and Andrew Padovani for their competent assistance with the
data. We also thank participants at the Search and Matching Annual Conference, the ZEW
Workshop on the Economics of Immigration, ASSET conference, the Sheffield Workshop on the
Macroeconomics of Migration, the University of Glasgow Workshop on Migration and Mobility
and seminar participants at the University of Cyprus for useful comments and discussion. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Andri Chassamboulli and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economic Effect of Immigration Policies: Analyzing and Simulating the U.S. Case
Andri Chassamboulli and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 25074
September 2018, Revised October 2019
JEL No. E24,F22,J64

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper we analyze the economic effects of different immigration policies using a model that
incorporates economic and policy features crucial to understanding the migrant flows into the US.
We differentiate among the most relevant channels of immigration to the US: family-based,
employment-based and undocumented. Moreover we explicitly account for earning incentives to
migrate and for the role of immigrant networks in generating immigration opportunities. Hence,
we can analyze the effect of policy changes through those channels. In our simulations highly
skilled employment and unskilled immigrants generate larger surplus to US firms than natives do.
Hence policies restricting their entry either directly or indirectly have a depressing effect on job
creation and, in turn, on native labor markets. Our analysis gives new insights into the effect of
policies as it accounts for the endogenous immigration response which is overlooked by most
existing models.


Andri Chassamboulli
University of Cyprus
CY-1678, Nicosia
Cyprus
andricha@ucy.ac.cy

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
1     Introduction
How would different immigration policies impact the US economy? This is an important
and debated question. Economists have adopted, so far, rather simplified models to
evaluate the consequences of changing immigration policies on the national economy and
labor markets. Usually they have analyzed the consequences of a change in the number
and in the composition of foreign-born as shiftS in supply within a neoclassical model
(e.g. Ottaviano and Peri 2012, or Llull 2017). Actual policies, however, are provisions
changing the conditions of entry through specific immigration channels or the degree of
enforcement of those conditions. The number of immigrants and their composition are
themselves equilibrium outcomes of these policies. To evaluate the effect of a policy change
on immigration flows, and in turn of these flows on the economy, one has to account for
the impact of policies on current and future incentives for immigration. Models that
produce quantitative assessments of the impact of immigration on labor markets and
other economic outcomes, have usually neglected the analysis of specific policies and
their general equilibrium effects accounting for networks and incentives. To do this one
has to model networks of job referrals and family unification opportunities, which may
create the conditions for the so called “chain migration effects”. Analyzing and simulating
how specific policies, affect each channel of entry in the US and, in turn, the long-run
immigration flow and labor market outcomes is the goal of this paper.
    Sometimes changes in immigration laws have unintended long-run equilibrium effects.
Through networks and family linkage effects they may increase substantially the immi-
gration opportunities in the future. For instance, the Immigration and Naturalization
act of 1965, supposed to be a change that could preserve immigrant composition while
abolishing quotas, ushered a family-based immigration system in the US, and over time
allowed the largest increase in immigrants in the US. Similarly the high tolerance for un-
documented immigrants in the 1990’s allowed in the US a large number of undocumented
foreign workers also affecting labor markets and subsequent immigration opportunities.
    The U.S. federal Government does not control directly the number of immigrants en-
tering or staying in the country. Instead, it sets rules about their entry and their oppor-
tunities to remain and it decides the intensity of enforcement of these rules. Immigration
policies are not usually quotas, but rather they specify different tracks of entry and dif-
ferent conditions for staying in the country. These rules, together with the incentives of
immigrants and the effectiveness of their enforcement, generate the observed number of

                                             1
immigrants and shape their composition in terms of skills/productivity, bargaining power
and expected duration of stay. These elements are key to our understanding of their labor
market effects. While it will be impossible to mirror the complexities of the US immigra-
tion system, our model aims at capturing the main avenues of entry and stay in the US.
No study, to the best of our knowledge, has so far incorporated the important interplay
between immigration policies, immigrants’ economic incentives and the role of immigrant
networks when analyzing the inflow of immigrants and their labor market effects.
   We develop a two-country economy that represents the US and the rest of the World,
and we model in detail each of three main ways of entry: Family, Employment and Un-
documented immigration. The opportunities for legal entry through each specific channel,
are affected by policies and by the existing networks (of family or potential co-workers).
Similarly illegal entry is affected by the degree of enforcement. A change in one policy
will change entry through that channel but also the size of the immigrant network with
consequences on the opportunities for entry through other channels. It will also affect
incentives of foreigners to migrate through labor market tightness and wages. In order to
capture key features of the US labor market, we separate high (college-educated) and low
(non college educated) skilled immigrants and we consider their different labor markets
and opportunities for entry.
   To reflect the current immigration system in the US we assume that the employment
route for legal entry is only available to highly skilled, the family route is available to skilled
and unskilled, in proportion of the existing family ties, and the illegal route is pursued only
by less skilled. We represent the labor market using a search and matching model, which
implies that firms post vacancies for skilled and unskilled workers and workers search
for jobs. Native and immigrants fill those vacancies and, as they have different outside
options, this reflects on their bargaining power and wages. Finally, we model the incentives
to migrate so that changes in the wage and unemployment conditions in the US will affect
the incentives to move: higher wages and lower unemployment conditions would attract
more immigrants. To mirror the US experience in 1990-2015 we choose parameters that
reflect the fact that during that period Mexico was the most relevant origin of low skilled
immigrants and Asia (especially China and India) was the most relevant source region for
high skilled immigrants. We solve the model and then we calibrate it to match aggregate
labor market- and immigration statistics for the US, for the average of 2010-2015. We
use such an equilibrium as starting point to simulate alternative policy scenarios.


                                                2
   By capturing these important aspects of the labor market and of immigrant entry, this
model allows us three insights into the effect of different policies that would not be present
in models based on the canonical labor demand and exogenous supply of immigrants.
First, the job creation effects of immigrants from any entry route (family, employment
and illegal) are beneficial to natives, but for different reasons. Unskilled family and
undocumented immigrants produce large surplus to firms because their wages per unit
of productivity are lower than those of natives due to their worse outside options. High-
skilled employment immigrants, instead, are selected on ability and increase the expected
firm surplus from a match due to their higher productivity. Both effects generate more job
creation and tighter labor markets. These job creation channels may attenuate or reverse
the prediction on native employment and wages from a pure supply/demand model.
   Second, while the family route allows unskilled workers it also generates family op-
portunities for high-skilled immigrants who come to the US to be employed. High-skilled
individuals have larger incentives to migrate and generate “network” opportunities for
other high-skilled individuals through job referrals. Symmetrically, the employment route
allows only highly skilled workers but it also generates family opportunities for unskilled
immigrants. Hence, in the long run, family reunification policies in the US have only a
marginally smaller effect in increasing the skilled/unskilled ratio vis-a-vis employment-
based policies. Restricting either of the two routes turns out to have similar negative job
creation effects.
   Third, given that the job creation effects of immigrants from any entry route are
beneficial to natives, if the overall immigration policies are balanced between skilled and
unskilled, then both groups of natives will be better off not only in terms of unemployment
but also in terms of wages.
   An innovation of this paper is that we can illustrate the impact on native wages and
unemployment from changing one channel of entry at the time. For instance we can
modify the approval rate of family admissions, so as to increase the number of family
immigrants by a certain percent, leaving the other policies (relative to other channels of
entry ) unchanged. We can then analyze what would happen in equilibrium to the inflow
of other groups of immigrants (also indirectly affected by incentives and networks) and
to wages and unemployment of natives. We will use the model to evaluate the potential
labor market effects of some recent policy proposals. One is the plan to reduce by 50%
the family reunification immigrants (which captures the main provision of the RAISE act


                                              3
proposed in 2017 in the U.S. Senate). Another is the substantial increase in deportation
rates to reduce (by 10 or 50%) the population of undocumented immigrants (this reflects
the explicit goal of the Trump administration to increased intensity of deportations of
undocumented). We can also analyze the plan to reduce the most prominent temporary
visa program, the H1B, (which is under scrutiny and several bills proposed in the House
in 2017, aimed at making it more restrictive). This would imply a smaller number of
temporary high skilled employment immigrants. Our model will provide estimates of
the potential effects of these measures on US labor markets, specifically on wage and
unemployment rates of natives and immigrants. At the same time we will use the model
to analyze the impact on migration flows of some important structural changes in the
US, such as the increase in productivity of high skilled workers (skill biased technological
change) and the increase in supply of highly educated workers.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant papers in the
literature and the innovative content of this paper relative to those. Section 3 describes
the main components of the model, its equilibrium conditions and provides an intuition
of its key mechanisms, with a focus on incentive to immigration, network effects, and the
working of the labor market. Section 4 describes the calibration and parameterization of
the Model, targeting the US as home country and Mexico/Asia as foreign country, using
as steady state the years 2010-2015. Section 5 describes the effects of immigration policies
and indirect policies that change the tightness of each entry mechanisms and allow us to
discuss the channels at work. It also describes the impact of some specific structural
changes in the US, on migration flows, and in turn, on the labor market. Then in Section
6 we present some robustness checks to values of some crucial parameter values. Section
7 provides some concluding remarks.


2     Literature Review
This paper contributes to the literature that analyzes the effects of changes in immigration
policies on Labor Market outcomes of natives in the US. The novelty of the paper is
that we develop a labor market model that allows for the analysis of different channels
of entry of immigrants and that we account for the incentive and network effects on
immigrants. The basic structure of the model builds on Chassamboulli and Peri (2017),
and Chassamboulli and Palivos (2015), but it enriches those models, significantly, by
featuring a fully developed 2-country equilibrium model and a much richer set of channels

                                             4
of immigration. We also add jobs that can be filled directly with referrals from existing
workers, on top of jobs that are filled through the usual search process after opening a
vacancy.
   There are several papers analyzing the economic effect of immigrants in the US (see
Lewis and Peri 2015 and Peri 2016 for overview of the literature). These papers are,
however, mostly empirically focused and they identify a portion of the total inflow of
immigrants to the US as exogenous and track its effects on the US labor markets. Recently,
some papers have analyzed in a general equilibrium framework the impact of high skilled
immigrants, admitted through the H1B program, on growth and labor markets in the US.
Notably Bound et al. 2017 and Jaimovich and Siu 2017 focus on the fact that highly skilled
immigrants have a high propensity to specialize in science and technology and this has a
strong impact on innovation and economic growth in the long run. Basso et al. (2017)
develop an equilibrium model that analyzes the interaction of technological change and
immigration, incorporating the endogeneity of immigrants inflows to technological growth.
Battisti et al. (2017) use a search model to examine the effect of changes in high skilled
and low skilled immigrants on labor market and fiscal transfers in European countries.
   Relative to those papers this study is the first to account for several important aspects
of the immigration process. First we consider the response of immigrants to earning in-
centives. Second we account for the role of networks in facilitating future immigration.
Third we allow for the existence of several types of entry avenues. Empirical papers on
the determinants of international migrations have studied the impact of wage and un-
employment differentials on migration flows across countries (e.g. Grogger and Hanson
2011). However, papers focusing on the impact of immigration on the receiving country
economy have usually neglected this “feedback channel” as less relevant. In our analysis
we account for the indirect effect of migration policies on immigration incentives, through
labor market variables. Similarly, several studies have emphasized the importance of net-
works in producing persistence in immigration flows (e.g. Munshi 2003; Hanson et al.
2017). None of them, however, has separately analyzed the role of family reunification
and jobs referrals as channels contributing to such persistence. Recently, the labor liter-
ature has recognized the role of referrals in hiring and its implication for labor markets
(e.g. Calvo-Armengol and Zenou, 2005, Fontaine, 2008, Galenianos, 2013, 2014, Horvath,
2014). We are the first to explicitly incorporate the “referral” channel of hiring in the
immigration literature.


                                             5
    One of the contributions of this paper is to explicitly consider the differences in im-
migrant skills, associated to each channel of entry. Due to legal restrictions immigrants
entering through different channels are quite different in skills. This affects their im-
pact on labor markets. We are only aware of few studies (e.g. Hunt 2011) relating the
economic performance of immigrants to their channel of entry. However, from a policy
perspective this is a very relevant question: changing the costs and opportunities of entry
for each channel affects immigrants’ composition and hence their labor markets effects.
While there is an extensive literature on selection and sorting of migrants across skills (e.g.
Grogger and Hanson 2013; Ortega and Peri 2012) and some papers specifically analyze
the sorting of immigrants to the US (e.g., Huertas-Moraga 2011; Kastner and Malamoud
2017) those studies do not relate selection to the type of entry channels and hence they
do not relate sorting directly to policy.
    Finally, recently there have been empirical studies looking at the effect of specific
immigration policies on US economic outcomes. Examples are Kerr and Lincoln (2010)
and Mayda et al (2018) who look at the change in quota for the H1B visa policy, Pope
(2017) who analyzes the effect of DACA (Deferred Action for Childhood Arrival) and
Clemens et al (2018) analyzing the effects of the end of a temporary visa program (the
Bracero program). Those papers, while careful on identification, have a very specific goal
of evaluating the immediate effect of one policy and their results are therefore hard to
generalize. Our contribution is to provide a flexible model that can be used to gain insight
and simulate a relatively large set of immigration policies.


3     Model
We describe here the main features of the model. We consider two countries: country 1
(the US) and country 2 (the rest of the world). Country 1 has higher wages and better
employment opportunities relative to country 2. Hence, some workers have incentives to
migrate from country 2 to country 1 to increase their income. No worker has incentives
to migrate from country 1 to country 2. The size of the native labor force of country 1
(indicated as N ) is normalized to 1 and it is divided into two types of workers: skilled
in measure of S and unskilled in measure of 1 − S. Individuals born in country 2 are,
instead, of measure X and are also divided into skilled and unskilled workers in measure
of Xs and Xu , respectively. Individuals from either country enter and exit the labor
force at rate τ , so that the overall size of the labor force (native of country 1 and 2)

                                              6
remains constant. New individuals enter the labor force as unemployed. All agents are
risk neutral and discount the future at a common rate r > 0, equal to the interest rate.
Time is continuous.
       The natives of country 2 can find opportunities to enter, reside and work legally in
country 1 through two channels. First, through family reunification laws that allow lawful
permanent residents of country 1 to sponsor their immediate relatives for immigration. In
particular, a native of country 2 can enter into country 1 on a family visa, if one of his/her
immediate family members is a legal immigrant of country 1. Second, it is possible to
enter on an employment visa. To be qualified for an employment visa an individual must
have a job offer in country 1. Such job offers are made available to the natives of country
2 through referrals from their network of contacts who are lawful permanent residents
of country 1. Employment visas, as opposed to family visas, are targeted towards aliens
with certain skills, because they are meant to fill specific skill gaps. We account for the
fact that in country 1, which we take to be the US, employment visas are mainly targeted
towards foreigners with high abilities and professional skills. We therefore assume that
entry through employment is only available to the skilled natives of country 2, whereas,
entry through family ties is available to both skilled and unskilled.
       Migration to country 1 can also be illegal/unauthorized. Opportunities for illegal
migration arise as “random events” occurring at rate xI , for the unskilled natives of
country 2. Skilled individuals typically face fewer restrictions on legal entry channels
and presumably relatively larger payoff, compared to unskilled individuals. It is therefore
reasonable to assume that those actively looking for opportunities to migrate illegally are
the unskilled individuals only1 .
       In any given period, some of the natives of country 2 will choose to take advantage of
opportunities to migrate to country 1 either illegally or legally. Immigrants, together with
natives, search for jobs, match with firms, bargain for wages and produce. Individuals
admitted on family visas can stay and work in country 1 indefinitely (i.e. family visas
are permanent). Employment immigrants, on the other hand, are initially admitted on
temporary work permits, and may transition to permanent residence status subsequently.2
   1
     According to estimates reported by the Migration Policy Institute in 2012, more than
80% of undocumented immigrants in the US had at most a high school degree.                           See
https://www.migrationpolicy.org/programs/us-immigration-policy-program-data-hub/unauthorized-
immigrant-population-profiles.
   2
     We assume that the employment entry is constituted by a temporary-permanent visa track as most of
the immigrants in the US follow such a path. The Department of State reports that in the years 2010-2017



                                                   7
They may obtain a permanent visa at rate xE , or return home at rate dT , reflecting the
end of their employment contract, the expiration of their visa or other personal reasons.
For workers on temporary permits, stay in country 1 is conditional on having a job in
country 1. If they switch to permanent residency they can stay and work in country 1
indefinitely. Legal immigrants with either family or permanent-employment visas face
zero deportation risk. They have a positive probability of returning home, however,
for personal idiosyncratic reasons. Illegal immigrants face the additional risk of being
repatriated by deportation. Hence the return probability of illegal immigrants is higher
than that of legal immigrants. Let dL and dI denote the instant return rate of legal and
illegal immigrants, respectively. We set dI ≥ dL > 0 due to deportation and the more
precarious state of the undocumented.
   The total labor force of country 1 thus consists of natives (N ) and immigrants, legal
and illegal (denoted as L and I, respectively) and its size is 1 + I + L, while the size of
total labor force in country 2 is X − I − L. All illegal immigrants are unskilled and all
employment immigrants, temporary or permanent (denoted as LT and LE , respectively),
are skilled, while family immigrants can be skilled (LsF ) or unskilled (LuF ). The total
number of legal immigrants in country 1 is given by L = LuF + Ls , where Ls = LsF +
LE + LT gives the number of legal immigrants who are skilled.

3.1     Workers and firms
Firms in country 1 operate in one of two intermediate sectors, or in the final sector.3
The two intermediate sectors produce intermediate goods Yu and Ys , using “unskilled”
and “skilled” labor, respectively and they operate a linear technology, which implies that
immigrants and natives of the same skill type are perfect substitutes in the production of
intermediates. These two intermediate inputs are non-storable and are sold in competitive
markets and assembled for the production of country 1’s final good (Y ), the numeraire.
The production technology for the final good of country 1 is as follows:
                                                            1
                                Y = [αYsσ + (1 − α)Yuσ ] σ , σ ≤ 1                                 (1)
only 10% of permanent employment permits (green cards) was given each year to people who came directly
from abroad. 90% of them was given as “adjustment of status,” to people already in the US with another
visa. See https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/legal/visa-law0/visa-statistics/nonimmigrant-visa-
statistics.html.
   3
     Our production side borrows from Acemoglu (2001).




                                                  8
where α is a positive parameter that governs income shares and σ determines the elasticity
of substitution between the unskilled and skilled inputs. The production technology in
(1) implies diminishing marginal products and Edgeworth complementarity between the
two inputs Ys and Yu .
   One important difference between skilled immigrants admitted on employment visas
and skilled family immigrants or natives is that the former are screened for their occu-
pational qualifications. Employment visas are targeted towards skilled foreigners with
specific abilities and they require that immigrants have a job offer in the US. No such
screening applies to skilled family immigrants who are, therefore, less selected on the
productivity dimension. There is therefore reason to expect that employment immigrants
are more productive than family immigrants and even than natives. We capture this by
assuming that each skilled native or family immigrant produces one unit of the intermedi-
ate input, while each employment immigrant (either permanent or temporary) produces
λ ≥ 1 units. In the numerical experiments that follows we calibrate the value of λ by
matching the wage difference between skilled employment-immigrants and skilled family-
immigrants and this parameter turns out to be larger than one. Unskilled workers, on
the other hand, are all equally productive. They all produce one unit of the intermediate
input. Given a linear production technology for the two intermediate inputs, we can write,
Ys = esN + esF + λ(esE + esT ) and Yu = euN + euF + euI , where eiκ denotes the number
of employed workers of skill type i and immigration/nativity status κ = [N, I, F, T, E]
(N = native, I = illegal, F = family-based, T = temporary employment-based and E =
permanent employment-based).
   Since the two intermediate inputs are sold in competitive markets, their prices, ps and
pu will be equal to their marginal products, that is:

                                                  1−σ
                                              Y
                                ps = α                                                 (2)
                                              Ys
                                                            1−σ
                                                        Y
                                pu = (1 − α)                                           (3)
                                                        Yu

3.2    Search and Matching
There are two labor markets in country 1, one for skilled and one for unskilled labor.
In each of the two labor markets unemployed workers and job vacancies are matched
via a stochastic technology represented by the matching function M (Ui , Vi ), where Ui

                                              9
and Vi denote, respectively, the number of unemployed workers and vacancies of skill
i = [u, s]. We assume that the function M (Ui , Vi ), exhibits standard properties.It is at
least twice continuously differentiable, increasing in its arguments, it exhibits constant
returns to scale and satisfies the Inada conditions. Using the property of constant returns
to scale, we can write the flow rate of match per unemployed worker of skill type i as
M (Ui , Vi )/Ui = m(θi ). The flow rate of match per vacancy is M (Ui , Vi )/Vi = q(θi ), where
θi = Vi /Ui is the measure of tightness in market i and m0 (θi ) > 0 while q 0 (θi ) < 0. Firms
post either high-skill vacancies or low-skill vacancies. Each firm posts at most one vacancy
and hires one worker. The number of firms of each type is determined endogenously by
free entry. While vacancies are skill-specific, they cannot be specifically “targeted” to
natives or immigrants. They are open to both native and immigrant workers with those
skills. Hence, natives and immigrants of skill type i, both find jobs at rate m(θi ).
    Firms bear a recruitment cost ci for each vacancy, which is specific to the skill type and
related to the expenses of looking for a worker. An unemployed worker of type i receives
a flow of income bi , which can be considered as the opportunity cost of employment. In
addition, unemployed workers pay a search cost πij per unit of time where the subscript
j = [N, I, L] denotes the worker’s origin and legal status: native (N ), illegal-immigrant
(I) and legal-immigrant (L). We account for the fact that a legal immigrant worker faces a
higher search cost compared to a native worker and an illegal immigrant faces even higher
costs. The reason is that legal immigrants, whether on temporary visas or permanent
residency, have access to significantly fewer benefits than US citizens, especially when
unemployed.4 Undocumented immigrants cannot access any unemployment insurance at
all and hence their cost of searching is even larger. We standardize the search cost of a
native worker to 0 and set πiN = 0, and we presume πI > πuL > 0, πsL > 0 which will be
confirmed by the calibration.
    When a vacancy and a worker are matched, they bargain over the division of the
produced surplus. The status of the worker as well as the output that results from a match
are known to both parties. Matches of unskilled firms with unskilled workers (natives
or immigrants) produce output pu (given in 3). Matches of skilled firms with skilled
natives or family immigrants produce output ps (given in 2), while matches with skilled
   4
     Since the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of 1996
many federal government benefits (Food stamps, TANF, AFDC and others) were restricted to US citizens
only. Hence non-naturalized legal immigrants had a significant larger cost of being without a job. In the
2000’s some but not all, states re-instated some of them.



                                                   10
employment immigrants on temporary or permanent visas produce output pE = λps .
Wages, denoted as wiκ , differ by skill type (i) and migration status κ = [N, I, F, T, E].
They are determined by Nash bargaining of the produced surplus between the firm and
the worker. After an agreement has been reached, production commences immediately.
Matches dissolve at the rate si . Following a job destruction, the worker and the vacancy
enter the corresponding market and search for new match.

3.3     Optimality Conditions and Free entry
At each point in time a worker is either employed (E) or unemployed (U ), while a vacancy
may be either filled (J) or empty (V ). We use the notation Eiκ , Uiκ , Jiκ and Viκ to denote
the present discounted value associated with the state where a worker is employed, a
worker is unemployed, a job is filled and a job is vacant, where i = [s, u] indicates the
worker’s skill type and κ = [N, I, F, T, E] the worker’s immigration/nativity status. Note
that we drop the subscript κ from Viκ , since a vacancy of skill type i is open to any worker
of skill type i irrespective of his/her immigration status and is therefore described by the
same Bellman equation. We also drop the subscript i whenever κ = [I, T, E], since all
illegal immigrants are unskilled and all employment immigrants (on either temporary or
permanent visas) are skilled. The full set of Bellman equations that describe the optimal
behavior of workers and firms in country 1 is in Appendix A.
   A second set of equilibrium conditions is that of free-entry (vacancy posting) on the
firm side in each of the two labor markets (skilled and unskilled). Firms open vacancies
up to the point that an additional one has zero expected value. In equilibrium this implies
the following two conditions:
                                     Vi = 0,    i = [s, u]                               (4)

   Wages are then determined by Nash bargain between the matched firm and the worker.
The outside options of the firm and the worker are the value of a vacancy (i.e. of searching
for a worker) and the value of being unemployed (i.e. of searching for job), respectively.
Let Siκ denote the surplus of a match between a vacancy of skill type i and a worker
of immigration status κ. With Nash-bargaining the wage is set to a level such that the
worker gets a share β of the surplus, where β represents the relative bargaining power of
workers, and the share (1 − β) goes to the firm. This implies seven equilibrium conditions
of the following form:



                                               11
        βSiκ = Eiκ − Uiκ ,     (1 − β)Siκ = Jiκ − Vi ,   i = [s, u] and κ = [N, F ]        (5)
        βSE = EE − UE ,       (1 − β)SE = JE − Vs                                          (6)
        βSI = EI − UI ,      (1 − β)SI = JI − Vu                                           (7)
        βST = ET − Us2 ,      (1 − β)ST = JT − Vs                                          (8)

   Conditions 5 to 7 are relative to workers in Country 1. Only condition 8 is relative
to residents of country 2. Ui2 denotes the value of searching for a job in country 2 for an
individual of skill type i = [s, u] who was born in country 2. It gives the outside option
of natives of country 2 who are currently employed (or seeking entry) in country 1 on
temporary visas, because these workers’ stay (or entry) in country 1 is conditional upon
having a job in country 1. If an agreement is not reached and they are not offered a job
in country 1, they will have to search for a job in country 2.

3.4     Legal Migration
The two main channels through which the natives of country 2 migrate legally to country
1 are the family unification system and the employment system.

3.4.1   Family unification

To be eligible for a family visa, a native of country 2 must have an immediate relative
who is a lawful permanent resident of country 1. Let LP ≡ L − LT denote the number
of legal immigrants of country 1 that hold permanent (employment or family) visas. An
individual from country 2 is more likely to be eligible to apply for a family visa when a
larger share of country-2 natives are legal (permanent) immigrants of country 1. More
formally, if we assume that all families have exactly the same probability/share of legal
immigrants on permanent visas in country 1, then the probability that a member of a
                                                                 LP
family network is a permanent-legal immigrant of country 1 is    X
                                                                      . Suppose that petitions
for obtaining family visas are filed and approved at rate xF . The rate at which natives of
country 2 obtain visas for legal entry into country 1 through family unification, therefore,
is given by xF LXP . As the network of incumbent legal-permanent immigrants expands
(i.e. as LP increases), entry of new immigrants through family ties becomes more likely.
This self-reinforcing channel provided by family ties is sometimes referred to as ”chain
migration”.

                                             12
3.4.2     Employment-based Admissions

A country-2 native can apply for a permit to enter and work in country 1 only if he has
already been offered a job in country 1. Such job offers are made available to potential
skilled migrants from country 2 through referrals from their network of co-ethnics who are
legally employed in country 1. We assume that an employer who is currently employing a
skilled legal-immigrant worker may be willing to support a new skilled worker’s migration
by opening a new position and asking his current legal-immigrant employee to recommend
an alien worker for the new position. If the referred worker is unemployed and willing
to migrate for the job, then a petition for an employment visa is filed, and if approved,
the worker gets the job and migrates to country 1. One way of interpreting this channel
of hiring is that incumbent immigrants use their employer contacts in order to assist the
migration of other members of their network. In other words, support from incumbent
immigrants encourages country 1 employers to create new positions for bringing workers
from country 2 lawfully into country 1. Another interpretation is that employers try to
take advantage of the information provided by their current skilled immigrant employees
in order to identify good quality candidates from abroad that can fill skilled positions,
without having to engage in time-consuming search.
      Let esL denote the number of skilled natives of country 2 who are legally employed in
country 1. The employer of each of them is willing to offer a job to another skilled migrant
at rate ρ. In this event, the immigrant employee will recommend one from his network.5
Suppose that n is the size of the network of co-ethnics of each individual from country
2. Each of the skilled natives of country 2 is therefore linked to ρn eXsL immigrants who
                                                                          

can refer her to a job. Each of these immigrants is in turn linked to n XsX−Ls natives of
                                                                              

country 2 who are skilled, thus suited for the job, and are currently residing in country 2.
The “referring” immigrant will recommend one among them at random.6 Hence, the rate
at which a skilled worker who is currently residing in country 2 is referred to an employer
in country 1 who is willing to support her migration to country 1 is given by ρn eXsL
                                                                                           
                                           
divided by n XsX−Ls which gives ρ Xse−L
                    
                                       sL
                                          s
                                              . We assume for simplicity that being referred
to the employer is the same as being offered the job and petitioned for entry. If work-
permit petitions are approved at rate γT , the skilled natives of country 2 obtain permits
  5
   Our modeling of referrals borrows from Galenianos (2014).
  6
   We assume that referrals are targeted towards non-migrants, in line with the idea that incumbent
immigrants use their employer contacts to bring new immigrants into the country.



                                                13
                                                    
                                             esL
to work in country 1 at rate xT             Xs −Ls
                                                         , where xT ≡ ργT .

3.5      The Immigration Decision and Inflows
A worker will take an opportunity to migrate to country 1 if its benefit exceeds its cost.
The migration cost, z, is heterogeneous across individuals and is distributed according to
the CDF Φ(z) with support [z, z̄]. We assume that only the unemployed natives of country
2 are actively searching for opportunities to migrate illegally, so such opportunities arise
only for the unskilled natives of country 2 who are unemployed. We also assume that
only unemployed workers are willing to act upon opportunities to legally migrate through
either the employment or the family route.7 All workers deciding whether to migrate or
not, through any of the three possible routes, are therefore unemployed and their benefit
from migrating is the difference between their value of being immigrants of country 1 and
their value of being unemployed (searching for a job) in their home country.
    The value of being an immigrant of country 1 depends on the entry route and on the
worker’s skill level. New illegal immigrants and new immigrants admitted on family visas
arrive in country 1 without a job and must search for a job in the market. For these types
of immigrants the benefit from migrating to country 1 is the difference in value between
searching for a job in country 1 and searching for a job in country 2. New immigrants
on employment visas, by contrast, arrive through referrals, with jobs. Their migration
benefit therefore is the difference between the value of being employed in country 1 (on a
temporary work permit) and the value of being unemployed in country 2.
    An unskilled individual whose migration cost is z, will choose to take advantage of an
opportunity to enter illegally into country 1 only if UI − Uu2 ≥ z while she will enter on
a family visa (if such an opportunity arises) if UuF − Uu2 ≥ z. Likewise a skilled native
of country 2 will migrate on a family visa only if UsF − Us2 ≥ z and on a temporary
employment visa only if ET − Us2 ≥ z. The threshold costs, denoted as z̃I , z̃iF , and z̃T and
representing the highest cost a worker is willing to pay in order to obtain illegal, family-
   7
     In order to migrate illegally, workers need to actively look for such opportunities, and often, they
need to move closer to the border. It is therefore reasonable to assume that those actively looking for
opportunities to enter illegally into country 1 are not only unskilled but also unemployed. Although
we cannot rule out the possibility of workers quitting their jobs in order to migrate, especially when
migrations are legal, we choose not to allow for this possibility in our analysis. Allowing for this possibility
would complicate the model considerably, without adding anything fundamental.




                                                           14
based or employment-based entry into country 1, are defined by the following conditions:

                                       z̃I = UI − Uu2                                       (9)
                                      z̃iF = UiF − Ui2                                     (10)
                                       z̃T = ET − Us2                                      (11)

These threshold immigration costs can then be used to determine the four rates Φ(z̃I ),
Φ(z̃T ) and Φ(z̃iF ), at which natives of country 2 take up opportunities to migrate, illegally,
on a temporary work permit and on a family visa, respectively. Changes in wage and
unemployment conditions, as well as changes in immigration policies in country 1 will
affect migration incentives by altering these threshold costs and therefore the inflows of
legal and illegal immigrants. Let u2i denote the number of unemployed workers of skill
type i = [s, u] in country 2. Inflows of illegal immigrants are given by xI Φ(z̃I )u2i , that of
                                                              
                                                           esL
skilled immigrants on temporary work permits by xT Xs −Ls Φ(z̃T )u2i , and that of skilled
and unskilled immigrants on family visas by xF LXP Φ(z̃sF )u2s and xF LXP Φ(z̃uF )u2u ,
                                                                                 

respectively.
   Notice that all the conditions of country 2 that can influence the decision to migrate
and the flow of migrants from country 2 to country 1 are summarized in only two values:
the value of searching for a job Ui2 and the number of unemployed individuals u2i . The
value of searching for a job reflects all home-country labor market conditions that may
influence the benefit of migrating, such as wages, employment opportunities etc, while the
number of unemployed gives the pool of potential migrants to country 1. Since our focus
is on the receiving country, we will skip a detailed representation of the labor market in
country 2 and simply focus on only these two values. Further, we take these two values as
given. In other words, we assume for simplicity that labor market conditions in country
2 are independent of immigration and labor market conditions in country 1.

3.6    The Steady-State Conditions
The last set of equilibrium conditions are the steady-state conditions. Six of them deter-
mine the constant number of unemployed workers of each type in country 1 by equating
the flows into and out of unemployment status for each type of worker: usN and uuN are
skilled and unskilled natives in country 1, usF and uuF are skilled and unskilled family
immigrants, uE are employment immigrants and uI are illegal immigrants. Five more
conditions guarantee the stationarity of the number of family immigrants (LsF and LuF ),

                                              15
illegal immigrants (I), and employment immigrants (LE and LT ), by equating the flows
into and out of the group. The eleven formal conditions defining these steady state
variables are given by equations (41) to (49) in Appendix A. Writing the steady state
conditions for unemployed and migrants as a function of parameters, labor market tight-
ness in the respective markets (θs , θu ) and threshold costs z̃sF , z̃uF , z̃T , z̃I we obtain the
following expressions:
                                   usN           ss + τ
                    ũsN =              =                                                                                     (12)
                                    S      ss + m(θs ) + τ
                                    uuN            su + τ
                    ũuN =                =                                                                                   (13)
                                   1−S        su + m(θu ) + τ
                                   uiF          si + dL + τ
                    ũiF =              =                                                                                     (14)
                                   LiF     si + dL + m(θi ) + τ
                                   uE                ss
                     ũE =             =                                                                                      (15)
                                   LE     ss + dL + m(θs ) + τ
                                   uI          su + dI + τ
                        ũI =          =                                                                                      (16)
                                   I     su + dI + m(θu ) + τ
                                                                                    !
                                              xF ũ2s Φ(z̃sF ) LXP
                    LsF =                                                               Xs                                    (17)
                                       dL + τ + BxF ũ2s Φ(z̃sF ) LXP
                                                                                                              
                                                         xF ũ2u Φ(z̃uF ) LXP
                    LuF =                                                                                    Xu           (18)
                                                          xI ũ2u Φ(z̃I )
                                       (dL + τ ) 1 +         dI +τ
                                                                                +   xF ũ2u Φ(z̃uF ) LXP
                                                                            
                                                 xE
                                                 xT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )(1 − ũsF )
                                              xE +dT +τ
                     LE        =                                             LsF                                          (19)
                                               xE             2
                                   dL + τ − xE +dT +τ xT ũs Φ(z̃T )(1 − ũE )
                                         
                                   dL + τ
                     LT        =            LE                                                                                (20)
                                     xE
                                                                               
                                                           xI ũ2u Φ(z̃I )                                    
                         I =                                            L
                                                                                                               Xu           (21)
                                                          xF ũ2u Φ(z̃uF ) XP
                                                                                                              
                                       (dI + τ ) 1 +             dL +τ
                                                                                        +    xI ũ2u Φ(z̃I )
                                      
                             xE +dL +τ
                                                                   
                             xE +dT +τ
                                         xT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )(1−ũsF )
where B = 1 +                  
                                    xE
                                                                       .
                        dL +τ − x +d +τ xT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )(1−ũE )
                                  E    T
                                                                 uuF +uI                                     usF +uE
   Let us also define the variables φu ≡                       uuF +uI +uuN
                                                                                        and φs ≡          usF +uE +usN
                                                                                                                         to be the
share of immigrants in the pool of unemployed unskilled and skilled workers, respectively,
          uI
ηI ≡   uI +uuF
                 to be the share of illegal immigrants among unemployed unskilled immigrants
               uE
and ηE ≡     uE +usF
                         to be the share of employment immigrants among unemployed skilled
immigrants. In equilibrium these shares are constant.
   Expressions (12)-(21) reveal some important mechanisms at work in our model. First,

                                                             16
as customary in these models, unemployment rates decrease with the matching proba-
bility m(θi ). The main channel through which immigration policies can influence the
unemployment rate of natives that participate in the market is their impact on the labor
market tightness, θi , and in turn, on the matching probability m(θi ). Second, expressions
(17)-(21) show that the equilibrium numbers of migrants of each type depend negatively
on the return probabilities (dI and dL ), positively on the approval rates of visa opportuni-
ties (xF , xT , xE ) or illegal immigration opportunities (xI ) and positively on the threshold
migration costs (z̃sF , z̃uF , z̃T and z̃I ). The latter implies any economic and policy fac-
tor that increases the value of searching for a job in country 1 relative to country 2 or
the value of being employed in country 1 on a temporary visa encourages immigration
and translates to larger equilibrium numbers of legal and illegal immigrants in country
1. Third, we see from expressions (17)-(19), the importance of immigrant networks in
determining the size of immigrant stocks. The share of legal (permanent) immigrants in
total foreign population ( LXP ) affects the probability of entry through family unification
positively, thus has a positive impact on legal immigration, while it affects the number of
illegal immigrants negatively. Similarly, the number of employment immigrants increases
as the employment rate of legal (employment or family) skilled immigrants increases. A
change in an immigration policy (affecting either entry or exit of immigrants) will there-
fore affect the number of immigrants through three different paths: first, it will have a
direct impact on the immigrant inflow or outflow (e.g. visa quotas or deportations), sec-
ond, it will affect immigrant entry thought its impact on immigration incentives (changes
in threshold immigration costs z̃I , z̃iF , and z̃T ) and third, it will also affect the size of
immigrant networks with consequences on opportunity for entry of other immigrants.
   Let us notice that once the constant equilibrium values of LiF , LE , LT , I, uiF , uiN , uE
and uI , i = [s, u], are determined, a linear technology determines production of intermedi-
ates so that Ys = S+LsF −usN −usF +λ(LE +LT −uE ) and Yu = S+LuF +I−uuN −uuF −uI .

3.7     Equilibrium
A steady state equilibrium consists of a set of threshold immigration costs, z̃sF , z̃uF , z̃T , z̃I ,
tightnesses θs , θu , number of unemployed usN , uuN , usF , uuF , uE , uI , and number of immi-
grants LsF , LuF , LE , LT and I such that the following apply:

   1. Natives of country 2 decide optimally whether to migrate or not (equations 9-11 are
      satisfied)

                                                 17
   2. The two free-entry conditions in (4) are satisfied

   3. Flows into and out of each group of unemployed workers are equal (equations 45-49
         in Appendix A)8

   4. The outflows of immigrants of each type equal their inflows (equations 41-43 in
         Appendix A)

The two linear production functions described above can determine the steady-state pro-
duction of intermediates, Ys , Yu , and in turn, aggregate production of country 1 (using
equation 1). The two marginal productivity conditions (2, 3), can be used to determine
the set of marginal productivities pu , ps and pE = λps . Finally, equations (50)-(55) in
Appendix A determine the seven wages wsN , wuN , wsF , wuF , wE , wT , wI , given that wages
are the outcome of Nash bargaining. As mentioned above, we take the values of searching
for jobs in country 2 por skilled and unskilled workers, Us2 and Uu2 , and the unemployment
rates in country 2, ũ2s and ũ2u , as given. In Appendix A we show how to derive some inter-
mediate results and provide a description for how to solve the model in blocks. Given the
fact, however, that some of the expressions are cumbersome we omit those from the text.
We will explain, instead, before calibrating and simulating the full model, the intuition
behind some key mechanisms.
       Given that free entry drives the value of a vacancy to zero, using (24)-(25) we get:
                           cu
                                 = φu [ηI JI + (1 − ηI )JuF ] + (1 − φu )JuN                                  (22)
                          q(θu )
                            cs
                                 = φs [ηE JE + (1 − ηE )JsF ] + (1 − φs )JsN                                  (23)
                          q(θs )
where φi is the share of of immigrants in the pool of unemployed individuals of skill
type i, ηI is the share of illegal immigrants among unemployed unskilled immigrants and
ηE the share of employment immigrants among unemployed skilled immigrants. These
expressions give the job creation conditions in unskilled and skilled markets, respectively.
They set the expected costs of creating a vacancy (left-hand-side) equal to the expected
value of a new job (right-hand-side) and can be used to determine the equilibrium market
tightness θu and θs , and in turn, the rates at which workers find jobs, m(θu ) and m(θs ).
   8
     Apparently, due to the network dependence of legal immigration pathways, the steady-state numbers
of legal immigrants, given in equations (17)-(19) depend on the share of permanent immigrants LXP .
By adding up (17)-(19) we can get the steady-state condition that determines LXP . That condition is
quadratic with two roots. One of the two roots is negative and thus can be ruled out. Hence, we get a
unique solution for LXP in terms of tightness θs , θu and immigration thresholds z̃sF , z̃uF , z̃T , z̃I , which can
be used to determine the steady-state solutions of LsF , LuF , LE and LT .

                                                        18
       We see, from these expressions, that if the value to the firm from creating a new job
differs depending on the type of worker hired (i.e. if JI 6= JuF 6= JuN and JE 6= JsF 6= JsN )
then changes in the size and composition of immigrant stock (i.e. changes in φs , φu ,
ηE and ηI ) can change the expected gains from creating new jobs and in turn affect
market tightness and job finding rates. A proportional increase in all types of immigrants
that leaves their composition unchanged, but increases their share in the unemployment
pool (increases φs and φu ) will increase the expected value of a new job, and induce
firms to open more vacancies per unemployed worker (increase θu and θs ) if immigrants
generate, on average, larger value for firms than natives: ηI JI + (1 − ηI )JuF > JuN or
ηE JE + (1 − ηE )JsF > JsN . The reasons why these inequalities are likely to hold are
discussed below. Changes in the composition of unemployed immigrants will also alter
job creation incentives if different types of immigrants generate different surplus to firms.
For instance, an increase in ηI or ηE will encourage job creation if JI > JuF or JE > JsF .
Any positive impact that immigrants may have on job creation and job finding rates will
translate into higher wages and lower unemployment rates for native workers, as can be
verified from equations (12)-(13) and (50) in Appendix A.
       The value to the firm from hiring an immigrant worker may be higher than that from
hiring a native worker mainly for two reasons. The first is productivity and is relevant
for skilled immigrants. Since employment-based immigrants are selected for their abilities
(through referral and visa requirements) they are likely more productive than other skilled
immigrants and natives. In our notation this means that λ > 1 so that pE > ps , which in
turn means JE > JsF (see equation 69 in Appendix A).9
       The second reason is search costs, and applies mainly to low skilled immigrants. As
discussed above, search costs differ between natives and immigrants and may also differ
across different types of immigrants. Immigrants, especially illegal ones, are willing to
accept lower wages, because they face higher search costs relative to natives as they
have limited access to unemployment insurance and welfare programs. As can be verified
from the equilibrium wage expressions in (50)-(55) the higher a worker’s search costs the
lower his wage, since search costs worsen a worker’s outside option and thus position in
   9
    The use of referrals from skilled immigrants can also increase the firm’s surplus from employing them.
In our baseline model, however, we choose to keep the surplus from hiring skilled immigrants as small
as possible, and assume that employers do not internalize the surplus that the use of referrals generates.
Since the use of referrals does not generate any rents to the firm, it does not also affect job creation
incentives. We discuss the case in which employers internalize this surplus in Appendix A and show
results for this case in Appendix B.4 (Table 25).



                                                   19
wage setting. This implies that immigrants generate larger profits to firms because they
accept lower wages. By comparing JiF to JiN and JI to JuF we can see more clearly
how immigrants’ search costs affect the firm’s value from hiring them (see Appendix
A.5). If family immigrants have higher search cost than natives, that is, if πiL > 0, then
JiF − JiN > 0 as long as dL is small. Hence, the value of a legal immigrant to the firm
is higher than that of a native, even given equal productivity, as long as the immigrant’s
search cost is high enough to compensate for the larger probability of separation. Likewise,
if illegal immigrants have worse outside options than legal ones (πI − πuL > 0), then
JI − JuF > 0 as long as the difference between the return probabilities, dI − dL —
representing the deportation rate — is not too large. Hence, low deportation rates and
high search cost for illegal immigrants make them particularly valuable to the firm.
    An additional channel through which changes in the size and composition of the im-
migrant population can affect the labor market outcomes of natives, operates through
the marginal product of each of the two skill types, ps and pu . This is the standard
complementarity channel: immigrants of a certain skill type substitute for natives of the
same skill type, and complement natives of different skill types. So increasing their sup-
ply decreases the marginal productivity of natives of the same skill type and increases
the marginal productivity of natives of the different skill. This channel operates only
when immigrant inflows alter the relative skill composition of the labor force. A propor-
tional increase in skilled and unskilled due to immigrants will have no impact through
this channel. Changes in immigration policy that decrease the relative supply of unskilled
labor, such as tighter border control (smaller xI ) or deportations (larger dI ), will put up-
ward pressure on marginal productivity of unskilled workers, and downward pressure on
marginal productivity of skilled ones. Effects go in the opposite direction when changes
in immigration policies decrease the relative supply of skilled labor.
    The overall impact of changes in immigration policies on job creation combines the
effects on marginal products and the effects on the expected value of a job (discussed
in the previous section) brought by changes in the composition of labor force (due to
changes in φu , φs , ηI and ηE ).10 The impact of these two effects can be in opposite
  10
     If dL = dI = 0, πiL = πI = 0, λ = 1 then immigrants and natives belonging to the same skill
group are identical and generate equal profits to firms so that changes in the composition of labor force
in terms of nativity and immigrant status no longer affect job creation. All effects, in this case, work
through the prices of intermediate inputs, pu and ps . If, in addition, skilled and unskilled labor are
perfect substitutes in production, i.e. σ = 1, then as can be verified from (2) and (3), prices are constant
(ps = α, pu = 1 − α) and immigration does not affect prices either. In this case immigration has no



                                                    20
direction, hence the prediction of this model may be opposite from that of the canonical
model. Consider for example the enforcement of deportations of illegal immigrants. It
will increase marginal productivity of unskilled, pu , by reducing their relative supply, but
it will also decrease the value of filling an unskilled job for the firm, if illegal immigrants
are paid significantly less compared to other unskilled workers. The overall impact on
the number of vacancies per unemployed worker, may go either way, and need not be
negative, as predicted by the price effect only.
    Finally, despite being separated by skill level, job creation in the two labor markets
is linked by production complementarity. Immigration-induced changes in one market
will carry over to the other through complementarities in production. For instance, any
policy hurting the creation of unskilled jobs, will also hurt the creation of skilled jobs, by
lowering the marginal productivity of the skilled labor.

3.8     Immigrant Networks, Incentives and Composition
The novelty of our model is that it incorporates the important interplay between immigra-
tion policies, immigrants’ economic incentives and immigrant networks. A change in one
policy, targeting entry through one particular channel, will affect the size of immigrant
network with consequences on the opportunity for entry through other channels. It will
also affect wages and employment opportunities for different skill groups, which will, in
turn, influence incentives for entry through each of the three channels. As discussed above
these elements are key to our understanding of the labor market effects of immigrants and
of immigration policies.
    The two legal entry routes of employment and family reunification, depend strongly on
networks, which means past immigrants. Inflows through the family unification channel
are larger when the stock of legal immigrants (on permanent visas) is larger. Also (19)
and (20) show that the stock of employment-based immigrants is proportional to the stock
of skilled-family immigrants. This means that inflows of immigrants through the family-
and employment-based channels are linked. In the long run equilibrium a policy affecting
one entry route will also affect the other entry route. The strong network dependence of
the legal entry routes may amplify any impacts of migrations on job creation.
    Two interesting facts should be noted about the role of networks. First, employ-
impact on the labor market. In the general case, where different types of immigrants and natives differ,
and the two labor inputs are imperfect substitutes (σ < 1) the effects of immigration work through both
of these channels.


                                                  21
ment immigrants generate entry opportunities for unskilled immigrants through family
ties. Likewise, unskilled immigrants generate entry opportunities for skilled immigrants
through family ties and on the job referrals. Because of this symmetry either channel
will produce similar long run changes in the skill composition of total legal immigrants.
Second, and differently, undocumented will not create large network effects, because they
can neither sponsor a family member nor create a referral for an employment-entry.11


4        Parameterization of the model
The model is complex and rich. We devote substantial attention in choosing parameters
and performing robustness checks for some of them (see Section 6 and Appendix B). Still,
one should think of our simulations as providing a reasonable idea (rather than exact
forecast) of the magnitude of labor market effects of different policies. We combine three
types of parameters. Some are taken from estimates in the literature. Others are summary
statistics taken from the data. A third group is chosen to match some moments of the
data through calibration. The parameter choice is summarized in Table 1. Our goal is
to match the moments of the data for the 2010-2015 average. Hence we choose the best
data available during or as close as possible to this time period. Some variables (such
as interest rate and population growth rates) are averaged over a longer time period to
ensure a long-run perspective. We describe here the sources and the methods used to
calculate these parameters.
       We use a Cobb-Douglas matching function, Mi = ξ(Ui ) (Vi )1− , i = [s, u]. Following
common practice in these models, we set the unemployment elasticity of the matching
function to  = 0.5, which is within the range of estimates reported in Petrongolo and
Pissarides (2001). We postulate the worker’s bargaining power to be β = 0.5, so that
the Hosios condition (β = ) is met (see Hosios, 1990). We use the monthly interest
rate r = 0.4% which implies a yearly real rate of about 5%.12 This is calculated as the
30-year treasury constant maturity bond rate minus the average GDP deflator over the
period 1980-2010 for the US. We define as skilled a worker who has at least some college
education and unskilled workers are those with no college education. Based on existing
  11
      We are not analyzing here long run effects in an overlapping generation framework, but long run
effects within the first generation. Considering U.S.-born children of immigrants as immigrants would
generate a channel through which undocumented can affect the stock of legal immigrants in the next
generation.
   12
      We match all the flow rates in the model to monthly rates.



                                                 22
estimates (see Goldin and Katz (2008) and Ottaviano and Peri (2012)) the elasticity of
substitution between those two types of workers is around 2. We therefore set σ = 0.5.
The migration costs are assumed to be lognormally distributed with µz and σz being,
respectively, the mean and standard deviation of lognormal values. We standardize the
mean to 0 and choose the value of σz , which together with the chosen entry approval
rates and return probabilities matches the observed numbers of immigrants in the US
(see below). We perform sensitivity analysis with respect to the mean of the distribution
in Section 6. In order to measure xF , the rate at which family reunification visas are
issued,we use the fact that the wait time to get a green card for immediate family to a
US citizen is 10-17 months.13 We set the wait time to the mean of 14 months and set the
                           1
rate at xF = 0.07 (i.e.   xF
                               = 14).
       As mentioned above, we consider Mexico as the main country supplying low skilled
immigrants and Chinese and Indians as the most relevant foreign group supplying high
skilled immigrants. Our measures of Xu and Xs , which represent the population of foreign
skilled and unskilled who can migrate to the US include the unskilled Mexican labor force
and the skilled Indian and Chinese labor force, respectively. Those values are equal to
0.323 and 0.562, respectively, when standardized by the US native population between 18
and 65 years, which is set to 1, and are obtained from Barro and Lee (2010).
       The share of native skilled workers in the US is set to S = 0.604. This is the share
of US native workers with some college education or more in the total native population
in working age (18-65) from the 2014 US ACS Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS).14
Using Census data over the period 1980 to 2010 we find the annual growth rate of US
native labor force to be 0.86% per year implying a monthly growth rate of 0.072% and
hence we set τ = 0.00072. Using matched data from the ORG Current Population Survey
(CPS) we estimated the average skilled and unskilled monthly job-separation rates in
the US (ss and su , respectively) to be 0.024 and 0.032, respectively.15 To calculate the
unemployment rate of foreign unskilled workers in their country of origin we use estimates
of unemployment rates by education in year 2015 for Mexico and find ũ2u = 0.036. We
set the unemployment rate of skilled foreign workers in their country to ũ2s = 0.067. This
was calculated using estimates of unemployment rates for highly skilled in India averaged
  13
     See https://www.boundless.com/immigration-resources/how-long-does-marriage-green-card-take/.
  14
     obtained at https://usa.ipums.org/usa/.
  15
     These measures calculate the employment to unemployment and employment to inactivity transitions
relative to employment and non-employment stocks.



                                                 23
over years 2013-2014 and China for year 2012.16
       The return probabilities of legal and illegal immigrants in the US, are taken from
Chassamboulli and Peri (2015) who calculate these probabilities for Mexican immigrants
and find that they are dL = 0.0023, dI = 0.0039. They use estimates for the total number
of returnees to Mexico (excluding deportations) and deportations (of non-criminal Mex-
icans) averaged over the available period 2001-2005 from Masferrer and Roberts (2009).
They consider returns other than deportations to be the “basic” returns of legal immi-
grants and calculate the return migration rate for legal Mexican migrants as the ratio of
returnees to Mexican-born unskilled population in the US. In order to compute the yearly
return rate of illegal Mexican immigrants they add to the basic rate the deportation rate
of non-criminal Mexicans. More specifically, by applying the same basic return rate to
the illegal Mexican population in the US (taken from Passel and Capps, 2004), they cal-
culate the number of illegal Mexicans returning to Mexico each year for reasons other
than deportations. They then add the number of deportations per year of non-criminal
Mexicans to that number (for the period 2001-2005) and divide by the number of illegal
Mexicans in the US to get the return+deportation rate of the illegal Mexicans. Given
the limited evidence on these parameters we also conduct robustness checks allowing for
higher values for the return rates (see section 6).
       We jointly calibrate the remaining 17 parameters of the model (cs , cu , bs , bu , σz ,
ξ, πsL , πuL , πI , α, dT , λ, Us2 , Uu2 , xT , xE , xI ) to match as many targets. We target
the ratio of employment/population in working age (18 to 65) for workers with some
  16
     Estimates of unemployment rates in Mexico were taken from OECD (2017), Unemployment rates
by education level (indicator). doi: 10.1787/6183d527-en (Accessed on 04 May 2017). Estimates are
reported for three education groups: below upper secondary, upper secondary non-tertiary and tertiary.
To calculate the unemployment rate of workers with no college education, we take the average unem-
ployment rate of the first two education groups. Estimates for India are from the Ministry of Labour
and Employment/Labour Bureau, Fourth Annual Employment and Unemployment Survey Report (2013-
14). Chandigarh: Government of India. Estimates for China are from (n.d.). Unemployment rate in
China between 2011 and 2012, by education level. In Statista - The Statistics Portal. Retrieved May
4, 2017, from https://www.statista.com/statistics/304678/china-unemployment-rate-trend-by-education-
level/. We take the average unemployment rate across workers with Diploma, Graduate degree and
workers with a post-graduate degree in India in order to get an estimate of the unemployment rate of
skilled workers in India. We then multiply with the skilled working age population in India to get an
estimate of the number of unemployed-skilled workers in India. To get an estimate of the number of
skilled unemployed in China we take the average unemployment rate of workers that have completed
Junior college and those that have a Bachelor’s degree and above and multiply it with the skilled working
age population in China. As mentioned above, the numbers of skilled working age populations in China
and India were taken from Barro and Lee (2015) and are relative to year 2010. We then add up the total
number of skilled unemployed in the two countries and divide by the total skilled population in working
age in the two countries to get an estimate of the average skilled unemployment rate of the two countries.



                                                   24
college education or more (skilled workers) and for high-school graduates or less (unskilled
workers) in the US using ACS data in 2014 and we obtain values equal to 84% and 67%,
respectively.17 We target the percent wage premium for US-born workers who have at
least some college education. Using 2014 ACS PUMS we find it to be equal to 78%.18 We
use data from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) to calculate the
vacancy to unemployment ratio in the US (averaged over 2014-2016) and set it to 0.62.
We then calculate the wage differences between immigrants legal or illegal and natives by
education. We use weekly wages for full time (male) workers from the dataset produced by
the Center for Migration Studies (CMS) that includes an indicator for “undocumented”
to the basic microdata from the American Community Survey, for year 2014.19 The ratio
of wage of skilled natives relative to skilled legal immigrants in the US was 0.92 and the
ratio of wages of unskilled natives relative to unskilled legal immigrants was 1.173.20 The
ratio of wages of illegal (unskilled) immigrants to the wages of unskilled natives is set at
0.8.21 From the New Immigrant Survey (NIS) which is a survey on immigrants who have
obtained their permanent resident status, we calculate the wage at first employment of
labor immigrants and of those with family reunification permits. We restrict to employed
people in prime age (25-50 years old) males. There are 4 categories of immigrants in
the NIS: those who have family reunification permits 55%, those who have employment
green card 10%, refugees 10% and others 25%. If we consider those belonging in the
last group “others” as labor immigrants we find the ratio of wages of employment to
family immigrants to be 1.6, but if we exclude them and take only employment relative
to family the ratio is 2.47, quite larger. In our benchmark calibration we choose the most
conservative wage ratio of 1.6, but we also show results using the alternative estimate
   17
      As there are very large flows between employment and non-employment for individuals in working
age we match the value of u to non-employment rather than to unemployment.
   18
      To measure the wage premium we use weekly wages for adults full time employed and US born
individuals, ages 16-65.
   19
      See http://data.cmsny.org/about.html for a description of data and methodology.
   20
      Notice that in line with our assumptions, skilled natives earn on average less than skilled immigrants,
since a portion of skilled immigrants are admitted into the US on employment visas and thus are screened
for their skills. A recent study of H1B visa workers by Lofstrom and Hayes (2011) calculates that H1B
workers, the largest skilled visa program, earn between 8 and 20% more than natives confirming the high
productivity of this group of workers.
   21
      Notice that our targeted wage difference between unskilled natives and immigrants is not far from
the immigrant-native wage gap of about 20% estimated in Borjas and Friedberg (2009) for year 2000,
after controlling for observed abilities such as education and age. Several other papers (e.g. LaLonde and
Topel 1991) show that immigrants are paid less than natives even after controlling for other observable
productivity determinants such as education and language. A negative immigrant premium of about 20%
is also within the range found in the survey by Kerr and Kerr (2011).



                                                     25
of 2.47 in Appendix B (see Table 26). We use Hall and Milgrom’s (2008) estimate for
the ratio of unemployment to employment income of 0.71 to pin down values for the
unemployment incomes; we set bs = 0.71ws , bu = 0.71wu where ws and wu are the
average wages of skilled and unskilled workers, respectively.
       We set the ratio of immigrants on family unification visas, temporary work permits,
permanent employment visas and of illegal immigrants to the US native labor force to
LsF + LuF = 0.116, LT = 0.0092, LE = 0.02 and I = 0.07, respectively. To get these
numbers we first use the CMS database to calculate the number of all immigrants in
working age that are illegal and the number that are legal (year 2014). We then use the
estimates of the number of temporary visas in 2013 from Costa and Rosenbaum (2017).22
We subtract the number of temporary visas from the total number of legal immigrants
in working age to get an estimate of the total number of legal immigrants in working
age that are on a permanent visa. We then use the NIS to calculate the share of family
unification and employment permits among the permanent legal immigrants.
       Based on the fact that the average duration of a temporary skilled worker visa (H1B
                                1
visa) is 3 years we set      xE +dT
                                      = 36. Finally, we assume that the value of searching for
a job in the US to a legal and permanent immigrant is at least four times the value of
searching for a job at home. Specifically we set UsF = 4Us2 and UuF = 4Uu2 . This value is
similar to the ratio of income per person in the US relative to Mexico, which provides an
order of magnitude for the real wage gains expected from migrating form that country.23
       As discussed above, the values of JE , JsF , relative to JsN and of JI , JuF relative to JuN
are important in determining the impact of changes in immigration policies on the cre-
ation of jobs in country 1. With our targeted wage differences and remaining parameters
as described above, we get JE = 2.69JsF , JsF = 0.98JsN , JI = 1.58JuF , JuF = 2.14JuN .
This implies that employment immigrants generate significantly larger profits to firms
than other skilled immigrants or natives because they are significantly more productive.
Although skilled family immigrants accept lower wages than skilled natives firms expect to
generate slightly lower profits from hiring them than from hiring their native-born coun-
terparts, because firms anticipate that matches with family immigrants will have lower
duration, due to the possibility of them returning to their home country. This implies
  22
     Report form Economic Policy Institute, available at http://www.epi.org/publication/temporary-
foreign-workers-by-the-numbers-new-estimates-by-visa-classification/.
  23
     Clemens et al (2019) find that the average migrant to the US increases her real wage by a factor of
3 to 4.



                                                  26
that in the skilled sector, a shift away from family and towards employment immigration
generates a significant increase in the expected surplus to the firm and, in turn, a job-
creating effect on the economy of country 1. In the unskilled sector, on the other hand,
both types of immigrants (family and illegal), but especially illegal immigrants, gener-
ate significantly larger profits to firms than natives because their wages are lower. This
means that a higher share of immigrants generates a significant job-creating effect. It also
implies that in the unskilled sector, a policy that replaces illegal immigrants with legal
ones is less harmful in terms of job creation compared to a purely restrictive immigration
policy that reduces the number of undocumented immigrants.


5        Policy Experiments and Structural Changes
The rich structure of our model allows us to simulate the labor market implications and
effects on immigrant inflows of different immigration policies and structural changes in
the host country. We consider direct policies, which impose restrictions on specific entry
channels and immigrant groups, such as enforcement of deportations or lower visa approval
rates, but also “indirect” policies. The latter do not directly impose restrictions on entry
channels, but affect, instead, immigrants’ conditions of living in the host country and
can reduce immigrant entry by decreasing the migration incentive. The outcomes that
we consider specifically in evaluating the policies are first the number and composition of
immigrants in equilibrium and second the labor market outcomes of natives, skilled and
unskilled.
       We consider five direct policies: (i) a decrease (slowdown) in the approval rate of
petitions for family visas captured by a decrease in xF (ii) a decrease in the approval rate
of petitions for temporary work permits captured by a decrease in xT , (iii) a decrease in
the approval rate of petitions for permanent employment visas captured by a decrease in
xE , (iv) an increase in border control captured by a decline in xI and (vi) an increase in
the intensity of deportations captured by an increase in dI .24 By targeting specific entry
channels (while keeping the other entry channels unchanged) we are able to illustrate the
effects that different types of immigration policies may have on immigrant composition
and the labor market.
  24
    The decrease/increase in approval rates lead to a decrease/increase in the yearly number of entries,
which is the usual variable people have in mind in immigration policies, but is an equilibrium outcome
in our approach.



                                                  27
   The indirect policies that we consider are: (i) an increase in the search cost of legal
immigrants, captured by an increase in both πsL and πuL (ii) an increase in the search cost
of illegal immigrants, captured by an increase in πI and (iii) a decrease in all immigrants’
value of staying in country 1. The latter is captured by a certain decrease in the flow
value of all immigrants of country 1, irrespective of their visa status or labor market
state, employed or unemployed. It can be viewed as an increase in anti-immigration or
xenophobic attitudes which makes immigrants feeling less welcome and lowers their flow
utility gain from being immigrants of country 1. The increase in search costs reflects
policies that reduce immigrants’ access to welfare benefits making their cost of being
unemployed larger.
   Besides the effects of policies, we also simulate the effects of two structural changes
in the host country: (i) an increase in the proportion of skilled (native) labor force,
captured by an increase in S and (ii) a skill-biased technological change, captured by an
increase in α, the parameter measuring the relative intensity of skilled labor in production.
Such changes can have differential effects on labor market conditions for different immi-
grant groups and can therefore influence immigrant entry and composition. We can also
use them to compare the model’s predictions regarding the migration response to wage
changes in the host country to the elasticity of immigration to income at destination found
in empirical studies.

5.1    Direct Policies
The effects of each of the five direct policies listed above are summarized in Table 2.
Columns 1-4 show the impact of decreasing, respectively, the approval rate of family
permits xF , the approval rate of employment-based admissions xT , the rate of transition
from a temporary to a permanent employment visa xE and the rate of illegal entry xI
(border controls), each by 10%. Column 5 shows the impact of increasing the deportation
rate dI by 10%. The entries in the Table represent the percentage effect on immigrant
stocks and composition (first 10 rows), natives’ unemployment rates (next 2 rows) and
wages (last 2 rows).
   The decrease in the approval rate of family entries delivers, by far, the largest decrease
in legal immigration. A 10% decrease in the approval rate, causes total family immigra-
tion to shrink by about 49%. This is due the strong network dependence of the family
route. A small decrease in the number of family entries leads to a substantial decrease


                                             28
in immigration opportunities in the long-run steady state, though family linkage effects.
Decreasing family entries leads also to a substantial decrease in employment-based immi-
gration (−48%), since opportunities for job referrals become scarce. The two legal entry
routes (employment and family) are linked strongly by networks. Although smaller in
magnitude, the effects of decreasing xE or xT resemble those of decreasing xF . All three
policies reduce the size of the legal immigrant network, and in equilibrium decrease entry
of legal immigrants through both the employment and the family channel.
   The three policies restricting the legal entry routes, decrease also the ratio of skilled
to unskilled immigrant workers. In the working of our model, reducing the approval rate
of family unification admissions, leads to a significant decrease in the ratio of skilled to
unskilled immigrant workers (−41%) for two reasons. First, a large share of family immi-
grants are skilled, as skilled individuals have larger incentives to migrate. Second, reducing
the family entries leads to a significant decrease in referrals for employment entry and,
as a result, in the entry of highly skilled individuals. As opportunities for entry through
legal channels become more scarce, more unskilled foreigners enter illegally into country
1. In all three cases, however, we see only a small increase in illegal entries. Even when
restricting family admissions, which reduces the unskilled legal immigrant population by
50%, the number of illegal immigrants increases by less than 2%. By lowering the ratio of
skilled to unskilled immigrant workers, the tightening of legal entry channels, decreases
the value of pu . At the same time, the proportion of (family) immigrants, who accept
lower wages than natives, in the pool of potential hires for unskilled jobs decreases. Both
of these changes lower the profits of unskilled jobs, inducing firms to open fewer vacancies
for unskilled workers and offer lower wages to them. Consequently, unskilled foreigners
have lower incentive to migrate illegally, since they will have to face lower wages and
higher unemployment. Despite the large decrease in legal entries, illegal entries increase,
but only slightly.
   The policies imposing restrictions on illegal immigration, on the other hand, reduce
the illegal and the total immigrant population, as expected, but at the same time, they
induce more entries through the legal routes. Such policies increase the ratio of skilled
to unskilled immigrants and the marginal product of unskilled labor, pu , while lowering
the marginal product of skilled labor, ps . This raises wages for unskilled workers and
encourages unskilled foreign workers to enter though the family channel, which in turn,
generates opportunities for also skilled immigrants to enter through family linkages and


                                             29
job referrals. The decrease in ps implies also lower wages for skilled workers, meaning
lower incentive for skilled foreigners to migrate, but the increased entry opportunities
through family ties, dominates over the negative incentive effect and the number of skilled
immigrants (employment or family) increases.
       Turning to the impact of these policies on natives’ labor market outcomes, we see that
the policies restricting illegal immigration increase the unemployment rates of both skilled
and unskilled native workers, because they induce firms to create fewer jobs (per unem-
ployed worker) in both markets. Key to understanding this negative effect on job creation
is their impact on the expected values of new jobs, which is negative and dominates over
the relative price effects. Decreasing the number of illegal immigrants, through either
border enforcement or deportations, reduces the relative supply of unskilled labor and
thus increases pu , but also increases the expected labor costs of firms seeking to hire un-
skilled workers, since illegal immigrants accept lower wages. The second effect dominates
leading firms in the unskilled market to open fewer vacancies per unemployed.25 This
negative job creation effect spills over to the skilled marker through complementarities in
production. The decrease in the number of illegal immigrants lowers ps . This hurts the
profit of skilled jobs and lowers job creation for skilled workers as well.
       This depressing effect on labor markets produced by a decline of undocumented (via
deportation or tightening of the border) was already pointed out in Chassamboulli and
Peri (2015). The large surplus that a match with an undocumented provides to employ-
ers, drives a strong job creation effect, and their decline reduces labor market tightness.
Consistent with this result are also the findings of Lee, Peri and Yasenov (2017), who
find negative employment effects on incumbent native workers from an episode of large
deportation of Mexicans in the 1929-1934 period. We see here, in addition, that the en-
dogenous responses of immigrant entries through other (legal) channels are not sufficient
to overcome this effect. The increased entry of unskilled family immigrants does not offset
the negative effect of fewer illegal immigrants on the expected surplus of unskilled jobs.
Similarly, the increased entry of employment immigrants is not enough to overturn the
negative effect of a lower ps on incentives to create skilled jobs.
       Tightening the entry of skilled employment immigrants increases the value of ps , on
the one hand, because it lowers the relative supply of skilled labor. On the other hand,
however, it lowers the expected productivity of skilled jobs, because employment immi-
  25
   The effects seem to be similar when the decrease in illegal immigration is achieved through increased
deportations (increase in dI ) or stronger border enforcement (decrease in xI ).

                                                  30
grants, selected for high skilled jobs, are more productive than native workers. Using the
calibrated parameters, the second effect dominates leading to lower job posting by em-
ployers and a higher unemployment rate for skilled natives.26 The decrease in the number
of employment immigrants, lowers job creation (and wages) for unskilled workers as well
by lowering pu and reducing incentives for unskilled foreigners to enter. But, as discussed
above, network effects are also at work in this case: with fewer employment immigrants
there are also fewer entries through family ties. Hence the proportion of immigrants in
the pool of potential hires for unskilled jobs decreases, which also hurts the profits from
creating unskilled jobs, adding to the decrease in job creation for unskilled workers due
to the decrease in pu .
       As in the case of decreasing employment-based admissions, the decrease in family-
based admissions hurts firms in the unskilled sector and induces them to open fewer
vacancies for unskilled workers for two reasons. First, with fewer family immigrants,
whose wages are lower, firms expect to pay higher wages on average and second, the
price of the unskilled labor input, pu , decreases as the relative supply of skilled labor
decreases. However, compared to the policies targeting employment immigrants, the
effects of this policy on job creation in the skilled sector are more positive, because skilled
family immigrants and natives generate almost identical surplus to firms. Our calibration
gives JsF = 0.98JsN , meaning that firms are almost indifferent between the two. Thus, a
smaller share of family immigrants in the skilled sector does not hurt incentives to create
jobs. Given, in addition, that this policy generates a large decrease in the ratio of skilled to
unskilled natives, and thus a large increase in ps , one would expect the unemployment rate
of skilled natives to fall significantly, as firms react to the increased price by creating more
jobs. Nevertheless, the unemployment rate of skilled natives decreases only moderately.
This occurs because the decrease in the number of employment immigrants, who are
indirectly affected through a lower number of referrals on the job, partially offsets the
positive price effect on incentives to create skilled jobs.
       The impact of each policy on wages of natives, shown in the last two rows, follows
that on prices (ps and pu ). In all cases, one of the two types of workers benefits in
terms of wages, while the other is hurt. Decreasing illegal migration increases the wage of
  26
    In our model having a temporary work permit is the necessary first step to obtaining a permanent
employment visa. Hence, a decrease in the number of immigrants on temporary work permits implies, in
steady state, an equal percentage decrease in the number of immigrants on permanent employment visas
(see equation 20). Thus, the effects of a decreasing xT are similar to those of a decreasing xE .



                                                31
unskilled and reduces that of skilled natives, because the relative supply of skilled labor
increases. All other policies, which reduce the size of legal immigrant population, lead
to a decrease in the supply of skilled labor. In those cases, the wages of skilled workers
increase while those of unskilled workers decrease. In Table 15 in Appendix B, we show
that the negative job creation effect dominates and in all of there cases, net native income
decreases in response to these direct immigration policies.
       Two general features are worth noting in the simulated results. First, the overall
takeaway from these policy experiments is that given the productivity of high skilled
immigrants, the surplus generated by low skilled immigrants and linkages generated by
incentive effects, all types of restrictive policies have a negative job creation effect. Second,
looking at the impact of policies across all channels, we see that there is a “complemen-
tarity” in legal channels of entry. A restrictive policy in one of them reduces entry in the
others. This is mainly due to the linkages generated by networks and magnifies the de-
pressive effect of each restrictive policy. On the other hand there is independence between
legal and illegal immigration: affecting one of the two channels changes only moderately,
mainly through a labor market feedback, which is rather weak, the inflow of immigrants
through the other channels.27 These also suggest that combinations of policies that re-
strict one entry route and relax another thus changing the composition of immigrants
but keeping their number constant are more stimulating of the labor market for natives,
especially when they increase the component of employment immigrants. In Appendix B
(Table 17) we present results for five such policy experiments.

5.2       Indirect Policies
Table 3 shows the effects of the three indirect policies listed above and follows the structure
of Table 2. Columns 1 and 2 show the effects of increasing the search cost of illegal and
legal immigrants, respectively. Higher search costs imply lower value not only while
unemployed but also while employed for immigrants, since with higher search cost, their
outside option is lower, which forces them to accept lower wages. Thus higher search
costs reduce the migration benefit and this is more important for illegal immigrants whose
migration benefits are smaller (due to lower wages and the risk of deportation). A 10%
  27
    As shown in the Appendix B (see Table 16) overlooking network linkages and incentive effects by
assuming that changes in the number of one type of immigrants leaves the numbers of other types of
immigrants intact, underestimates the negative job creation impact especially of restrictive policies on
legal immigration.



                                                  32
increase in the search cost of illegal immigrants decreases their number by about 6%,
while a 10% increase in the search cost of legal immigrants decreases the legal population
by only 0.5%. The effects of increasing the search cost of illegal immigrants on immigrant
flows is similar those of increasing their deportations or imposing tighter border controls.
   One notable difference, however, between this policy and the direct policies considered
above, is that with higher search costs firms can pay lower wages to illegal immigrants,
with a positive impact on incentives to create unskilled jobs. This positive effect fully
offsets the depressing effect of having fewer illegal immigrants in their pool of potential
hires. In contrast to increasing deportations or tightening border controls, increasing
the search costs of illegal immigrants increases job creation in the unskilled market and
decreases the unemployment rate of unskilled native workers. It also implies a smaller
negative effects on the price of the skilled labor input, since the two labor inputs are
compliments in production, and therefore a smaller increase in the unemployment rate of
skilled natives.
   Similarly, the job creation effects of reducing legal immigration through higher search
costs (shown in column 2) are more positive compared to those of policies that directly
restrict legal entries. In this case, the unemployment rates of both types of native workers
decrease, as job creation increases in both markets, and this occurs for three reasons. First,
as mentioned above, higher search costs induce legal immigrants, skilled or unskilled, to
accept lower wages with a positive impact on incentives to create jobs in both markets.
Second, relative to policies that restrict entry through the employment channel, this
policy, by affecting both types of skilled immigrants (employment and family), implies
smaller changes in their composition, and thus smaller negative effects on the profits
of skilled jobs. Third, by reducing the benefit of entering legally, it makes an illegal
entry opportunity relatively more attractive to unskilled foreigners, and increases illegal
immigration be relatively more, which benefits unskilled firms.
   In column 3 the effects of reducing immigrants’ utility flow value from residing in
country 1 are shown. We consider a decrease in the flow value of all immigrants which is
equal to 5% of the wage of an unskilled family immigrant (about 6% of the wage of an
illegal immigrant and 2.5% of the wage of a skilled family immigrant). Although it targets
all types of immigrants, it has a relatively large negative impact on entry incentives of
illegal foreigners whose migration benefit is relatively small. In addition, since this policy
reduces the flow value of immigrants irrespective of their labor market status (employed


                                             33
or unemployed), it does not affect directly an immigrant’s bargaining position or wage.
Hence, the effects of this policy on natives’ labor market outcomes are similar to those
of direct policies restricting illegal immigration such as border enforcement. The relative
supply of skilled labor increases, unskilled workers benefit in terms of wages while skilled
workers are hurt, but the unemployment rates of both types of workers increase.

5.3    Comparing Effects Across Policies
The simulations that we perform in this subsection consist in using each of the policy
instruments to reduce either legal or illegal immigrants by a certain percentage (we sim-
ulate reductions between 2% and 10%). In Figure 1 we consider policies that target a
certain percentage decrease in the number of legal immigrants. We consider the effects
of decreasing approval rates for family visas, temporary employment visas, and perma-
nent employment visas (decreasing xF , xT and xE , respectively) and the effects of higher
search costs for legal immigrants (increasing πsL and πuL ). In Figure 2 we consider policies
targeting decreases in illegal immigration. We consider the effects of stronger border en-
forcement and deportations (decreasing xI and increasing dI ) and the impact of imposing
higher search costs for illegal immigrants (increasing πI ). Each figure is made of twelve
panels, each showing the impact of the policies on one endogenous variable at a time.
Four of them show the impact on the number of immigrants of each type (skilled-family,
employment, unskilled-family and undocumented immigrants). Three panels show that
impact of policies on the composition of immigrants: the proportion of skilled immigrants
that are on employment visas, the proportion of unskilled immigrants that are undocu-
mented and the proportion of immigrants that are skilled. Four panels show the effects
of policies on wage and unemployment rates of skilled and unskilled natives. The last
panel shows the impact on net income to natives (our measure of net income is specified
in Appendix B.1). In each panel the horizontal axis shows the percentage decrease in the
number of immigrants (legal or illegal). The vertical axis shows the effect on the outcome
variable as percentage of its initial value. Besides summarizing the key main effects de-
scribed above, the figures allow us to compare easily the effects of different policies that
deliver a certain percentage reduction of legal or illegal immigrants.
   One feature that stands out in the figures is that the different policies used to reduce
legal immigration by a certain percent have very different labor market effects. Those
focused on employment immigration have the largest negative labor market effect, because


                                             34
they reduce drastically the proportion of immigrants on employment visas. Given the
higher productivity of employment immigrants, this implies strong negative effects on
job creation in the skilled market and through complementarities also strong negative
job creation effects in the unskilled market. These policies deliver the largest percentage
increase in the unemployment rates of both types of native workers. The policy restricting
family unification entries comes next. This policy has a smaller negative impact on job
creation in the skilled market, because it keeps the proportion of skilled immigrants on
employment visas almost intact. It lowers the unemployment rate of skilled natives, and
generates a somewhat smaller increase in the unemployment rate of unskilled natives.
Lastly, reducing legal immigration through higher search costs has the most positive labor
market effect on both types of native workers. This policy decreases the unemployment
rate of both types of native workers, not only because it forces legal immigrants to accept
lower wages, but also because it keeps the proportion of skilled immigrants on employment
visas almost intact. In addition, it increases the entry of undocumented immigrants by
more than the other three policies, implying a larger offseting increase in the profits of
unskilled jobs.
   On the other hand, as shown in Figure 2, the two policies that directly restrict illegal
immigration, border controls and deportations, have very similar effects on the composi-
tion of immigrants and labor market. Increasing deportations of illegal immigrants hurts
unskilled jobs, by decreasing their expected duration, with negative effects on incentives
to create such jobs. However, this effect is small, since both policies have almost identical
labor market effects. The only policy that lowers the unemployment rate of unskilled
natives is the increase in the search costs of illegal immigrants. As discussed above, this
policy raises the profits of unskilled jobs by lowering the wages of illegal immigrants,
implying also, due to complimentarities in production, smaller negative effects on the
creation of jobs for skilled workers.

5.4    The Effects of Structural Changes
Finally in Table 4, we show our model prediction on how the two structural changes
mentioned above affect immigration. Column 1 summarizes the effects of a 5% increase
in the proportion of skilled native workers (S) and column 2 the effects of a skill-biased
technological change captured by a 5% increase in α.
   What these changes deliver is effectively a change in the relative productivity of the two


                                             35
labor inputs. The increase in α increases ps and decreases pu , implying better employment
opportunities and wages for skilled workers and worse for unskilled workers. This, in turn,
implies more incentive for skilled and less incentive for unskilled foreigners to enter. The
increase in S has the opposite effect: it lowers ps /increases pu and decreases incentives for
skilled foreigners to enter, while it encourages the migration of unskilled foreigners. But
the increased share of natives in the skilled labor force affects also the expected surplus of
skilled jobs. It means that firms are less likely to match with an employment immigrant,
which reduces incentives to create skilled jobs further, and discourages more the migration
of skilled foreigners. The endogenous responses in immigrant flows generate offsetting
changes in the skill composition of the labor force that help slow down the relative price
effects of these structural changes, but influence also the expected surplus of new jobs.
   The structure of the US immigration system is such that most of the offsetting changes
in the skill composition of immigrants occur through changes in illegal entries. This is
because entries of immigrants through the legal channels depend on network-generated
entry opportunities and thus respond less to changes in the migration benefit. The increase
in S reduces incentives for skilled immigrants to enter through both the employment
and the family channel, but this, in turn, implies also fewer opportunities for unskilled
immigrants to enter through family linkages. Despite stronger migration incentives for
the latter, their inflow decreases as the legal network shrinks, reinforcing incentives for
unskilled workers to enter illegally. Likewise, the increase in α increases the inflow of
skilled immigrants, but also generates opportunities for unskilled family immigrants to
enter. As a result, the inflow of unskilled family immigrants increases, despite their
lower migration incentive, which then implies a larger decrease in the number of illegal
immigrants. Larger responses in illegal entry tend to amplify the positive, and negative,
respectively, job creation effect of these structural changes on unskilled native workers.
As the proportion of illegal immigrants in the unskilled population increases, the profits
of unskilled jobs increase, adding to the positive job creation effect of a higher price pu
due to the increase in S. Similarly, as the entry of illegal immigrants decreases, the effects
of the skill biased technological change become more negative on unskilled native workers.
   The last two rows of the table show the percentage change in skilled and unskilled
immigration relative to the percentage change in the average wage of skilled and unskilled
workers, respectively. We can use these elasticities to compare the model predictions
regarding the responsiveness of immigrant flows to changes in host-country conditions


                                             36
to those found in empirical studies. The most comparable numbers, as estimated on
panel and in a log-log specifications are from Ortega and Peri (2012). They find the
elasticity of international immigrant flows to changes in per capital income at destination
to be between 0.5 and 1, and of flows between EU countries to be around 2. We find
comparable numbers for the elasticities with respect to wages; they are in the range of
0.5 − 1, consistent with these estimates.


6     Robustness Checks
In spite of our effort locating the most appropriate data for the parameterization, often
there is a range of uncertainty about some of the statistics and parameter values. For some
important parameters, therefore, we show the simulated effects of policies in a reasonable
range, based on the empirical literature. These checks are performed in Tables 5-14 that
reproduce the simulations of Tables 2-4, with each table devoted to one specific policy or
structural change. All tables follow the same structure. In the first column we show results
in the baseline (benchmark) case. In the rest of the columns we show robustness checks
on five parameters. For other parameters that are less relevant we perform robustness
checks in the Appendix B (see Tables 18-24, which mirror the structure of Tables 5-14).
    A first key parameter is λ, which measures the productivity gap between employment-
based immigrants, skilled immigrants on family visas and skilled natives. The significant
job-creation effect from employment immigrants derives from their higher productivity
which is reflected in their higher wages. In order to check the robustness of our main
results, in columns (2) and (3) in Tables 5-14 we decrease λ so that the productivity of
employment immigrants is 10% and 20% lower relative to the value we used in our baseline
parameterization. The wage ratio between employment and skilled family immigrants
drops from 1.55 in our baseline case to 1.41 and 1.26, respectively.
    The return rate of immigrants is an important determinant of their value to a firm
and of their job-creating effect. In column (4) we increase the return rate of illegal
immigrants, dI , while in column (5) we check that our results are robust to a higher
exogenous “natural” return rate of legal immigrants, dL . In both cases, we re calibrate
the model and adjust the values of πsL , πuL and πI so that we keep matching our baseline
targeted wage differences (given in Table 1). By increasing dL we essentially decrease the
values of πsL and πuL that match our targeted wage differences, i.e., we decrease the search
costs of legal immigrants and make firms’ value from hiring them smaller. Likewise, by

                                            37
increasing dI we reduce firms’ value from hiring illegal immigrants, by increasing their
match break up probability and lowering their search cost πI .
   For the results discussed above we standardise the mean of log normal values of the
distribution of immigration costs to 0. This parameter may be important for how immi-
grant flows respond to changes in the host country conditions. In columns (6) and (7) we
increase the mean to 0.5 and 1.
   The degree of skilled-unskilled complementarity in production is also important in
determining how the immigration-induced changes in the skill-mix of labor force translate
into the change in their marginal productivity pu and ps . In columns (8)-(10) we change σ,
the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution between the skilled and unskilled
labor inputs. We keep all other targets and parameter vales the same. We consider
σ = −0.5 and σ = 0, which are lower than our benchmark value of σ = 0.5, implying
stronger complementarity between the two labor inputs and σ = 1 which means that the
two labor inputs are perfect substitutes.
   Let us first discuss the effect of a lower productivity for employment immigrants. Con-
firming our previous conclusion that fewer family admissions benefit incentives to create
skilled jobs mainly by decreasing the relative supply of skills and increasing the price of the
skilled input we see that decreasing the productivity of employment immigrants (columns
2 and 3) actually strengthens this effect. When employment immigrants are less produc-
tive their reduced presence, due to fewer referrals from skilled family immigrants, is less
negative on the profits of skilled jobs. We therefore see a larger decrease in the unemploy-
ment rate of skilled natives, while the effects on all other market variables and immigrant
entry and composition remain almost intact. As expected, the policies restricting employ-
ment immigration (Tables 6 and 7), have less negative employment effects, especially on
skilled workers, when the productivity of employment immigrants is smaller. The impact
of such policies on the unemployment rate of skilled workers turns negative when their
productivity of employment immigrants is reduced by 20%. It remains, however, small,
while effects on all other market variables and immigrant entry remain robust to this
change. The effects of increasing the search costs of legal immigrants (Table 11) are also
robust to changes in the productivity of employment immigrants, since this policy affects
both types of legal immigrants and keeps their composition almost unchanged. Likewise,
the effects of policies reducing illegal immigration (see Tables 8-9 and 10) are not sensitive
to changes in the productivity of employment immigrants, since such policies affect little


                                              38
the inflow of legal immigrants.
       The effects of all policies are also not sensitive to increasing the return rates of either
illegal or legal immigrants (column 4 and 5) or to increasing the mean of the distribution of
immigration costs.28 Moreover, the results for the two structural changes are very similar
across the different values of these parameters and the elasticities of immigrant flows with
respect to wages remain within the range of available empirical estimates (0.7 − 1) when
the mean of the distribution increases.
       Changes in the elasticity of substitution (columns 8-10), on the other hand, alter
mainly the distributional effects of policies.29 As the degree of skilled-unskilled comple-
mentarity decreases (σ increases) the impact of policies that tend to increase (decrease)
the relative supply of skilled labor, such as decreasing xI (such as decreasing xF , xT or
xE ) becomes more positive (negative) on skilled workers and more negative (positive) on
unskilled workers. This occurs because as the degree of complementarity decreases the
effects of changes in relative supply of skills on the marginal products of the two labor
types diminish. When σ = 1 and the two labor inputs are perfects substitutes, then their
prices are constant and not affected by changes in the relative supply of skills. All effects
in this case work through the impact of policies on the composition of immigrants and in
turn the expected values of jobs, in line with our previous conclusions that these effects,
which are mostly negative, often dominate over the relative price effects.
       Finally, it is not surprising that the effects of increasing the proportion of natives that
are skilled on immigrant entry and composition fade away as the degree of complemen-
tarity decreases. The less compliments the two labor inputs are the smaller the impact
of changes in the relative supply of skills on the relative prices of the two inputs. In the
extreme case, where the two inputs are perfects substitutes (σ = 1) prices are constant
and all effects on immigrant entry work through the impact of more skilled natives on
the expected values of new jobs. But our main conclusion regarding the responses in
immigrant flows and the role of network effects remain robust.
  28
     The return probability of legal immigrants seems to be a bit more important for the effects of indirect
policies that work through decreasing the migration incentive, such as anti-immigration attitudes (Table
12). A higher return probability acts as an increase in the rate at which immigrants discount the migration
benefit. If the probability of return is large the migration benefit is less sensitive to such policies, meaning
that their impact on inflows of legal immigrants reflects more the effect of networks.
  29
     Changes in the elasticity of substitution do not alter the impact of policies on net income.




                                                      39
7     Conclusions
In this paper we develop a two-country search and matching model that represents the US
and the rest of the World, and we model in detail each of the three channels of immigrant
entry to the US: Family reunification, Employment and Illegal. Immigration policies
together with the effectiveness of their enforcement, the incentives of immigrants and
the networks size, determine the observed number of immigrants and their composition in
terms of skills and productivity. Most existing models analyzing the impact of immigration
have typically treated immigration as an exogenous policy variable, and have neglected
the analysis of incentives and network effects. We include these effects in our analysis
and we evaluate how immigration policies affect long-run immigration and native labor
markets.
    We use the model to evaluate the labor market effects of some realistic policy propos-
als, that mirror existing bills that have been discussed in the Senate and the House in the
recent past. For instance the plan to reduce by 50% the family reunification is similar to
the RAISE act which has been proposed in the Senate in 2017. Also a drastic increase
in deportation rates, in order to reduce (by 10 or 50%) the population of undocumented
immigrants is an explicit goal of the current presidential administration. We simulate
the effects of these policies. The model also allow us to analyze how immigration flows
respond to important structural changes taking places in the US such as skill biased tech-
nological change and the change in supply of local skills (due to changes in educational
attainments). The real novelty of our model is that our simulations account for what
happens in equilibrium to the inflow of various groups of immigrants, to incentives to mi-
grate and to native unemployment and wages accounting for all these general equilibrium
effects.
    Our model allows insights into the effect of different policies that would not be possible
in a model based on classical labor demand and supply and on the idea that policy controls
the total number of immigrants. First, we show that undocumented and unskilled family
immigrants encourage job creation and may have positive employment effects on natives
due to their low wages. Highly skilled employment immigrants, on the other hand, receive
higher wages, but as their productivity per unit of wage is higher than that of natives they
generates a significant job creating effect. Given these effect, we show that a decrease in
the inflow of immigrants from any entry route has a depressing effect on the labor market
for both skilled and unskilled natives.

                                             40
   Then we show that the two channels of legal entry, family unification and employment,
are connected. Family reunification increases opportunities for equilibrium employment
immigration via networks/referrals and vice-versa. The family reunification channels am-
plifies the negative effects of a decrease in employment immigrants, as fewer employment
immigrants generate fewer opportunities for new immigrant entries through family ties.
Likewise, to a large extent the negative effects of decreasing family-based admissions come
from the consequent decrease in employment immigration. For this reason, a policy com-
bination that reduces entry through one channel but facilitates entry through the other
helps attenuate the negative effects and may have positive effects on job creation and net
income of natives.
   These are only few of the policy experiments that one can perform using the model.
We hope that future research will follow, extending and applying the model to evaluate
the economic effects of a large array of possible immigration policies.




                                            41
                  Table 1: Parameterization and matched moments


               From the literature:
 = 0.5        Petrongolo and Pissarides (2001)
β = 0.5        Satisfies the Hosios(1990) condition
σ = 0.5        Ottaviano and Peri (2012)
µz = 0         Normalization
dL = 0.0023    The ratio of returnees to US residents is 0.027 per year
dI = 0.0039    For Mexican immigrants – Chassamboulli and Peri (2015)
ss = 0.032     US monthly skilled separation rate – Chassamboulli and Peri (2015)
su = 0.024     US monthly unskilled separation rate – Chassamboulli and Peri (2015)

                Measured from the data:
r = 0.004      The monthly interest rate
τ = 0.00072    The growth rate of the population 18-65 years of age – Census data
S = 0.604      The share of skilled labor force in the US, 18-65 years of age – 2014 ACS
ũ2s = 0.067   Average skilled unemployment rate in China and India – Barro Lee 2010
ũ2u = 0.036   Unskilled unemployment rate in Mexico – Barro Lee 2010
Xs = 0.562     Skilled labor force of India+China/US native labor force – Barro Lee 2010
Xu = 0.323     Unskilled labor force of Mexico/US native labor force – Barro Lee 2010
xF = 0.015     It takes about 67 months for a family visa to be issued

               Jointly calibrated to match moments of the data:
α = 0.698      The skilled wage premium in the US of 78% – 2014 ACS PUMS
ξ = 0.124      The vacancy to unemployment ratio in the US of 0.62 – JOLTS 2014-16
bs = 0.438     The ratio of unemployment to employment income of 0.71
bu = 0.231     for both skill types (Hall and Milgrom, 2008)
               The wage ratio between:
πsL = 0.002    1. skilled natives and immigrants of the US of 0.92
πuL = 0.183    2. unskilled natives and legal-unskilled immigrants of the US, of 1.173
πI = 0.389     3. illegal (unskilled) immigrants and unskilled natives of the US, of 0.8
λ = 1.538      – Center for Migration Studies (CMS)
               4. employment immigrants and family immigrants of the US, of 1.6
               – New Immigrant Survey (NIS)
cs = 0.0165    The employment rates of skilled and unskilled native workers
cu = 0.0440    in the US: 0.84 and 0.67 – ACS data 2014
xT = 0.0567    The ratio of temporary workers to the US native labor force of 0.0092
xE = 0.0066    The ratio of employment immigrants to the US native labor force of 0.02
xI = 0.0577    The ratio of illegal immigrants to the US native labor force of 0.07
σz = 4.224     The ratio of family immigrants to the US native labor force of 0.116
               – CMS, NIS, Costa and Rosenbaum (2017)
dT = 0.0212    Average duration of a temporary worker visa is 36 months
Us2 = 22.28    UsF = 4Us2
Uu2 = 7.82     UuF = 4Uu2 .


                                          42
                                  Table 2: Direct Policies

                                ↓ in xF        ↓ in xT       ↓ in xE        ↓ in xI      ↑ in dI

 Immigrants:
 LF s                            -47.95          -5.46         -3.74         1.62          1.39
 LF u                            -51.84          -6.96         -5.04         4.17          3.59
 LE                              -47.88         -16.87        -13.19         1.54          1.32
 LT                              -47.88         -16.87         -3.54         1.54          1.32
 I                                1.97           0.16          0.16          -8.10         -6.98

 Total family                    -48.76          -5.77         -4.01         2.15          1.85
 Total employment                -47.88         -16.87        -10.15         1.54          1.32
 Total legal                     -48.58          -8.10         -5.30         2.02          1.74
 Total                           -31.66          -5.34         -3.47         -1.37         -1.18
 Skilled/Unskilled               -41.32          -6.84         -4.28         7.03          6.02

 Unempl. Rates:
 ũsN                             -0.20          0.10           0.12          0.22          0.20
 ũuN                             2.24           0.45           0.27          0.33          0.29

 Wages:
 wsN                              0.63           0.13          0.07          -0.15         -0.14
 wuN                              -1.96          -0.42         -0.26         0.40          0.36
 The entries in the Table represent the percentage effects of five restrictive immigration policies on
immigrant stocks and composition (first 10 rows), natives’ unemployment rates (next 2 rows) and
natives’ wages (last 2 rows). Column 1 shows the effects of a 10% decrease in the approval rate of
petitions for family visas. Column 2 a 10% decrease in the approval rate of petitions for temporary
work permits. Column 3 a 10% decrease in the approval rate of petitions for permanent employ-
ment visas. Column 4 an increase in border control captured by a 10% decrease in the rate at which
illegal immigration opportunities occur, and Column 5 a 10% increase in the rate of deportations
of illegal immigrants.




                                                 43
                            Table 3: Indirect Policies

                                 ↑ in πI       ↑ in πLs ,πLu        ↓ in flow value

 Immigrants:
 LF s                             1.20              -0.41                   -0.75
 LF u                             3.05              -1.02                   -0.43
 LE                               1.18              -0.40                   -1.10
 LT                               1.18              -0.40                   -1.10
 I                                -5.70             0.12                    -3.83

 Total family                     1.59              -0.53                   -0.69
 Total employment                 1.18              -0.40                   -1.10
 Total legal                      1.50              -0.51                   -0.77
 Total                            -0.91             -0.30                   -1.80
 Skilled/Unskilled                4.92              -0.25                   2.22

 Unempl. Rates:
 ũsN                             0.07              -0.02                    0.11
 ũuN                             -0.76             -0.15                    0.23

 Wages:
 wsN                              -0.05             0.01                    -0.06
 wuN                              0.21              -0.02                   0.13

 The entries in the Table represent the percentage effects of three indirect immigration poli-
cies on immigrant stocks and composition (first 10 rows), natives’ unemployment rates
(next 2 rows) and natives’ wages (last 2 rows). Column 1 shows a 10% increase in the
search cost of illegal immigrants. Column 2 a 10% increase in the search cost of legal im-
migrants and Column 3 a decrease in all immigrants’ flow value of staying in the host
country (country 1), which is equal to 5% of the wage of an unskilled family immigrant.




                                             44
     Figure 1: Effects of policies reducing legal immigration




45
     Figure 2: Effects of policies reducing illegal immigration




46
                 Table 4: Structural Changes

                                                  ↑ in S        ↑ in α



 Immigrants:
 LF s                                              -0.59         3.53
 LF u                                              -0.81         5.46
 LE                                                -1.10         6.11
 LT                                                -1.10         6.11
 I                                                 2.36         -10.30

 Total family                                      -0.64        3.93
 Total employment                                  -1.10        6.11
 Total legal                                       -0.74        4.39
 Total                                             0.30         -0.53
 Skilled/Unskilled                                 -2.26        11.33

 Unempl. Rates:
 ũsN                                              1.56          -7.30
 ũuN                                              -3.44         8.28

 Wages:
 wsN                                               -0.89         5.06
 wuN                                               2.86          -7.05

 Elasticity of Migrant Flows:
 Skilled                                            0.79         0.82
 Unskilled                                          0.59         0.88

 The Table summarizes the simulated effects of two structural changes in
the host country (country 1). Column 1 summarizes the effects of a 5%
increase in the proportion of skilled native workers (S) and column 2 the
effects of a skill-biased technological change captured by a 5% increase in
α. The entries in the Table represent the percentage effects on immigrant
stocks and composition (first 10 rows), natives’ unemployment rates (next
2 rows) and natives’ wages (next 2 rows). The last two rows of the table
show the percentage change in the number of skilled and unskilled immi-
grants relative to the percentage change in the average wage of skilled and
unskilled workers, respectively, in the host country.




                                   47
                                                    Table 5: Decrease in Family-based admissions, robustness checks

                                       (1)             (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)             (6)         (7)           (8)          (9)        (10)

                                     bench.      −10% in pE          −20% in pE         +25% in dI         +25% in dL          µ = 0.5      µ=1         σ = −0.5        σ=0        σ=1

      Immigrants:
      LF s                           -47.95          -48.49              -49.11             -47.95             -48.41           -47.74      -47.44        -47.27       -47.55      -48.54
      LF u                           -51.84          -52.33              -52.89             -51.83             -52.03           -51.63      -51.32        -51.02       -51.37      -52.50
      LE                             -47.88          -48.39              -48.98             -47.88             -48.35           -47.66      -47.36        -47.01       -47.37      -48.66
      LT                             -47.88          -48.39              -48.98             -47.88             -48.35           -47.66      -47.36        -47.01       -47.37      -48.66
      I                               1.97            2.01                2.06               1.94               1.71             1.45        0.68          -0.54        0.54        3.90

      Total family                   -48.76          -49.28              -49.89             -48.76             -49.19           -48.54      -48.23        -48.05       -48.35      -49.36




48
      Total employment               -47.88          -48.39              -48.98             -47.88             -48.35           -47.66      -47.36        -47.01       -47.37      -48.66
      Total legal                    -48.58          -49.10              -49.71             -48.57             -49.01           -48.35      -48.04        -47.83       -48.14      -49.21
      Total                          -31.66          -31.91              -32.19             -31.67             -32.04           -31.69      -31.74        -32.01       -31.85      -31.44
      Skilled/Unskilled              -41.32          -41.90              -42.57             -41.31             -41.44           -40.91      -40.32        -39.33       -40.19      -42.87

      Unempl. Rates:
      ũsN                            -0.20           -0.42               -0.64              -0.19              -0.23            -0.18       -0.15         -1.28        -0.85       0.90
      ũuN                            2.24            2.15                2.07               2.26               2.23             2.26        2.29          4.53          3.58       0.22

      Wages:
      wsN                             0.63            0.61                0.60               0.63               0.62             0.62        0.61          1.32          1.05      -0.04
      wuN                             -1.96           -1.87               -1.78              -1.96              -1.93            -1.94       -1.91         -3.98        -3.17      -0.02
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 10% decrease in xF , on five parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table 2,
     column 1). In columns (2) and (3) we decrease the productivity of employment immigrants by 10% and 20%. In column (4) we increase the return rate of illegal immigrants by 25%. In
     column (5) we increase the return rate of legal immigrants by 25%. In columns (6) and (7) we increase the mean of the log normal values of the distribution of immigration cost to 0.5
     and 1. In columns (8)-(10) we change σ, the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution between the skilled and unskilled labor inputs.
                                                Table 6: Decrease in Employment-based admissions, robustness checks

                                       (1)             (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)         (7)          (8)           (9)       (10)

                                    bench.       −10% in pE         −20% in pE          +25% in dI        +25% in dL          µ = 0.5      µ=1        σ = −0.5        σ=0        σ=1

      Immigrants:
      LF s                            -5.46           -5.47              -5.48              -5.46              -5.54            -5.42       -5.37        -5.35         -5.40      -5.56
      LF u                            -6.96           -6.94              -6.92              -6.96              -6.97            -6.91       -6.85        -6.81         -6.87      -7.09
      LE                             -16.87          -16.84             -16.80             -16.87             -16.98           -16.83      -16.78       -16.71        -16.78     -17.02
      LT                             -16.87          -16.84             -16.80             -16.87             -16.98           -16.83      -16.78       -16.71        -16.78     -17.02
      I                               0.16            0.18               0.20               0.16               0.11             0.07        -0.07        -0.26         -0.08      0.53

      Total family                    -5.77           -5.77              -5.78              -5.77              -5.85            -5.73       -5.67        -5.65         -5.70      -5.88




49
      Total employment               -16.87          -16.84             -16.80             -16.87             -16.98           -16.83      -16.78       -16.71        -16.78     -17.02
      Total legal                     -8.10           -8.07              -8.04              -8.10              -8.18            -8.06       -8.00        -7.97         -8.03      -8.22
      Total                           -5.34           -5.30              -5.25              -5.34              -5.41            -5.34       -5.35        -5.39         -5.37      -5.29
      Skilled/Unskilled               -6.84           -6.83              -6.83              -6.84              -6.87            -6.75       -6.62        -6.45         -6.61      -7.19

      Unempl. Rates:
      ũsN                            0.10            0.02               -0.06               0.10               0.09            0.11        0.11         -0.15        -0.05       0.33
      ũuN                            0.45            0.41               0.37                0.45               0.45            0.45        0.46         0.93          0.73       0.03

      Wages:
      wsN                            0.13             0.12               0.11               0.13               0.13            0.13        0.12          0.29          0.22       -0.01
      wuN                            -0.42            -0.39              -0.35              -0.42              -0.42           -0.42       -0.41         -0.90        -0.70       0.00
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 10% decrease xT , on five parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table 2,
     column 2). In columns (2) and (3) we decrease the productivity of employment immigrants by 10% and 20%. In column (4) we increase the return rate of illegal immigrants by 25%. In
     column (5) we increase the return rate of legal immigrants by 25%. In columns (6) and (7) we increase the mean of the log normal values of the distribution of immigration cost to 0.5
     and 1. In columns (8)-(10) we change σ, the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution between the skilled and unskilled labor inputs.
                                                    Table 7: Fewer Permanent Employment Visas, robustness checks

                                       (1)             (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)         (7)          (8)           (9)       (10)

                                    bench.       −10% in pE         −20% in pE          +25% in dI        +25% in dL          µ = 0.5      µ=1        σ = −0.5        σ=0        σ=1

      Immigrants:
      LF s                            -3.74           -3.76              -3.78              -3.74              -3.50            -3.73       -3.72        -3.67         -3.70      -3.80
      LF u                            -5.04           -5.04              -5.04              -5.04              -4.69            -5.03       -5.03        -4.95         -4.98      -5.12
      LE                             -13.19          -13.18             -13.17             -13.19             -12.40           -13.22      -13.27       -13.08        -13.13     -13.28
      LT                              -3.54           -3.53              -3.53              -3.54              -2.67            -3.58       -3.63        -3.42         -3.47      -3.65
      I                               0.16            0.17               0.18               0.16               0.13             0.10        0.02         -0.09          0.02      0.38

      Total family                    -4.01           -4.02              -4.04              -4.01              -3.76            -4.00       -3.99        -3.94         -3.97      -4.07




50
      Total employment               -10.15          -10.14             -10.13             -10.15              -9.33           -10.18      -10.23       -10.04        -10.08     -10.25
      Total legal                     -5.30           -5.29              -5.29              -5.30              -4.93            -5.30       -5.30        -5.22         -5.25      -5.37
      Total                           -3.47           -3.45              -3.44              -3.47              -3.23            -3.49       -3.52        -3.50         -3.49      -3.44
      Skilled/Unskilled               -4.28           -4.28              -4.30              -4.27              -3.93            -4.24       -4.20        -4.04         -4.14      -4.49

      Unempl. Rates:
      ũsN                            0.12            0.05               -0.01               0.12               0.11            0.12        0.13         -0.04         0.03       0.26
      ũuN                            0.27            0.25               0.23                0.28               0.25            0.28        0.28         0.56          0.44       0.02

      Wages:
      wsN                            0.07             0.07               0.07               0.07               0.07            0.07        0.07          0.17          0.13       -0.01
      wuN                            -0.26            -0.23              -0.21              -0.26              -0.23           -0.26       -0.26         -0.55        -0.43       0.00
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 10% decrease xE , on five parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table 2,
     column 3). In columns (2) and (3) we decrease the productivity of employment immigrants by 10% and 20%. In column (4) we increase the return rate of illegal immigrants by 25%. In
     column (5) we increase the return rate of legal immigrants by 25%. In columns (6) and (7) we increase the mean of the log normal values of the distribution of immigration cost to 0.5
     and 1. In columns (8)-(10) we change σ, the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution between the skilled and unskilled labor inputs.
                                                                 Table 8: Border Controls, robustness checks

                                       (1)             (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)             (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)       (10)

                                    bench.       −10% in pE         −20% in pE          +25% in dI         +25% in dL         µ = 0.5      µ=1        σ = −0.5       σ=0 σ=1

      Immigrants:
      LF s                           1.62             1.63               1.65               1.62               1.72             1.59         1.56        1.51         1.56        1.71
      LF u                           4.17             4.19               4.20               4.17               4.27             4.15         4.11        4.03         4.09        4.31
      LE                             1.54             1.55               1.57               1.54               1.65             1.51         1.47        1.34         1.42        1.72
      LT                             1.54             1.55               1.57               1.54               1.65             1.51         1.47        1.34         1.42        1.72
      I                              -8.10            -8.11              -8.11              -8.10              -8.10            -8.09       -8.07        -7.70        -7.86      -8.47

      Total family                   2.15             2.16               2.18               2.15               2.27             2.12         2.08        2.04         2.08        2.25




51
      Total employment               1.54             1.55               1.57               1.54               1.65             1.51         1.47        1.34         1.42        1.72
      Total legal                    2.02             2.04               2.06               2.02               2.14             1.99         1.95        1.89         1.94        2.14
      Total                          -1.37            -1.37              -1.38              -1.36              -1.29            -1.38       -1.40        -1.32        -1.34      -1.41
      Skilled/Unskilled              7.03             7.07               7.11               7.03               7.03             7.03         7.01        6.60         6.78        7.44

      Unempl. Rates:
      ũsN                            0.22            0.23                0.24               0.22               0.22            0.22        0.22         0.51          0.39      -0.03
      ũuN                            0.33            0.33                0.34               0.32               0.33            0.33        0.33         -0.19         0.03      0.79

      Wages:
      wsN                            -0.15            -0.15              -0.15              -0.15              -0.15            -0.15       -0.15        -0.33        -0.25       0.00
      wuN                            0.40             0.39               0.39               0.39               0.40             0.40         0.39        0.92         0.70       -0.06
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 10% decrease xI , on five parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table 2,
     column 4). In columns (2) and (3) we decrease the productivity of employment immigrants by 10% and 20%. In column (4) we increase the return rate of illegal immigrants by 25%.
     In column (5) we increase the return rate of legal immigrants by 25%. In columns (6) and (7) we increase the mean of the log normal values of the distribution of immigration cost to
     0.5 and 1. In columns (8)-(10) we change σ, the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution between the skilled and unskilled labor inputs.
                                                         Table 9: Enforcement of Deportations, robustness checks

                                       (1)              (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)         (7)           (8)          (9)       (10)

                                     bench.       −10% in pE         −20% in pE          +25% in dI         +25% in dL          µ = 0.5      µ=1        σ = −0.5        σ=0 σ=1

      Immigrants:
      LF s                            1.39             1.41               1.43                1.46               1.52             1.40         1.42        1.29          1.33        1.48
      LF u                            3.59             3.61               3.63                3.76               3.76             3.66         3.76        3.45          3.51        3.73
      LE                              1.32             1.34               1.35                1.38               1.46             1.33         1.34        1.14          1.22        1.49
      LT                              1.32             1.34               1.35                1.38               1.46             1.33         1.34        1.14          1.22        1.49
      I                               -6.98            -7.00              -7.01               -7.30              -7.16            -7.14       -7.37        -6.60         -6.76      -7.34

      Total family                    1.85             1.87               1.88                1.93               2.00             1.87         1.89        1.74          1.79        1.95




52
      Total employment                1.32             1.34               1.35                1.38               1.46             1.33         1.34        1.14          1.22        1.49
      Total legal                     1.74             1.76               1.78                1.82               1.89             1.75         1.78        1.62          1.67        1.85
      Total                           -1.18            -1.19              -1.20               -1.23              -1.14            -1.22       -1.28        -1.13         -1.15      -1.22
      Skilled/Unskilled               6.02             6.06               6.10                6.30               6.17             6.16         6.38        5.61          5.78        6.40

      Unempl. Rates:
      ũsN                            0.20             0.21                0.21               0.21                0.20            0.20        0.21         0.46          0.35       -0.03
      ũuN                            0.29             0.29                0.30               0.30                0.29            0.30        0.31         -0.17         0.02       0.70

      Wages:
      wsN                             -0.14            -0.14              -0.14               -0.14              -0.14            -0.14       -0.14        -0.29         -0.23       0.00
      wuN                             0.36             0.35               0.35                0.37               0.37             0.36         0.38        0.83          0.63       -0.06
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 10% increase in dI , on five parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table 2,
     column 5). In columns (2) and (3) we decrease the productivity of employment immigrants by 10% and 20%. In column (4) we increase the return rate of illegal immigrants by 25%.
     In column (5) we increase the return rate of legal immigrants by 25%. In columns (6) and (7) we increase the mean of the log normal values of the distribution of immigration cost to
     0.5 and 1. In columns (8)-(10) we change σ, the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution between the skilled and unskilled labor inputs.
                                               Table 10: Higher Search Costs for Illegal Immigrants, robustness checks

                                       (1)              (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)         (7)           (8)          (9)       (10)

                                     bench.       −10% in pE         −20% in pE          +25% in dI         +25% in dL          µ = 0.5      µ=1        σ = −0.5        σ=0 σ=1

      Immigrants:
      LF s                            1.20             1.32               1.26                1.22               1.60             1.45         1.82        1.12          1.16        1.28
      LF u                            3.05             3.30               3.17                3.10               3.96             3.74         4.77        2.89          2.95        3.20
      LE                              1.18             1.29               1.23                1.20               1.57             1.41         1.76        1.07          1.11        1.28
      LT                              1.18             1.29               1.23                1.20               1.57             1.41         1.76        1.07          1.11        1.28
      I                               -5.70            -6.14              -5.92               -5.81              -7.39            -7.03       -9.02        -5.35         -5.50      -6.03

      Total family                    1.59             1.73               1.65                1.61               2.11             1.92         2.42        1.49          1.53        1.68




53
      Total employment                1.18             1.29               1.23                1.20               1.57             1.41         1.76        1.07          1.11        1.28
      Total legal                     1.50             1.64               1.56                1.53               2.00             1.82         2.28        1.40          1.44        1.59
      Total                           -0.91            -0.99              -0.95               -0.93              -1.14            -1.14       -1.50        -0.86         -0.88      -0.96
      Skilled/Unskilled               4.92             5.36               5.13                5.01               6.41             6.11         7.94        4.59          4.72        5.24

      Unempl. Rates:
      ũsN                            0.07             0.09               0.08                0.07               0.12             0.10         0.16        0.16          0.12       -0.02
      ũuN                            -0.76            -0.73              -0.75               -0.75              -0.67            -0.69       -0.59        -0.94         -0.86      -0.58

      Wages:
      wsN                             -0.05            -0.06              -0.06               -0.05              -0.09            -0.08       -0.12        -0.11         -0.09      0.00
      wuN                             0.21             0.23               0.22                0.22               0.30             0.28         0.38        0.38          0.31       0.05
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 10% decrease in πI , on five parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table 3,
     column 1). In columns (2) and (3) we decrease the productivity of employment immigrants by 10% and 20%. In column (4) we increase the return rate of illegal immigrants by 25%.
     In column (5) we increase the return rate of legal immigrants by 25%. In columns (6) and (7) we increase the mean of the log normal values of the distribution of immigration cost to
     0.5 and 1. In columns (8)-(10) we change σ, the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution between the skilled and unskilled labor inputs.
                                                Table 11: Higher Search Costs for Legal Immigrants, robustness checks

                                       (1)              (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)         (7)           (8)          (9)       (10)

                                     bench.       −10% in pE         −20% in pE          +25% in dI         +25% in dL          µ = 0.5      µ=1        σ = −0.5        σ=0 σ=1

      Immigrants:
      LF s                            -0.41            -0.42              -0.43               -0.41              -0.26            -0.48       -0.58        -0.39         -0.40      -0.42
      LF u                            -1.02            -1.03              -1.05               -1.02              -0.62            -1.20       -1.45        -0.99         -1.00      -1.03
      LE                              -0.40            -0.41              -0.42               -0.40              -0.25            -0.47       -0.57        -0.38         -0.39      -0.42
      LT                              -0.40            -0.41              -0.42               -0.40              -0.25            -0.47       -0.57        -0.38         -0.39      -0.42
      I                               0.12             0.13               0.13                0.12               0.11             0.14         0.17        0.09          0.10        0.16

      Total family                    -0.53            -0.54              -0.56               -0.53              -0.33            -0.63       -0.75        -0.52         -0.53      -0.55




54
      Total employment                -0.40            -0.41              -0.42               -0.40              -0.25            -0.47       -0.57        -0.38         -0.39      -0.42
      Total legal                     -0.51            -0.52              -0.53               -0.51              -0.32            -0.59       -0.71        -0.49         -0.50      -0.52
      Total                           -0.30            -0.30              -0.31               -0.30              -0.17            -0.35       -0.42        -0.30         -0.30      -0.29
      Skilled/Unskilled               -0.25            -0.26              -0.27               -0.25              -0.18            -0.29       -0.35        -0.21         -0.23      -0.28

      Unempl. Rates:
      ũsN                            -0.02            -0.02              -0.02               -0.02              -0.02            -0.02       -0.02        -0.04         -0.03       0.00
      ũuN                            -0.15            -0.15              -0.15               -0.15              -0.16            -0.14       -0.14        -0.10         -0.12      -0.18

      Wages:
      wsN                             0.01             0.01               0.01                0.01               0.01             0.01         0.01        0.03          0.02       0.00
      wuN                             -0.02            -0.02              -0.02               -0.02              -0.02            -0.03       -0.03        -0.07         -0.05      0.02
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 10% decrease in πsL and πuL , on five parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see
     Table 3, column 2). In columns (2) and (3) we decrease the productivity of employment immigrants by 10% and 20%. In column (4) we increase the return rate of illegal immigrants
     by 25%. In column (5) we increase the return rate of legal immigrants by 25%. In columns (6) and (7) we increase the mean of the log normal values of the distribution of immigration
     cost to 0.5 and 1. In columns (8)-(10) we change σ, the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution between the skilled and unskilled labor inputs.
                                                  Table 12: Stronger Anti-Immigration Attitudes, robustness checks

                                      (1)              (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)             (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)       (10)

                                    bench.       −10% in pE         −20% in pE         +25% in dI         +25% in dL         µ = 0.5      µ=1        σ = −0.5        σ=0 σ=1

      Immigrants:
      LF s                           -0.75           -0.76               -0.78              -0.74              0.42            -0.82       -0.88        -0.78        -0.77      -0.72
      LF u                           -0.43           -0.41               -0.40              -0.38              1.41            -0.37       -0.24        -0.51        -0.48      -0.33
      LE                             -1.10           -1.16               -1.24              -1.08              0.22            -1.23       -1.39        -1.14        -1.13      -1.04
      LT                             -1.10           -1.16               -1.24              -1.08              0.22            -1.23       -1.39        -1.14        -1.13      -1.04
      I                              -3.83           -3.95               -4.09              -3.92              -4.91           -4.74       -6.13        -3.39        -3.58      -4.21

      Total family                   -0.69           -0.69               -0.70              -0.66              0.63            -0.72       -0.75        -0.72        -0.71      -0.64




55
      Total employment               -1.10           -1.16               -1.24              -1.08              0.22            -1.23       -1.39        -1.14        -1.13      -1.04
      Total legal                    -0.77           -0.79               -0.81              -0.75              0.54            -0.83       -0.89        -0.81        -0.80      -0.72
      Total                          -1.80           -1.85               -1.92              -1.81              -1.28           -2.14       -2.64        -1.67        -1.73      -1.89
      Skilled/Unskilled              2.22            2.30                2.37               2.29               3.81            2.86         3.88        1.86         2.01        2.54

      Unempl. Rates:
      ũsN                            0.11            0.11               0.11               0.11               0.14            0.13        0.17          0.19         0.16      0.02
      ũuN                            0.23            0.23               0.24               0.23               0.23            0.28        0.35          0.04         0.12      0.42

      Wages:
      wsN                            -0.06           -0.06               -0.06              -0.06              -0.09           -0.07       -0.09        -0.11        -0.09       0.00
      wuN                            0.13            0.14                0.15               0.14               0.22            0.17         0.23        0.29         0.23       -0.03
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a decrease in immigrants’ flow value, on five parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark)
     case (see Table 3, column 3). In columns (2) and (3) we decrease the productivity of employment immigrants by 10% and 20%. In column (4) we increase the return rate of illegal
     immigrants by 25%. In column (5) we increase the return rate of legal immigrants by 25%. In columns (6) and (7) we increase the mean of the log normal values of the distribution of
     immigration cost to 0.5 and 1. In columns (8)-(10) we change σ, the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution between the skilled and unskilled labor inputs.
                                   Table 13: Increase in the Proportion of Skilled in Native Labor Force, robustness checks

                                      (1)             (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)             (6)         (7)           (8)          (9)       (10)

                                   bench.       −10% in pE          −20% in pE         +25% in dI          +25% in dL         µ = 0.5      µ=1        σ = −0.5 σ = 0 σ = 1

      Immigrants
      LF s                          -0.59            -0.61               -0.63              -0.60              -0.63            -0.68       -0.80        -1.20         -0.95      -0.05
      LF u                          -0.81            -0.84               -0.87              -0.83              -1.20            -0.96       -1.20        -1.50         -1.22      -0.10
      LE                            -1.10            -1.12               -1.14              -1.11              -1.08            -1.20       -1.34        -2.33         -1.81      -0.07
      LT                            -1.10            -1.12               -1.14              -1.11              -1.08            -1.20       -1.34        -2.33         -1.81      -0.07
      I                             2.36             2.42                2.48               2.39               2.69             2.89         3.71        4.20          3.47        0.39

      Total family                  -0.64            -0.66               -0.68              -0.65              -0.75            -0.74       -0.88        -1.27         -1.01      -0.06
      Total employment              -1.10            -1.12               -1.14              -1.11              -1.08            -1.20       -1.34        -2.33         -1.81      -0.07
      Total legal                   -0.74            -0.75               -0.77              -0.74              -0.82            -0.83       -0.97        -1.49         -1.17      -0.06




56
      Total                         0.30             0.31                0.33               0.30               0.36             0.41         0.59        0.41          0.38        0.09
      Skilled/Unskilled             -2.26            -2.32               -2.38              -2.29              -2.41            -2.71       -3.37        -4.17         -3.40      -0.32

      Unempl. Rates
      ũsN                          1.56             1.55                1.53               1.56               1.55             1.55         1.52        3.51          2.65        0.08
      ũuN                          -3.44            -3.46               -3.47              -3.44              -3.45            -3.46       -3.49        -6.25         -5.08      -0.90

      Wages
      wsN                           -0.89            -0.90               -0.90              -0.89              -0.89            -0.88       -0.87        -2.01         -1.53      0.00
      wuN                           2.86             2.87                2.87               2.86               2.85             2.83         2.79        6.30          4.83       0.07

      Elasticities
      Skilled                        0.79            0.82                0.86               0.80                0.82            0.90        1.05          0.73         0.75       3.37
      Unskilled                      0.59            0.60                0.62               0.60                0.64            0.74        0.98          0.44         0.49       -1.02
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 5% increase in the proportion of skilled workers in the labor force (S), on five parameters. The first column shows
     results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table 4, column 1). In columns (2) and (3) we decrease the productivity of employment immigrants by 10% and 20%. In column (4) we
     increase the return rate of illegal immigrants by 25%. In column (5) we increase the return rate of legal immigrants by 25%. In columns (6) and (7) we increase the mean of the log
     normal values of the distribution of immigration cost to 0.5 and 1. In columns (8)-(10) we change σ, the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution between the skilled and
     unskilled labor inputs.
                                                     Table 14: Skill-Biased Technological Change, robustness checks

                                      (1)              (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)              (6)          (7)          (8)           (9)        (10)

                                   bench.       −10% in pE          −20% in pE          +25% in dI         +25% in dL          µ = 0.5       µ=1        σ = −0.5        σ=0         σ=1

      Immigrants
      LF s                           3.53            3.64                3.77                3.53               3.62             4.01        4.69          4.57          3.86        3.60
      LF u                           5.46            5.70                5.96                5.46               7.47             6.42        7.85          7.24          5.96        5.83
      LE                             6.11            6.25                6.41                6.12               5.86             6.72        7.56          7.87          6.73        6.07
      LT                             6.11            6.25                6.41                6.12               5.86             6.72        7.56          7.87          6.73        6.07
      I                             -10.30          -10.73              -11.18              -10.30             -14.15           -12.65      -16.16        -13.08        -10.88      -11.61

      Total family                   3.93            4.07                4.23               3.93                 4.45            4.51        5.33           5.13          4.30       4.07
      Total employment               6.11            6.25                6.41               6.12                 5.86            6.72        7.56           7.87          6.73       6.07
      Total legal                    4.39            4.52                4.67               4.39                 4.75            4.97        5.80           5.70          4.81       4.49




57
      Total                         -0.53            -0.61               -0.69              -0.53               -1.58            -0.93       -1.55         -0.58         -0.44      -0.90
      Skilled/Unskilled             11.33            11.78               12.29              11.33               14.10            13.78       17.58         14.66         12.14      12.46

      Unempl. Rates
      ũsN                          -7.30            -7.29               -7.27               -7.31              -7.23            -7.26       -7.19         -9.16         -8.05      -6.96
      ũuN                          8.28             8.33                8.39                8.30               8.51             8.40        8.59          9.70           8.61       8.92

      Wages
      wsN                           5.06             5.04                5.02                5.06               5.00             5.02        4.95          6.55           5.65       4.79
      wuN                           -7.05            -7.03               -7.01               -7.05              -6.89            -6.93       -6.75         -7.97         -7.28      -7.46

      Elasticities
      Skilled                        0.82             0.85                0.89               0.82                0.83            0.93         1.08          0.82         0.81        0.88
      Unskilled                      0.88             0.93                0.97               0.88                1.25            0.80         0.95          0.99         0.90        0.95
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a skill-biased technological change captured by a 5% increase in α, on five parameters. The first column shows results in
     the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table 4, column 2). In columns (2) and (3) we decrease the productivity of employment immigrants by 10% and 20%. In column (4) we increase the
     return rate of illegal immigrants by 25%. In column (5) we increase the return rate of legal immigrants by 25%. In columns (6) and (7) we increase the mean of the log normal values
     of the distribution of immigration cost to 0.5 and 1. In columns (8)-(10) we change σ, the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution between the skilled and unskilled labor
     inputs.
References
[1] Acemoglu Daron, 2001. “Good Jobs Vs Bad Jobs,” Journal of Labor Economics, The
  University of Chicago Press, vol. 19(1), pages 1-21.

[2] Barro Robert and Jong-wha Lee, 2015. “Data Set on Long-term Educational Attain-
  ment by Country” available at http://barrolee.com/data/oupdownloadb.htm.

[3] Basso Gaetano, Giovanni Peri and Ahmed Rahman, 2017. “Computerization and Im-
  migration: Theory and Evidence from the United States,” NBER Working Papers
  23935, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

[4] Battisti Michele, Gabriel Felbermayr, Giovanni Peri and Panu Poutvaara, (forthcom-
  ing) “Immigration, Search, and Redistribution: A Quantitative Assessment of Native
  Welfare,” (forthcoming) Journal of the European Economic Association.

[5] Borjas, George J. (2016) “The Labor Supply of Undocumented Immigrants,” NBER
  Working Papers 22102, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

[6] Bound, J., G. Khanna and N. Morales, 2017. Understanding the Economic Impact of
  the X-1B Program on the US,“ in High-Skilled Migration to the United States and its
  Economic Consequences, G.X. Hanson, W.R. Kerr and S. Turner (Eds.). University of
  Chicago Press, forthcoming.

[7] Calvo-Armengol Antoni and Yves Zenou, 2005. “Job matching, social networking and
  word-of-mouth communication,” Journal of Urban Economics, 57, 500–522.

[8] Chassamboulli Andri and Theodore Palivos, (2014) “A Search-Equilibrium Approach
  To The Effects Of Immigration On Labor Market Outcomes,” International Economic
  Review, vol. 55, 111-129, 02.

[9] Chassambouli Andri and Giovanni Peri, (2015). “The Labor Market Effects of Re-
  ducing the Number of I Immigrants,” Review of Economic Dynamics, Elsevier for the
  Society for Economic Dynamics, vol. 18(4), pages 792-821, October.

[10] Clemens Michael, Ethan Lewis, Hannah Postel, 2017. “Immigration Restrictions as
  Active Labor Market Policy: Evidence from the Mexican Bracero Exclusion - Working
  Paper 451,” Working Papers 451, Center for Global Development.


                                           58
[11] Clemens Michael A. Claudio E. Montenegro and Lant Pritchett, (2019). ”The Place
  Premium: Bounding the Price Equivalent of Migration Barriers,” The Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 101(2), pages 201-213, May.

[12] Fernández-Huertas Moraga, Jesús , 2011. “New Evidence on Emigrant Selection,”
  The Review of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 93(1), pages 72-96, February.

[13] Francois Fontaine, 2008. “Why are similar workers paid differently? The role of social
  networks.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 32 3960–3977.

[14] Galenianos M. 2013. “Learning about match quality and the use of referrals.” Review
  of Economic Dynamics, Volume 16, Issue 4, pp. 668-690.

[15] Galenianos M. 2014. “Hiring through Referrals.” Journal of Economic Theory, vol.
  152, 304-323

[16] Goldin Claudia and Larry Katz (2008) ”The Race between education and Technol-
  ogy”, Harvard University press, Boston Mass, 2008.

[17] Grogger, Jeffrey and Hanson, Gordon X., 2011. Income maximization and the selec-
  tion and sorting of international migrants,“ Journal of Development Economics, 95(1):
  42- 57.

[18] Hanson Gordon & Chen Liu & Craig McIntosh, 2017.” The Rise and Fall of U.S.
  Low-Skilled Immigration,“ NBER Working Papers 23753, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

[19] Horvath, G. 2014. “Occupational mismatch and social networks,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Behavior and Organization, 106(C), 442–468.

[20] Hunt, Jennifer 2011. “Which Immigrants Are Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial?
  Distinctions by Entry Visa,” Journal of Labor Economics, University of Chicago Press,
  vol. 29(3), pages 417-457.

[21] Jaimovich, N. and X.E. Siu. (2017). “High-Skilled Immigration, STEM LE ,and Non-
  Routine-Biased Technical Change,” in High-Skilled Migration to the United States and
  its Economic Consequences, G.X. Hanson, W.R. Kerr and S. Turner (Eds.).University
  of Chicago Press, forthcoming.


                                            59
[22] Kaestner Robert and Ofer Malamud (2014) “Self-selection and International migra-
  tion New Evidence from Mexico” Review of Economics and Statistics Volume 96, Issue
  1, March 2014 p.78-91.

[23] Kerr William R. and William F. Lincoln, 2010. “The Supply Side of Innovation: X-
  1B Visa Reforms and U.S. Ethnic Invention,” Journal of Labor Economics, University
  of Chicago Press, vol. 28(3), pages 473-508, July.

[24] Lewis, Ethan & Peri, Giovanni, (2015). “Immigration and the Economy of Cities and
  Regions,” Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Elsevier.

[25] Lofstrom, Magnus and Hayes, Joseph, 2011. “X-1Bs: How Do They Stack Up to US
  Born Workers?,” IZA Discussion Papers 6259, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

[26] Masferrer C. and B. Roberts, (2009). “Going Back Home? The Ambiguities of Con-
  temporary Mexican Return Migration,” Conference at UT Austin, 2009.

[27] Mayda Anna Maria, Francesc Ortega, Giovanni Peri, Kevin Shih and Chad Sparber,
  2017. “The Effect of the X-1B Quota on Employment and Selection of Foreign-Born
  Labor,” NBER Working Papers 23902, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

[28] Munshi, Kaivan 2003. “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the
  U. S. Labor Market,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Oxford University Press,
  vol. 118(2), pages 549-599.

  (2017)

[29] Ottaviano, G. I., and Peri, G. (2012). Rethinking the Effect of Immigration on Wages.
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(1), 152-197.

[30] Ortega Francesc and Giovanni Peri, 2015. “Migration Policies: Recent Advances on
  Measurement, Determinants and Outcomes,” CESifo Economic Studies, CESifo, vol.
  61(3-4), pages 521-526.

[31] Peri, Giovanni 2016. “Immigrants, Productivity, and Labor Markets,” Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, American Economic Association, vol. 30(4), pages 3-30, Fall.

[32] Pope, Nolan 2016 “The Effects of DACAmentation: The Impact of Deferred Action
  for Childhood Arrivals on Unauthorized Immigrants,” Journal of Public Economics 143:
  98-114, 2016


                                           60
A      Online Appendix: Model Details
A.1     Bellman Equations
The Bellman equations describing the values of job vacancies for unskilled and skilled
workers in country 1 are as follows:

            rVu = −cu + q(θu ) [φu (ηI JI + (1 − ηI )JuF ) + (1 − φu )JuN − Vu ]            (24)
            rVs = −cs + q(θs ) [φs (ηE JE + (1 − ηE )JsF ) + (1 − φs )JsN − Vs ]            (25)

where φi is the proportion of unemployed workers of skill type i that are immigrants,
ηI is the proportion of unemployed unskilled immigrants that are illegal and ηE is the
proportion of unemployed skilled immigrants that have (permanent) employment visas.
    The value of a job in country 1 depends on the origin and immigrant status of the
worker filling the job and is expressed by the following equations:

               rJT   =   pE − wT + xE [JE − JT ] + (dT + τ ) [Vs − JT ]                     (26)
              rJiN   =   pi − wiN + (si + τ ) [Vi − JiN ] i = [s, u]                        (27)
               rJI   =   pu − wI + (su + dI + τ ) [Vu − JI ]                                (28)
              rJuF   =   pu − wuF + (su + dL + τ ) [Vu − JuF ]                              (29)
              rJsF   =   ps + δxT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )JT − wsF + (ss + dL + τ ) [Vs − JsF ]         (30)
               rJE   =   pE + δxT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )JT − wE + (ss + dL + τ ) [Vs − JE ]           (31)

When a job is filled by a native worker its value (JiN ) takes the standard form: it is equal
to the flow surplus that the job generates (productivity minus the wage) plus the expected
capital loss in case the job is destroyed (match breaks up), which occurs at rate si + τ .
Because immigrants may also return home, the effective rate of destruction of jobs filled
by immigrants is larger; it is given by ss + dL + τ if the immigrant is legal and su + dI + τ if
illegal. If the immigrant is on a temporary work permit, then the rate of job destruction
is dT + τ . Notice that matches with immigrants on temporary work permits break up only
due to labor force exits or returns. There are no separations to unemployment in this
case, since stay in country 1 on a temporary work permit is conditional on having a job.
As can be see in (26) immigrants on temporary employment visas (work permits) may
transfer to a permanent status with probability xE and thereby generate a flow surplus
equal to JE − JT .
    The use of referrals to hire skilled workers from country 2 can generate an expected flow
of surplus equal to xT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )JT : the probability that an employment visa is approved
(given that the employer is willing to sponsor a skilled worker’s migration), xT , times the
probability that a match with a foreign skilled worker is created, ũ2s Φ(z̃T ), times the firm’s
value of such a match, JT . A match with a foreign worker will be created if the contacted
worker is unemployed, the probability of which is ũ2s and willing to immigrate (i.e. his
immigration cost is sufficiently low) the probability of which is Φ(z̃T ). In general, the
use of referrals can increase the value of a job filled by a skilled immigrant by a fraction
δ ∈ [0, 1] of this expected surplus. If δ = 1 the employer fully internalizes that flow
surplus, while in the other extreme, where δ = 0 the employer does not internalize it and


                                               61
the flow value of a match with a skilled immigrant worker is only his/her productivity (ps
or pE ).30 In our benchmark model, analyzed in the main text, we set δ = 0 so that the
use of referrals to hire skilled foreigners does not generate any rents to the firm and does
not affect job creation incentives. In Appendix B, in Table 25, we show results for δ > 0.
   The value of being unemployed is described in the following equations, relative to each
worker type:

                (r + τ )UiN    =    bi + m(θs ) [EiN − UiN ]                                         (32)
                                    bi − πiL + m(θs ) [EiF − UiF ] + dL Ui2 − UiF
                                                                                 
                (r + τ )UiF    =                                                                     (33)
                                    bu − πI + m(θu ) [EI − UI ] + dI Uu2 − UI
                                                                             
                  (r + τ )UI   =                                                                     (34)
                                    bs − πsL + m(θs ) [EE − UE ] + dL Us2 − UE
                                                                               
                 (r + τ )UE    =                                                                     (35)

There is no value of being unemployed in country 1 for an immigrant on temporary work
permit, since, as already mentioned, stay in country 1, in this case, is conditional on
having a job. All immigrants on temporary work permits are employed, otherwise they
must return home.
   Finally the value of being employed in steady state is given by the following five
conditions relative to each country and worker type:

                     (r + τ )EiN    =   wiN + si [UiN − EiN ]                                        (36)
                                        wiF + si [UiF − EiF ] + dL Ui2 − EiF
                                                                             
                     (r + τ )EiF    =                                                                (37)
                                        wI + su [UI − EI ] + dI Uu2 − EI
                                                                        
                       (r + τ )EI   =                                                                (38)
                                        wE + ss [UE − EE ] + dL Us2 − EE
                                                                          
                      (r + τ )EE    =                                                                (39)
                                        wT + xE [EE − ET ] + dT Us2 − ET
                                                                           
                      (r + τ )ET    =                                                                (40)

A.2      Steady-State Conditions
By equating the outflow of immigrants of each type, which includes returns to the home
country and labor force exits, to the inflow of new immigrants into each group we obtain
the steady-state conditions for the number of immigrants that hold permanent family
or employment visas, LiF and LE , respectively, the number of immigrants on temporary
work permits, LT and the number of illegal immigrants, I:
                                                 LP 2
                               (dL + τ )LiF = xF     u Φ(z̃iF )                                      (41)
                                                 X i
                              (dL + τ )LE = xE LT                                                    (42)
                                                             
                                                    Ls − usL
                         (dT + xE + τ )LT = xT                  u2s Φ(z̃T )                          (43)
                                                    Xs − L s
                                (dI + τ )I = xI u2u Φ(z̃I )                                          (44)

where Ls − usL = esL and usL = usF + uE gives the total number of skilled immigrants on
permanent visas that are unemployed. It includes both those holding employment visas
  30
    Galenianos (2014) adopts an alternative assumption; that new jobs created through the use of referrals
are immediately sold off to keep a firm’s employment at one. The firm receives a share δ ∈ [0, 1] of the
surplus of the job from selling it and the remaining goes to the buyer.


                                                   62
(uE ) and those holding family visas (usF ). Notice that besides repatriations and labor
force exits, outflows from the group of temporary employment immigrants (LT ) include
also transitions to permanent residency (at rate xE ). Notice also that flows into the pool
of illegal, family, and temporary (employment) immigrants all come directly from country
2, whereas, flows into the pool of permanent employment immigrants come only from
those on temporary work permits.
    The conditions for steady-state unemployment of natives (usN and uuN ), immigrants
on family visas (usF and uuF ), immigrants on employment visas (uE ) and illegal immi-
grants (uI ) are as follows

                                 τ S + ss (S − usN )     = (m(θs ) + τ )usN              (45)
                     τ (1 − S) + su (1 − S − uuN )       = (m(θu ) + τ )uuN              (46)
                                       LP
                 si (LiF − uiF ) + xF      Φ(z̃iF )u2i   = (m(θi ) + dL + τ ) uiF        (47)
                                        X
                                       ss (LE − uE )     = (m(θs ) + dL + τ ) uE         (48)
                          su (I − uI ) + xI Φ(z̃I )u2u   = (m(θu ) + dI + τ ) uI         (49)

Equations (45) and (46) show that flows into the pools of unemployed skilled and un-
skilled natives of country 1 include new labor force entrants and those who separate from
their jobs (at the exogenous rate ss and su , respectively), while flows out of these pools
consist of those who find jobs (at the job finding rate m(θs ) and m(θu ), respectively)
and those who exit the labor force. The rates at which workers find skilled and unskilled
jobs depend on the labor market tightness that prevails in the skilled and unskilled labor
market (θs and θu , respectively). Since new family-based and illegal immigrants arrive in
country 1 without a job, flows into these two pools (left-hand-sides of 47 and 49) come
partly from the inflow of new immigrants (xF LXP Φ(z̃iF )u2i and xI Φ(z̃I )u2u , respectively)
and partly from the job separations of incumbent immigrants. Flows out of these pools
(right-hand-sides of 47 and 49) can be either due to job finding, exogenous returns to
country 2 and labor-force exits. Similarly, flows of employment immigrants out of un-
employment (right-hand-side of 48) come from job finding, returns and labor-force exits.
However, inflows of (permanent) employment-based immigrants into unemployment (left-
hand-side of 48) come only from job separations and do not include new immigrants, since
new employment-based immigrants, i.e. those who switch from temporary to permanent
employment visas, already have jobs.

A.3     Wages
Using the Bellman equations (24) to (40), the free-entry conditions (4) the Nash bargain-
ing conditions (5) to (8) and the immigration conditions in (9) to (11), we can solve for




                                                 63
the equilibrium wage rates. Their expressions are as follows:

           wiN    =   βpi + (1 − β) [bi + βm(θi )SiN ] , i = [s, u]                      (50)
           wuF    =   βpu + (1 − β) [bu − πuL + βm(θu )SuF ]                             (51)
            wI    =   βpu + (1 − β) [bu − πI + βm(θu )SI ]                               (52)
                      β ps + δxT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )JT + (1 − β) [bs − πsL + βm(θs )SsF ]
                                              
           wsF    =                                                                      (53)
                      β pE + δxT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )JT + (1 − β) [bs − πsL + βm(θs )SE ]
                                               
            wE    =                                                                      (54)
                      βpE + (1 − β) (r + τ )Us2 − xE (UE − Us2 )
                                                                 
            wT    =                                                                      (55)

A worker’s wage is a weighted average of the flow value that he generates to the firm
and the outside option available to him. The weight put on the flow value by the Nash-
bargaining formula is the parameter expressing the workers’ bargaining power (β). The
outside options depend on not only the workers’ skill type but also on their nativity and
immigration status and they are equal to the unemployment flow income (net of search
cost) plus the expected gain from search. Notice that the outside option of those working
in country 1 on temporary employment visas is not the value of searching for a job in
country 1, but instead, the value of searching for a job in country 2 ((r + τ )Us2 ), since as
explained above, these workers’ stay (or entry) in country 1 is conditional on them having
a job in country 1. Finally, notice that workers on temporary visas are willing to accept
a wage cut in exchange of the possibility of switching from a temporary to a permanent
employment visa. This is captured by the last term in (55): the wage of temporary visa
holders (wT ) is smaller the higher the probability that they will transition from temporary
to permanent residency, xE , and the larger the expected gain from this transition. The
expected gain from this transition is the difference between the value of searching for a
job in country 1 as a permanent employment-based immigrant and the value of searching
for a job in country 2 as a native.

A.4     Value of a Filled Vacancy
Setting Vi = 0 in (26) to (31) we get:
                                          pi − wiN
                            JiN = =                 , t = [s, u]                         (56)
                                         r + si + τ
                                          pu − wuF
                            JuF =                                                        (57)
                                      r + su + dL + τ
                                      ps − wsF + δxT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )JT
                            JsF =                                                        (58)
                                             r + ss + dL + τ
                                      pE − wE + δxT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )JT
                             JE =                                                        (59)
                                             r + ss + dL + τ
                                           pu − w I
                             JI =                                                        (60)
                                      r + su + dI + τ
                                      pE − wT + xE JE
                             JT =                                                        (61)
                                      r + dT + τ + xE




                                              64
Apparently the values of jobs to the firms increase with the worker’s productivity and
decease with the worker’s break up probability and wage, while the use of referrals to hire
workers on temporary visas may also increase the value of jobs filled by skilled immigrants
given δ ≥ 0. Notice also that the value to the firm from employing a temporary worker
JT increases with JE , since with probability xE the worker may become a permanent
immigrant.
   Substituting the equilibrium wages (given in equations 50 to 55) into the equations
above and using the Nash bargaining conditions in (5) to (8) we can write:

                                      (1 − β)(pi − bi )
          JiN = (1 − β)SiN =                             , i = [s, u]                                  (62)
                                    r + si + τ + βm(θi )
                                      (1 − β)(pu − bu + πuL )
          JuF =       (1 − β)SuF =                                                                     (63)
                                    r + su + dL + τ + βm(θu )
                                    (1 − β)(ps − bs + πsL + δxT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )ST )
          JsF =       (1 − β)SsF =                                                                     (64)
                                           r + ss + dL + τ + βm(θs )
                                   (1 − β)(pE − bs + πsL + δxT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )ST )
           JE =       (1 − β)SE =                                                                      (65)
                                           r + ss + dL + τ + βm(θs )
                                     (1 − β)(pu − bu + πI )
            JI =      (1 − β)SI =                                                                      (66)
                                  r + su + dI + τ + βm(θu )
                                   (1 − β)(pE + xE SE − (r + τ )Us2 + xE (UE − Us2 ))
           JT =       (1 − β)ST =                                                                      (67)
                                                    r + dT + τ + x E
where

                                         bs − πsL + βm(θs )SE − (r + τ )Us2
                          UE − Us2 =                                                                   (68)
                                                    r + τ + dL
The marginal products ps , pu and pE = λps , can be expressed using (2) and (3) and the
steady-state conditions in (12)-(21) and (43) in terms of market tightness and the thresh-
olds immigration costs. The above equations therefore give the values of the surpluses
SiN , SiF , SE and ST , i = [s, u], in terms of the endogenous variables: θu , θs , z̃I , z̃sF , z̃uF , z̃T .

A.5      Differences in Job Surplus
Manipulating the Bellman equations for jobs filled by employment- and skilled-family-
based immigrants (equations 64 and 65) we get:

                                                  (1 − β)(pE − ps )
                               JE − JsF =                                                              (69)
                                              r + ss + τ + dL + βm(θs )




                                                     65
Clearly, if pE > ps , then JE > JsF . Using (62)-(64) and (66) we can write:

                                            πsL + δxT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )ST − dL SsN
                                                                             
                 JsF − JsN = (1 − β)                                                  (70)
                                               r + ss + τ + dL + βm(θs )
                                                                        
                                                   πuL − dL SuN
                 JuF − JuN = (1 − β)                                                  (71)
                                            r + su + τ + dL + βm(θu )
                                                                         
                                            (πI − πuL ) − (dI − dL )SuF
                   JI − JuF = (1 − β)                                                 (72)
                                             r + su + τ + dI + βm(θu )

Expression (70) reveals skilled family immigrants can generate larger surplus to firms than
skilled natives for two reasons. First, because they face higher search costs, which forces
to accept lower wages, and second, because firms can use referrals from them to hire highly
skilled foreigners from abroad. As mentioned above, in our benchmark model we choose
the most conservative case for the firms’ surplus from employing skilled immigrants and
set δ = 0. That is, we assume that the firm does not internalize the surplus generated
from the use of referrals (we consider the case where δ > 0 in Appendix B.4, Table
25). Therefore, in our benchmark case if family immigrants have higher search cost than
natives, that is, if πiL > 0, then JiF − JiN > 0 as long as dL is small. Similarly, if the
search cost of illegal immigrants is higher than that of unskilled family immigrants, that
is, if πI > πuL , then JI − JuF > 0 as long as dI − dL is small.

A.6     The Threshold Immigration Costs
Applying the Nash bargaining conditions in (5) to (8) to equations (33), (34) and (40)
and using the threshold conditions in (9)-(11) we get:

                           bu − πI + βm(θu )SI − (r + τ )Uu2
                   z̃I =                                                              (73)
                                      r + τ + dI
                           bi − πuL + βm(θi )SiF − (r + τ )Ui2
                  z̃iF   =                                     , i = [s, u]           (74)
                                       r + τ + dL
                           β (pE − (r + τ )Us2 ) + xE (UE − Us2 + SE )
                  z̃T    =                                                            (75)
                                        r + τ + dT + xE

where UE − Us2 is given by expression (68). Inspecting the above equations shows that
all threshold immigration costs increase when the relevant job finding rate is higher, the
corresponding job surplus larger, and the return probability smaller. In other words, a
worker incentive to migrate through any of the three channels is larger the faster she
expects to find a job, the larger the wage she expects to earn and the longer she expects
to stay at destination. This can be seen more clearly when we use (51)-(55) to express




                                              66
the thresholds in terms of wages:
                                      wI −βpu
                                       1−β
                                                − (r + τ )Uu2
                             z̃I =                                                           (76)
                                           r + τ + dL
                                      wiF −βpi
                                        1−β
                                               − (r + τ )Ui2
                          z̃iF =                       , i = [s, u]                          (77)
                                        r + τ + dL
                                     CwT + (1 − C)WP − (r + τ )Us2
                             z̃T   =                                                         (78)
                                              r + τ + dL
where
                                                    wE − β(pi + δxT ũ2s Φ(z̃T )ST ))
                                                                                      
               WP ≡          DwE + (1 − D)
                                                               1−β
                       r + τ + dL
                 C ≡
                    r + τ + dL + xE
                      r + τ + dL
                D ≡
                    r + τ + dL + ss
The first terms in (76) and (77) represent the values of searching for jobs in country 1 for
an illegal immigrant and a family immigrant, respectively. These values are higher the
higher the corresponding wage (wI and wiF ). In the case of a temporary work permit,
where entry is with a job, the first term (in 78), represents the value of being employed
on a temporary work permit given that there is a possibility of transition to permanent
residency. It is the weighted average of the wage he can earn as temporary immigrant
(wT ) and the value of switching to permanent residency (WP ). The latter is the weighted
average of the wage he can earn as a permanent employment immigrant (wE ) and the
value of searching for a new job in country 1, in the event of separation with he current
employer. Because of the possibility of transferring to a permanent visa, the benefit of
entry on a temporary work permit increases with both wT and wE .

A.7     Solving the Model
By substituting the equations (62) to (68) into the two job creation conditions (22)-(23)
and the four threshold conditions in (73)-(75) we get six equations in six unknowns which
can be used to solve for the two market tightnesses, θu and θs , and the four thresholds,
z̃I , z̃sF , z̃uF , z̃T , in terms of model parameters. The equilibrium values of tightnesses and
thresholds can then be substituted in (2) and (3) to determine the equilibrium produc-
tivities, and then in (50)-(55) to determine wages, and in the steady-state conditions in
(12)-(21) to determine immigrant stocks and unemployment rates.




                                                     67
B     Online Appendix: Additional Robustness Checks
      and Extensions
B.1     Effects on Natives’ Net Income
In Table 15, we summarize net income changes generated by the policy and structural
changes we considered in the text. The net income of natives, Ỹ , is given by the following
expression:

 Ỹ = Y + bs usN + bu uuN − cs vs − cu vu − wsF esF − wuF euF − wE eE − wI eI − wT LT (79)

where eiF = LiF − uiF , i = [s, u], eE = LE − uE , and eI = I − uI . The expression above
assumes that employers are natives and it shows that net income to natives includes total
wage income to natives plus unemployment income to natives minus the cost of vacancy
posting and the wages paid to immigrants. An alternative definition can be obtained by
omitting the natives’ unemployment income (if one thinks that such income is generated
by transfers rather than by additional home production).

                                 Ỹ1 = Ỹ − bs usN − bu uuN                            (80)

B.2     Exogenous Changes in the Number of Immigrants
In Table 16, we examine how results change when network and incentive effects are elim-
inated so that policies can completely control all types of immigration, i.e. when immi-
gration is exogenous. We implement the percentage changes in the relevant immigrant
group generated by the 10% decreases in approval rates (xF , xT , xE and xI - see Table
2) we considered in the text, but we keep the numbers of all other types of immigrants
constant. E.g, we decrease the number of family immigrants by the same percentage as
in our baseline model when the approval rate of family visas decreases by 10%, but we
keep all other types of immigrants constant. We do this for all four cases and compare
the resulting effects to those obtained in our model where immigration is an equilibrium
outcome.

B.3     Policy Combinations
We compare here the effects of purely restrictive policies, which reduce the total immi-
grant population, to those of policy combinations that restrict one entry channel but relax
another so that total immigrant population remains constant. Table 17 summarizes the
effects of two purely restrictive policies and of five policy combinations. The first two
columns show the effects of a 10% decrease the number of illegal immigrants, achieved
trough border enforcement (decreasing xI ). The second column shows the effects of de-
creasing the approval rate of family visas (decreasing xF ) to achieve a 10% decrease the
number of family immigrants. The next five columns show the policy combinations. In
the first three policy combinations we lower xI to achieve a 10% decrease in illegal im-
migration, but increase the approval rate of temporary employment visas xT , permanent
employment visas xE and family visas xF , respectively, so that the total number of im-


                                            68
migrants remains constant. What these three policy combinations deliver effectively is a
replacement of illegal immigrants with legal immigrants (both family and employment,
since increasing the network implies more entries through both channels). In the fourth
and fifth combinations, we replace family immigrants with employment immigrants. That
is, we lower the visa approval rate for family entries so as to decrease the number of family
immigrants by 10% and increase the approval rate of temporary and permanent employ-
ment visas, respectively, so as to keep total immigration constant. The entries in the
Table represent the percentage effects of these policies on natives’ unemployment rates,
wages, and total net income.

B.4     Additional Robustness Checks
The structure of Tables 18-24 that follow mirrors that of Tables 5-12 in the text. Each
table is devoted to one policy or structural change. It shows results in the baseline case
in the first column while the rest of the columns are devoted to robustness checks on
seven parameters. In columns (2) and (3) we change the bargaining power parameter. In
particular we set β = 0.4 and β = 0.3. In columns (4) and (5) we set  = 0.6 and  = 0.4;
a higher and lower value for the matching function elasticity. In column (6) we lower the
targeted replacement ratio to 0.5 implying a lower value for the flow unemployment income
bi . In columns (7) and (8) we increase the value of searching for a job as an immigrant
in the US relative to the value of searching for a job at home and set UiF = 5Ui2 and
UiF = 6Ui2 , respectively. In columns (9) and (10) we decrease and increase, respectively,
the time it takes for a family visa to be approved to 12 and 16 months. And finally, in
columns (11) and (12) we double the separation rates (ss and su ) for skilled and unskilled
workers, respectively. The tables show is that our main results are not sensitive to these
changes.
     Next we analyze the case where firms internalize the surplus that the use of referrals
generates. In Table 25 we examine how the effects of the policies and structural changes
considered in the text change when the use of referrals to hire skilled workers from abroad
increases the employers’ surplus (i.e. δ > 0). While in the benchmark calibration we
set δ = 0 in the table we also show results for δ = 0.5. When employers internalize the
benefit from the use of referrals, employing skilled (employment or family) immigrants
becomes more valuable to them. As a result, the impact of policies that restrict entries of
skilled immigrants, either directly, or through network effects, such as decreasing family-
or employment-based admissions, becomes more negative on skilled job creation. On the
other hand, the negative impact of policies restricting/discouraging illegal entries on job
creation in the skilled sector, becomes smaller (and may turn positive), since such policies
increase entries of skilled immigrants (mainly through network effects).
     Finally, in Table 26 we show results when the wage ratio of employment to family
immigrants is set to 2.47. As mentioned in Section 4 this is the ratio obtained from
NIS when we consider as employment immigrants those belonging to the group “others”.
By increasing the wage ratio of employment to family immigrants to 2.47 we essentially
make employment immigrants much more productive and therefore much more valuable
to employers. Thus, the effects of increasing the wage ratio of employment to family
immigrants are similar to those of increasing δ (in Table 25). The job creation effect
of policies restricting illegal entries on skilled natives turns positive, since such policies

                                             69
induce more employment-based entries of skilled immigrants, but remains, however small,
while the negative job creation effect of policies restricting legal entries on skilled natives
becomes larger, since such policies decrease the entry of employment immigrants. We see
here that the endogenous responses in legal entries to the policies imposing restrictions
on illegal entries, can overturn the negative job creation effect of such policies only if
employment immigrants are significantly more productive than natives. Moreover, in
line with our previous conclusion that reduced entry of employment immigrants (due to
network effects) magnifies the job depressive effect of policies imposing restrictions on
family entries, we see here that the effects of these policies are much more negative when
employment immigrants are significantly more productive.

                         Table 15: Effects on Natives’ Net Income

                                                                     Ỹ        Ỹ1
                      Direct Policies
                      10% decrease in xF                           -1.14     -1.46
                      10% decrease in xT                           -0.33     -0.43
                      10% decrease in xE                           -0.18     -0.24
                      10% decrease in xI                           -0.07     -0.13
                      10% increase in dI                           -0.06     -0.11

                      Indirect Policies
                      10% increase in πI                            0.07     0.13
                      10% increase in πsL and πuL                   0.01     0.02
                      decrease in flow value                       -0.09     -0.13

                      Structural Changes
                      5% increase in S                             1.64      2.01
                      5% increase in α                             1.94      2.40
                     The Table shows the percentage changes in natives’ net income gen-
                    erated by the policies and structural changes considered in the text.
                    The two measures of net income Ỹ and Y˜1 are as described in Sec-
                    tion B.1.




                                                    70
                    Table 16: Effects of Policies when Immigration is Exogenous

                                 10% ↓ in xF            10% ↓ in xT            10% ↓ in xE              10% ↓ in xI
                                bench exog             bench exog             bench exog               bench exog
 Unempl. Rates:
 ũsN                            -0.20      -0.64        0.10       -0.06        0.12        0.18        0.22        0.23
 ũuN                            2.24       1.40         0.45       0.10         0.27        0.16        0.33        0.40

 Wages:
 wsN                             0.63       0.30        0.13        0.04        0.07         0.05        -0.15       -0.15
 wuN                             -1.96      -0.89       -0.42       -0.11       -0.26       -0.17        0.40         0.37

 Net Income
 Ỹ                              -1.14      -0.34       -0.33       -0.23       -0.18       -0.05        -0.07       -0.12
 Ỹ1                             -1.46      -0.43       -0.43       -0.27       -0.24       -0.08        -0.13       -0.19
 Each of the four panels of the Table summarizes the effects of a restrictive immigration policy on natives’ unemployment
rates (first 2 rows), wages (next 2 rows) and net income (last 2 rows). The first panel shows the effects of decreasing family
immigrants (through a 10% decrease in xF ). The second panel the effects of decreasing employment immigrants on temporary
work permits (through a 10% decrease in xT ). The third panel the effects of decreasing employment immigrants on perma-
nent visas (through a 10% decrease in xE ), and the fourth panel the effects of decreasing illegal immigrants (through a 10%
decrease in xI ). In each of the four panels the first column (bench) shows the effects in our benchmark model, where the
number of immigrants of each type is an equilibrium outcome (see Table 2, columns 1-4). The second column (exog) shows
the effects of a decrease in the relevant immigrant group equal to that generated in the benchmark model, when immigration
is exogenous – that is, when the numbers of other types of immigrants remain the same.




                                                            71
                                                   Table 17: Purely Restrictive Policies Vs Policy Combinations

                                      Purely Restrictive                                                      Policy Combinations
                                      ↓ xI          ↓ xF                        ↓ xI ↑ xT          ↓ xI ↑ x E       ↓ xI ↑ xF    ↓ xF ↑ xT                         ↓ xI ↑ xE
                                   (10% ↓ in I) (10% ↓ in LF )                (10% ↓ in I)        (10% ↓ in I) (10% ↓ in I) (10% ↓ in LF )                       (10% ↓ in LF )
                                                                                                           (total immigration constant)
      Unempl. Rates:
      ũsN                              0.27                 -0.04                 0.23                 0.22                0.28                 -0.52                  -0.96
      ũuN                              0.41                 0.42                  0.26                 0.27                0.30                 -0.39                  -0.37

      Wages:
      wsN                               -0.19                0.12                  -0.23               -0.22                -0.21                -0.11                  -0.09
      wuN                               0.49                 -0.38                 0.62                 0.61                 0.58                 0.43                   0.41

      Net Inc.
      Ỹ                                -0.09                -0.23                 0.02                -0.01                -0.03                 0.56                  0.39




72
      Ỹ1                               -0.16                -0.29                 -0.02               -0.05                -0.08                 0.73                  0.57
      The first panel of the Table summarizes the percentage effects of two restrictive immigration policies, one that achieves a 10% decrease in the number of illegal immigrants (I)
     through increased border controls (decrease in xI ), and one that achieves a 10% decrease in the number of family immigrants (LF ) through a lower approval rate of petitions for
     family visas (decrease in xF ). The second panel summarizes the effects of five policy combinations that change immigrant composition but leave the total number of immigrants the
     same. In the first three we lower xI to achieve a 10% decrease in illegal immigration, but increase the approval rate of temporary employment visas xT , permanent employment
     visas xE and family visas xF , respectively. In the next two, we lower the visa approval rate for family entries so as to decrease the number of family immigrants by 10% and
     increase the approval rate of temporary and permanent employment visas, xT and xE , respectively.
                                                 Table 18: Decrease in Family-based admissions, additional robustness checks

                  (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)              (10)            (11)             (12)

                bench.       β = 0.4      β = 0.3       = 0.6       = 0.4      0.5 repl. r.      UF1 = 5U 2      UF1 = 6U 2       1/xF = 12        1/xF = 16         double ss       double su

      LF s      -47.95        -48.21       -48.28       -47.94       -47.97         -47.42           -48.04           -48.08           -48.17           -48.11           -47.96          -47.96
      LF u      -51.84        -52.20       -52.29       -51.80       -51.88         -51.09           -51.96           -52.02           -52.08           -51.83           -51.85          -51.84
      LE        -47.88        -48.12       -48.19       -47.87       -47.90         -47.35           -47.97           -48.01           -48.10           -48.05           -47.91          -47.88
      LT        -47.88        -48.12       -48.19       -47.87       -47.90         -47.35           -47.97           -48.01           -48.10           -48.05           -47.91          -47.88
      I          1.97          3.12         3.45         1.72         2.19           -0.21            2.35             2.54             2.66             1.47             1.96            1.94
      S/U       -41.32        -42.08       -42.29       -41.18       -41.45         -39.78           -41.58           -41.71           -41.82           -41.14           -41.33          -41.31

      ũsN       -0.20        -0.25         -0.25        -0.17       -0.19           -0.19            -0.21            -0.21            -0.22            -0.18            -0.09           -0.21
                 2.24         2.24           2.24        2.81         1.71           1.73             2.22             2.21             2.21             2.26             2.25            2.21




73
      ũuN

      wsN        0.63         0.64           0.64        0.60         0.66           0.66             0.64             0.64             0.65             0.62             0.64            0.63
      wuN        -1.96        -1.95         -1.87        -1.91       -2.01           -2.07            -1.98            -1.99            -1.99            -1.93            -1.97           -1.97
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 10% decrease in xF , on seven parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table 2, column
     1). In columns (2) and (3) we change the bargaining power parameter. In columns (4) and (5) we set a higher and lower value for the matching function elasticity. In column (6) we lower the
     targeted replacement ratio to 0.5. In columns (7) and (8) we increase the value of searching for a job as an immigrant in the US relative to the value of searching for a job at home. In columns
     (9) and (10) we decrease and increase, respectively, the time it takes for a family visa to be approved to 12 and 16 months. In columns (11) and (12) we double the separation rates (ss and su )
     for skilled and unskilled workers, respectively.
                                             Table 19: Decrease in Employment-based admissions, additional robustness checks

                  (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)              (10)            (11)             (12)

                bench.       β = 0.4      β = 0.3       = 0.6       = 0.4      0.5 repl. r.      UF1 = 5U 2      UF1 = 6U 2       1/xF = 12        1/xF = 16         double ss       double su

      LF s       -5.46         -5.51        -5.52        -5.46        -5.46          -5.37            -5.48            -5.48            -5.50            -5.49            -5.45           -5.46
      LF u       -6.96         -7.05        -7.07        -6.95        -6.96          -6.78            -6.99            -7.00            -7.01            -6.94            -6.95           -6.96
      LE        -16.87        -16.92       -16.93       -16.88       -16.87         -16.78           -16.89           -16.89           -16.91           -16.91           -16.85          -16.87
      LT        -16.87        -16.92       -16.93       -16.88       -16.87         -16.78           -16.89           -16.89           -16.91           -16.91           -16.85          -16.87
      I          0.16          0.37          0.43        0.12          0.20          -0.20            0.23             0.26             0.29             0.07             0.16            0.16
      S/U        -6.84         -7.01        -7.06        -6.82        -6.87          -6.53            -6.90            -6.93            -6.95            -6.80            -6.83           -6.84

      ũsN       0.10          0.10         0.10         0.14         0.07           0.05              0.10            0.10             0.10              0.10            0.12             0.10
      ũuN       0.45          0.46         0.47         0.56         0.34           0.34              0.45            0.44             0.44              0.45            0.45             0.44




74
      wsN        0.13         0.13           0.12        0.12         0.13           0.13             0.13             0.13             0.13             0.13             0.13            0.13
      wuN        -0.42        -0.42         -0.41        -0.42       -0.43           -0.45            -0.43            -0.43            -0.43            -0.42            -0.42           -0.43
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 10% decrease in xT , on seven parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table 2, column
     2). In columns (2) and (3) we change the bargaining power parameter. In columns (4) and (5) we set a higher and lower value for the matching function elasticity. In column (6) we lower the
     targeted replacement ratio to 0.5. In columns (7) and (8) we increase the value of searching for a job as an immigrant in the US relative to the value of searching for a job at home. In columns
     (9) and (10) we decrease and increase, respectively, the time it takes for a family visa to be approved to 12 and 16 months. In columns (11) and (12) we double the separation rates (ss and su )
     for skilled and unskilled workers, respectively.
                                                 Table 20: Fewer Permanent Employment Visas, additional robustness checks

                  (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)              (10)            (11)             (12)

                bench.       β = 0.4      β = 0.3       = 0.6       = 0.4      0.5 repl. r.      UF1 = 5U 2      UF1 = 6U 2       1/xF = 12        1/xF = 16         double ss       double su

      LF s       -3.74         -3.77        -3.79        -3.75        -3.73          -3.67            -3.75            -3.75            -3.74            -3.74            -3.73           -3.74
      LF u       -5.04         -5.10        -5.12        -5.06        -5.04          -4.92            -5.06            -5.06            -5.05            -5.01            -5.03           -5.04
      LE        -13.19        -13.23       -13.24       -13.20       -13.18         -13.10           -13.20           -13.20           -13.15           -13.17           -13.16          -13.19
      LT         -3.54         -3.58        -3.60        -3.55        -3.53          -3.45            -3.55            -3.55            -3.50            -3.52            -3.51           -3.54
      I          0.16          0.29          0.32        0.20          0.18          -0.05            0.20             0.22             0.24             0.11             0.16            0.16
      S/U        -4.28         -4.38        -4.42        -4.31        -4.29          -4.08            -4.31            -4.33            -4.32            -4.23            -4.26           -4.27

      ũsN       0.12          0.12         0.13         0.12         0.09           0.06              0.12            0.12             0.12              0.12            0.14             0.12
      ũuN       0.27          0.28         0.28         0.27         0.21           0.21              0.27            0.27             0.27              0.28            0.27             0.27




75
      wsN        0.07         0.07           0.07        0.08         0.08           0.08             0.08             0.08             0.08             0.07             0.08            0.07
      wuN        -0.26        -0.26         -0.25        -0.26       -0.26           -0.27            -0.26            -0.26            -0.26            -0.25            -0.26           -0.26
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 10% decrease in xE , on seven parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table 2, column
     3). In columns (2) and (3) we change the bargaining power parameter. In columns (4) and (5) we set a higher and lower value for the matching function elasticity. In column (6) we lower the
     targeted replacement ratio to 0.5. In columns (7) and (8) we increase the value of searching for a job as an immigrant in the US relative to the value of searching for a job at home. In columns
     (9) and (10) we decrease and increase, respectively, the time it takes for a family visa to be approved to 12 and 16 months. In columns (11) and (12) we double the separation rates (ss and su )
     for skilled and unskilled workers, respectively.
                                                                Table 21: Border Controls, additional robustness checks

                  (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)              (10)            (11)             (12)

                bench.       β = 0.4      β = 0.3       = 0.6       = 0.4      0.5 repl. r.      UF1 = 5U 2      UF1 = 6U 2       1/xF = 12        1/xF = 16         double ss       double su

      LF s       1.62         1.63           1.64        1.61         1.62           1.59             1.62             1.62             1.64             1.67             1.62            1.62
      LF u       4.17         4.19           4.21        4.17         4.18           4.13             4.18             4.18             4.20             4.22             4.18            4.18
      LE         1.54         1.56           1.57        1.52         1.56           1.54             1.55             1.55             1.56             1.59             1.54            1.54
      LT         1.54         1.56           1.57        1.52         1.56           1.54             1.55             1.55             1.56             1.59             1.54            1.54
      I          -8.10        -8.09         -8.10        -8.13       -8.07           -7.98            -8.11            -8.11            -8.12            -8.09            -8.10           -8.11
      S/U        7.03         7.03           7.03        7.05         7.02           6.94             7.04             7.05             7.04             7.03             7.03            7.04

      ũsN       0.22          0.20         0.19         0.28         0.16           0.13              0.22            0.22             0.22              0.22            0.22             0.23
      ũuN       0.33          0.15         0.00         0.42         0.25           0.21              0.33            0.33             0.33              0.33            0.33             0.36




76
      wsN        -0.15        -0.14         -0.13        -0.16       -0.15           -0.15            -0.15            -0.15            -0.15            -0.15            -0.15           -0.16
      wuN        0.40         0.35           0.31        0.40         0.39           0.40             0.40             0.40             0.40             0.40             0.40            0.41
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 10% decrease in xI , on seven parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table 2, column
     4). In columns (2) and (3) we change the bargaining power parameter. In columns (4) and (5) we set a higher and lower value for the matching function elasticity. In column (6) we lower the
     targeted replacement ratio to 0.5. In columns (7) and (8) we increase the value of searching for a job as an immigrant in the US relative to the value of searching for a job at home. In columns
     (9) and (10) we decrease and increase, respectively, the time it takes for a family visa to be approved to 12 and 16 months. In columns (11) and (12) we double the separation rates (ss and su )
     for skilled and unskilled workers, respectively.
                                             Table 22: Higher Search Costs for Illegal Immigrants, additional robustness checks

                  (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)              (10)            (11)             (12)

                bench.       β = 0.4      β = 0.3       = 0.6       = 0.4      0.5 repl. r.      UF1 = 5U 2      UF1 = 6U 2       1/xF = 12        1/xF = 16         double ss       double su

      LF s       1.20         0.48           0.30        1.18         1.22           3.00             0.96             0.84             0.82             1.61             1.20            1.17
      LF u       3.05         1.20           0.74        3.00         3.10           7.84             2.41             2.12             2.06             4.05             3.05            2.96
      LE         1.18         0.49           0.31        1.16         1.19           2.92             0.94             0.84             0.82             1.57             1.18            1.14
      LT         1.18         0.49           0.31        1.16         1.19           2.92             0.94             0.84             0.82             1.57             1.18            1.14
      I          -5.70        -2.18         -1.34        -5.57       -5.83          -14.81            -4.48            -3.92            -3.81            -7.58            -5.70           -5.52
      S/U        4.92         1.85           1.14        4.81         5.02          13.50             3.84             3.35             3.26             6.60             4.91            4.76

      ũsN       0.07         -0.01         -0.02        0.06         0.07           0.21             0.03             0.02             0.01             0.12             0.06            0.06
      ũuN       -0.76        -0.73         -0.57        -0.95       -0.58           -0.26            -0.82            -0.85            -0.85            -0.67            -0.76           -0.77




77
      wsN        -0.05         0.00         0.01         -0.04       -0.06           -0.25            -0.03            -0.02            -0.02            -0.09            -0.05           -0.05
      wuN        0.21          0.07         0.06         0.19         0.23           0.73             0.15             0.12             0.12             0.31             0.21            0.21
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 10% increase in πI , on seven parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table 3, column
     1). In columns (2) and (3) we change the bargaining power parameter. In columns (4) and (5) we set a higher and lower value for the matching function elasticity. In column (6) we lower the
     targeted replacement ratio to 0.5. In columns (7) and (8) we increase the value of searching for a job as an immigrant in the US relative to the value of searching for a job at home. In columns
     (9) and (10) we decrease and increase, respectively, the time it takes for a family visa to be approved to 12 and 16 months. In columns (11) and (12) we double the separation rates (ss and su )
     for skilled and unskilled workers, respectively.
                                             Table 23: Higher Search Costs for Legal Immigrants, additional robustness checks

                  (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)             (6)              (7)              (8)               (9)             (10)             (11)            (12)

                bench.       β = 0.4      β = 0.3        = 0.6       = 0.4      0.5 repl. r.      UF1 = 5U 2      UF1 = 6U 2       1/xF = 12         1/xF = 16        double ss        double su

      LF s       -0.41         -0.30        -0.24        -0.41        -0.41           -0.48            -0.38            -0.37            -0.33             -0.37            -0.41           -0.41
      LF u       -1.02         -0.75        -0.60        -1.02        -1.02           -1.21            -0.95            -0.91            -0.82             -0.90            -1.02           -1.02
      LE         -0.40         -0.30        -0.24        -0.40        -0.40           -0.48            -0.38            -0.36            -0.32             -0.36            -0.40           -0.40
      LT         -0.40         -0.30        -0.24        -0.40        -0.40           -0.48            -0.38            -0.36            -0.32             -0.36            -0.40           -0.40
      I          0.12          0.07          0.05        0.14          0.11           0.16             0.11             0.10             0.10              0.13             0.12            0.13
      S/U        -0.25         -0.17        -0.13        -0.26        -0.24           -0.31            -0.23            -0.22            -0.20             -0.24            -0.25           -0.25

      ũsN       -0.02         -0.01        -0.01        -0.03        -0.01           -0.01            -0.02            -0.02            -0.02             -0.02            -0.03           -0.02
      ũuN       -0.15         -0.11        -0.08        -0.18        -0.11           -0.10            -0.15            -0.15            -0.15             -0.15            -0.15           -0.15




78
      wsN        0.01          0.01          0.01        0.02          0.01           0.01             0.01             0.01             0.01              0.01             0.01            0.01
      wuN        -0.02         -0.01         0.00        -0.03        -0.02           -0.02            -0.02            -0.02            -0.02             -0.02            -0.02           -0.02
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a 10% increase in πsL and πuL , on seven parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see Table
     3, column 2). In columns (2) and (3) we change the bargaining power parameter. In columns (4) and (5) we set a higher and lower value for the matching function elasticity. In column (6) we
     lower the targeted replacement ratio to 0.5. In columns (7) and (8) we increase the value of searching for a job as an immigrant in the US relative to the value of searching for a job at home. In
     columns (9) and (10) we decrease and increase, respectively, the time it takes for a family visa to be approved to 12 and 16 months. In columns (11) and (12) we double the separation rates (ss
     and su ) for skilled and unskilled workers, respectively.
                                                Table 24: Stronger Anti-Immigration Attitudes, additional robustness checks

                  (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)              (10)            (11)             (12)

                bench.       β = 0.4      β = 0.3       = 0.6       = 0.4      0.5 repl. r.      UF1 = 5U 2      UF1 = 6U 2       1/xF = 12        1/xF = 16         double ss       double su

      LF s       -0.75        -1.19         -1.41        -0.76       -0.75           0.16             -0.83            -0.85            -0.82            -0.07            -0.75           -0.77
      LF u       -0.43        -1.42         -1.80        -0.42       -0.43           2.10             -0.69            -0.80            -0.71            0.74             -0.42           -0.47
      LE         -1.10        -1.59         -1.94        -1.11       -1.09           -0.23            -1.16            -1.17            -1.10            -0.38            -1.10           -1.12
      LT         -1.10        -1.59         -1.94        -1.11       -1.09           -0.23            -1.16            -1.17            -1.10            -0.38            -1.10           -1.12
      I          -3.83        -1.82         -1.33        -3.86       -3.80           -9.73            -3.03            -2.65            -2.54            -5.08            -3.82           -3.70
      S/U        2.22         0.44          -0.09        2.24         2.20           7.41             1.58             1.29             1.22             3.62             2.21            2.11

      ũsN       0.11          0.05         0.04         0.14         0.08           0.16              0.09            0.08             0.07              0.14            0.11             0.11
      ũuN       0.23          0.11         0.08         0.29         0.17           0.32              0.19            0.17             0.17              0.26            0.23             0.24




79
      wsN        -0.06        -0.02         0.00         -0.06       -0.05           -0.17            -0.04            -0.04            -0.03            -0.08            -0.06           -0.06
      wuN        0.13         0.02          -0.01        0.14         0.13           0.42             0.10             0.08             0.08             0.21             0.13            0.13
      The Table shows robustness checks for the simulated effects of a decrease in immigrants’ flow value, on seven parameters. The first column shows results in the baseline (benchmark) case (see
     Table 3, column 3). In columns (2) and (3) we change the bargaining power parameter. In columns (4) and (5) we set a higher and lower value for the matching function elasticity. In column
     (6) we lower the targeted replacement ratio to 0.5. In columns (7) and (8) we increase the value of searching for a job as an immigrant in the US relative to the value of searching for a job at
     home. In columns (9) and (10) we decrease and increase, respectively, the time it takes for a family visa to be approved to 12 and 16 months. In columns (11) and (12) we double the separation
     rates (ss and su ) for skilled and unskilled workers, respectively.
                               Table 25: Robustness Check: when the the use of referrals generates surplus

                                                  Direct Policies                                Indirect Policies                    Struct. Changes
                                     ↓ xF        ↓ xT   ↓ xE    ↓ xI              ↑ dI      ↑ πI   ↑ πsL ,πuL ↓ flow v.               ↑S       ↑α

      Immigrants:
      LsF                           -49.02      -5.91       -3.90     1.63      1.41       1.23          -0.79            -0.94       -0.77          4.04
      LuF                           -52.86      -7.39       -5.20     4.20      3.62       3.09          -1.35            -0.59       -0.99          5.94
      LE                            -49.53     -17.44      -13.42     1.60      1.37       1.23          -0.66            -1.33       -1.34          6.47
      LT                            -49.53     -17.44       -3.80     1.60      1.37       1.23          -0.66            -1.33       -1.34          6.47
      I                              1.73       0.14        0.14      -8.09     -6.98      -5.74         0.17             -3.87       2.37          -10.47

      Total family                  -49.82      -6.21       -4.17     2.17      1.87       1.62          -0.91            -0.87       -0.82         4.43




80
      Total employment              -49.53     -17.44      -10.39     1.60      1.37       1.23          -0.66            -1.33       -1.34         6.47
      Total legal                   -49.76      -8.57       -5.47     2.05      1.76       1.53          -0.85            -0.96       -0.93         4.86
      Total                         -32.53      -5.66       -3.59     -1.35     -1.16      -0.90         -0.51            -1.94       0.18          -0.27
      Skilled/Unskilled             -42.38      -7.21       -4.41     7.04      6.03       4.96          -0.55            2.08        -2.42         11.83

      Unempl. Rates:
      ũsN                           4.26        0.91       0.59       0.05      0.05      -0.04         -0.67            0.23        1.76           -6.47
      ũuN                           2.55        0.51       0.31       0.32      0.28      -0.76         -0.17            0.25        -3.42          8.31

      Wages:
      wsN                            0.53       0.11       0.07       -0.15     -0.13      -0.05          0.03            -0.06       -0.90          5.02
      wuN                            -2.24      -0.49      -0.29      0.41      0.37       0.22           0.00            0.12        2.84           -7.06
      The Table summarizes the simulated effects of the policies and structural changes considered in the main text (see Tables 2-4) when half of the flow surplus
     generated from the use of referrals goes to the employer (δ = 0.5). In our benchmark calibration we set δ = 0, meaning that the employer does not internalize
     the flow surplus that the use of referrals generates.
               Table 26: Robustness Check: wage ratio between employment and family immigrants is set to 2.47

                                                 Direct Policies                                Indirect Policies                    Struct. Changes
                                     ↓ xF       ↓ xT   ↓ xE    ↓ xI              ↑ dI      ↑ πI   ↑ πsL ,πuL ↓ flow v.               ↑S       ↑α

      Immigrants:
      LsF                          -50.03       -5.72      -3.91     1.67      1.44       1.29          -1.37           -1.09        -0.93         4.60
      LuF                          -53.73       -7.20      -5.20     4.24      3.66       3.21          -1.86           -0.66        -1.14         6.56
      LE                           -50.84      -17.32     -13.46     1.66      1.43       1.31          -1.15           -1.33        -1.49         6.85
      LT                           -50.84      -17.32      -3.85     1.66      1.43       1.31          -1.15           -1.33        -1.49         6.85
      I                             1.13        -0.01      0.06      -8.08     -6.99      -5.89         0.20            -3.98        2.42         -10.94

      Total family                 -50.81       -6.03      -4.18     2.21      1.91       1.69          -1.47           -1.00        -0.97         5.01




81
      Total employment             -50.84      -17.32     -10.43     1.66      1.43       1.31          -1.15           -1.33        -1.49         6.85
      Total legal                  -50.81       -8.40      -5.49     2.10      1.81       1.61          -1.40           -1.07        -1.08         5.40
      Total                        -33.43       -5.59      -3.64     -1.31     -1.14      -0.90         -0.87           -2.04        0.09          -0.07
      Skilled/Unskilled            -43.10       -6.97      -4.36     7.03      6.04       5.10          -1.00           2.07         -2.56         12.57

      Unempl. Rates:
      ũsN                           6.67       1.15       0.88      -0.03     -0.02      -0.10         -1.02            0.21        1.82          -6.09
      ũuN                           3.16       0.65       0.40      0.30      0.26       -0.77         -0.15            0.26        -3.39         8.38

      Wages:
      wsN                           0.58       0.14        0.08      -0.15     -0.13      -0.06         0.05            -0.05        -0.86         5.04
      wuN                           -2.78      -0.63       -0.38     0.43      0.38       0.24          -0.02           0.11         2.80          -7.09
     The Table summarizes the simulated effects of the policies and structural changes considered in the main text (see Tables 2-4) when the wage ration between
     employment and family immigrants is set to 2.47. In our benchmark calibration this wage ratio is set to 1.60.
