NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMMODITY CURRENCIES AND MONETARY POLICY
Michael B. Devereux
Gregor W. Smith
Working Paper 25076
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25076

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

Margaux MacDonald provided expert research assistance. We thank the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada for support of this research. For helpful comments we
thank Allan Gregory, Carolin Pflueger, Marcel Aloy and seminar participants at the Vancouver
School of Economics and Aix Marseille School of Economics. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Michael B. Devereux and Gregor W. Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Commodity Currencies and Monetary Policy
Michael B. Devereux and Gregor W. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 25076
September 2018
JEL No. E52,F31,F41
ABSTRACT
Countries that specialize in commodity exports often exhibit a correlation between the relevant
commodity price and the value of their currency. We explore a natural but little-studied
explanation for this correlation. An increase in the commodity price leads to increases in the
future values of the international differential in policy interest rates. The tightening of expected
future monetary policy relative to the US then leads to an immediate appreciation. We show
theoretically that this correlation depends on the stance of monetary policy. We then derive a
statistical model that embodies this mechanism and test the over-identifying restrictions for
Australia, Canada, and New Zealand. For all three countries, controlling for the effect of
commodity prices in predicting current and future monetary policy leaves them no significant,
remaining role in statistically explaining exchange rates.

Michael B. Devereux
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
mbdevereux@gmail.com
Gregor W. Smith
Department of Economics
Queen's University
Kingston, Ontario
Canada
smithgw@econ.queensu.ca

1. Introduction
Countries that specialize in commodity exports often exhibit a correlation between
the relevant commodity price and the value of their currency. We explore a natural but
little-studied explanation for this correlation. The mechanism is this: An increase in the
export commodity price leads participants in the foreign exchange market to expect a
tightening of domestic monetary policy relative to policy in the US. The exchange rate
reacts immediately to the change in expected future policy, inducing a correlation with the
commodity price.
Australia, Canada, and New Zealand often are cited as developed economies with
commodity currencies. For these countries there is an obvious correlation between an
export commodity price (or an index of them) and the value of the currency. Commentators
typically remark on this correlation at high frequency but it also is evident in the monthly
or quarterly data that macroeconomists usually study.
However, most models of the exchange rate treat it as determined in financial markets
given the enormous daily volume of transactions. The BIS triennial survey (2016) reports
daily average turnover for the currencies of these three countries (against the USD) for April
2016 in billions of US dollars (followed by the rank by these volumes among countries):
AUD: 262 (4); CAD: 218 (5); NZD: 78 (11). These daily volumes of foreign exchange
transactions dwarf daily trade flows, daily GDP, or daily transactions volumes in the
corresponding stock exchanges (the ASX, TSX, and NSX respectively). For example, the
average daily value of transactions on the TSX in 2016 was 4.7 billion USD. And quoting
Canada’s 2016 annual exports by dividing by the number of trading days on the TSX
(258) gives 1.84 billion USD per day. These differences in scale suggest that exchange-rate
movements cannot easily be explained by transactions in goods or equity markets.
We study commodity prices as predictors of future monetary policy. We measure relative monetary policy using the difference between the central bank’s policy interest rate and
the US federal funds rate. Forecasts of future monetary policy of course cannot be observed
directly, so the paper derives ways to measure their projections on commodity prices. We
then present a test of the hypothesis that those prices contribute to exchange-rate move1

ments only for this reason. We measure commodity prices first by the export commodity
price index and then separately by its largest component, which comprises prices of energy
for Canada, base metals for Australia, and dairy products for New Zealand. For all three
countries, controlling for the effect of commodity prices in predicting current and future
monetary policy leaves them no significant, remaining role in explaining exchange rates.
Section 2 next outlines a model of a small, open economy, illustrating how the response
of the nominal exchange rate to a commodity-price shock depends on the monetary-policy
rule. Section 3 describes the countries and series we study. Section 4 then highlights some
related empirical research. We explain the econometric restrictions and construct tests in
sections 5 and 6.
2. A Model of Exchange Rates and Commodity Prices
The empirical hypothesis is that the exchange-rate response to commodity price shocks
is linked primarily to the stance of monetary policy. In this section, we construct a model
consistent with this hypothesis. Our objective is not to establish a definitive explanation
of the characteristics of commodity currencies, but rather just to demonstrate that a
currency appreciation following spikes in commodity prices may be a natural implication
of inflation-targeting monetary policy, and would not occur under alternative policy rules.
The model is quite standard. Consider a small, open economy, with two goods, traded
and non-traded. Uribe and Schmitt-Grohé (2017, chapter 8) introduce this TNT model.
Traded goods come in two types, manufactures and commodities. In both cases, prices
are determined exogenously on world markets. Households consume both traded and nontraded goods. For simplicity, we assume that the two traded goods are perfect substitutes
in consumption. Household preferences are given by
∞
X

β t [U (CT,t ) + U (CN,t )],

(1)

t=0

where CT,t (CN,t ) represents consumption of the traded (non-traded) good. The household’s budget constraint is
PT,t CT,t +PN,t CN,t +

∗
St Bt+1
Bt+1
+
= PN,t YN,t +PT,t YT,t +PR,t YR +Bt∗ St +Bt , (2)
∗
(1 + it+1 ) 1 + it+1

2

where PT,t is the price of the traded good. We assume that PT,t = St (where St is the
nominal exchange rate, here defined as the price of foreign currency in term of domestic
currency), so that the law of one price holds for traded goods, and we assume the foreign
price of traded goods is normalized to unity. PN,t is the price of the non-traded good.
Bt∗ represents the foreign-currency-denominated, one-period, risk-free bond holdings while
Bt is the holding of domestic currency bonds. i∗t is the nominal interest rate on foreign
currency bonds, set exogenously in the foreign financial market, while it is the home
currency nominal interest rate on domestic currency bonds and is set by the domestic
central bank.
YN,t is the output of the non-traded good. YT,t is the exogenous output of traded
∗
∗
St , where XR,t
is the world-determined price of the resource
goods, while PR,t = XR,t

good, and YR is the exogenous output of the (tradable) resource good.
The domestic household’s optimal division of consumption between traded and nontraded goods satisfies the condition:
PT,t U 0 (CN,t ) = PN,t U 0 (CT,t ).

(3)

The optimal holding of foreign-currency bonds (using condition PT,t = St ) is represented
by the Euler equation:
U 0 (CT,t ) = βEt U 0 (CT,t+1 )(1 + i∗t+1 ),

(4)

while the optimal holding of home-currency bonds satisfies:
U 0 (CT,t )
(1 + it+1 )
= βEt U 0 (CT,t+1 )
.
St
St+1

(5)

We make two assumptions about monetary policy. In each case, monetary policy
follows an interest-rate rule. But in the first case, (Case A) the interest rate rule is
geared towards exchange-rate stability. This is represented by the following exchange-rate
targeting rule:
1 + it+1 = exp(νt )
3

1  St−1 −σs
,
β St

(6)

where σs determines the size of the interest-rate response to exchange-rate changes, and
νt is a mean-zero, white noise shock to the monetary rule. Note that this is not a fixed
exchange rate rule. Shocks to the foreign interest rate i∗t , or shocks νt will effect the
exchange rate. But as we see below, this rule does have the implication that the exchange
rate will not respond to news about future commodity prices.
The second monetary rule (Case B) is geared towards targeting inflation in domestic
goods prices:
1 + it+1 = exp(νt )

1  PN,t σπ
.
β PN,t−1

(7)

This is a natural monetary rule to follow in an environment where all price stickiness is in
the non-traded goods sector.
We assume that the non-traded goods price is sticky. It is set one period in advance,
and adjusts after a shock. Within a period, output of non-traded goods is determined
by demand (i.e. perfectly elastic supply), given the fixed price. After adjustment, nontraded goods output is in perfectly inelastic supply, fixed at an exogenous natural rate YN .
This assumption is not necessary. We could easily endogenize labour supply and have the
flexible-price level of non-traded output determined by equilibrium in the labour market,
without changing any of our results. As noted, the output of of both types of traded goods
is exogenous.
We now illustrate our main result: The exchange-rate response to a commodity price
shock is determined by the stance of monetary policy. We will show this in a particularly
transparent way. Take the following event. Start in equilibrium where YN is at its natural
∗
rate. Then, assume that at time 0, there is an announced permanent increase in XR
for

time 1. This will increase the present value of traded goods income. There is a fixed output
of traded goods and a constant foreign-currency interest rate. In addition, let β(1+i∗ ) = 1,
so that households wish to smooth their consumption of traded goods over time. We can
work out the impact on current traded goods consumption from time 0 onwards using the
Euler equation in traded-goods consumption:
U 0 (CT,t ) = βU 0 (CT,t+1 )(1 + i∗ ),
4

(8)

combined with the intertemporal budget constraint for traded goods:
∞ 
X
t=0

∞ 
X
1 t
1 t
∗
C
=
(YT,t + XR,t
YR ).
T,t
∗
∗
1+i
1
+
i
t=0

(9)

This implies that there is a permanent rise in CT , starting at t = 0. Denote the new
0

∗
value of traded goods consumption as CT . Since the rise in XR,1
increases the demand for

traded goods from time 0 onward, this will raise the demand for non-traded goods, using
∗
(3). Given the unexpected rise in XR,1
, the price of the non-traded good in period 0 is

fixed, and cannot respond until period 1. The response of output in the non-traded goods
sector will depend on the monetary rule.
Note that, from period 1 onwards, non-traded output is fixed at YN due to the condition:
U 0 (YN ) =

PN,t+1 0 0
U (CT ).
St+1

(10)

The relative price of non-traded goods is uniquely determined by this condition, from time
1 onwards.
What happens to the output of non-traded goods in period 0, and to the exchange
rate? First consider monetary policy A. Combining (4), (5), and (6), assuming νt = 0 we
have, from time t = 0 onwards:
1  St−1 −σs
St+1
= (1 + i∗ )
.
β St
St

(11)

Given that β(1 + i∗ ) = 1, this gives a unique solution for the exchange rate St = St−1 .
Critically, the exchange rate does not respond to the announced commodity price increase,
either in time 0 or in future periods. In time 1, the real appreciation is achieved by a rise
in the non-traded goods price.
Figure 1 illustrates this result, for period 0. It shows that in period 0, the rise in CT
will shift out the demand for non-traded goods. Given the fixed price of non-traded goods,
YN,0 rises. From period 1 onwards, output of non-traded goods goes back to its natural
rate, and the price of the non-traded good rises to satisfy (10)).
5

Now focus on monetary policy B. Combining (4), (5), and (7), again assuming νt = 0,
we have, from time t = 0 onwards:
St+1
1  PN,t σs
= (1 + i∗ )
.
β PN,t−1
St

(12)

At time 0, the left-hand side of (12) is predetermined (and PN 1 = PN,−1 by our assumption
of an initial steady state in the non-traded goods sector), so therefore it must be that
S1 /S0 = 1. From time 1 onwards, we have:
1  PN,1 σs
= (1 + i∗ ).
β PN,0

(13)

Equations (12) and (13) give us a unique value of PN,t = PN,−1 for all t ≥ 0. The nontraded goods price does not move at all in response to the announced commodity price
increase, either at t = 0 nor in any future period. This means that (10) must be satisfied by
an exchange-rate appreciation. So St falls permanently from time t = 1 onwards. But we
have established already that S1 /S0 = 1. Thus, the domestic currency must immediately
appreciate at time 0 after the announced commodity price increase. This in fact implies
that the demand for non-traded goods will shift back to its original level, and output of
non-traded goods in period 0 will not increase at all, unlike the response under monetary
rule A. Figure 2 illustrates this response.
Hence, under monetary policy A, there is no immediate response of the exchange rate
(real or nominal) to the commodity price shock. But under monetary policy B, which
we can think of as a variant of an inflation targeting rule, there is an immediate (and
permanent) nominal and real exchange-rate appreciation.
Policy B might be replaced with a more familiar CPI targeting regime. In this case,
we would still see a time 0 appreciation, but it would be smaller than under rule B. An
appreciation would reduce the time zero CPI, leading to a fall in the time 0 domestic
interest rate. As a result, the UIRP condition would require an anticipated appreciation,
so the time zero appreciation would be less than that described above. But qualitatively,
we would still have the contrast between a CPI rule and rule A, where the exchange rate
would not respond at all to commodity price shocks.
6

3. Statistical Background for Canada, Australia, and New Zealand
Our study focuses on Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. These are the same
countries studied by Chen and Rogoff (2003). They have floating exchange rates, have
targetted inflation for most of the period we study, and export commodities. An underlying
idea is that the world commodity prices will be exogenous to monetary policy in these
countries, a feature that should help identification. Monetary policy in these countries was
not constrained by the zero lower bound, with the exception of Canada during 2009–2010,
so their standard indicators of monetary policy are relevant.
∗
To streamline notation we label the commodity price XR,t
simply as Xt and label its

logarithm xt . To measure this we use the national, commodity price indexes of central
banks, where possible. Central banks say that they track these series so it seems natural
to assume that participants in foreign exchange markets do so too. We thus use the
commodity price indexes of the Bank of Canada and the Reserve Bank of Australia. The
Reserve Bank of New Zealand does not publish such an index, but a private bank (ANZ)
has done so since 1986 and its index is widely tracked. Each series is at monthly frequency.
We use the versions in USD then deflate by the US CPI.
The Bank of Canada’s commodity price index (BCPI) is a chain Fisher index. As of
2018, the largest components were the prices of West Texas intermediate oil (20.7%) and
metals and minerals (19.5%). The Reserve Bank of Australia’s Index of Commodity Prices
(ICP) is a Laspeyres index, with weights periodically updated. The largest components
are the prices of iron ore (with a weight of 32.7%) and metallurgical coal (with a weight
of 16.4%). Weights in the ANZ index also are based on shares of commodity exports. For
2018 the largest components are the prices of dairy products (38%), beef (10.9%), and
lamb (10.3%).
Chen and Rogoff (2003, section 4.2) explain why the export commodity price index
may be a better way to measure shocks to a country’s terms of trade than the terms of
trade itself. The latter is affected by price stickiness (and the nature of pass-through)
which affects the correlation with the exchange rate and also limits the degree to which
the terms of trade can respond to shocks within a month.
7

The exchange rate, St (with log st ), is the value of the USD in local currency, also
monthly. Thus a decrease is a domestic appreciation. We measure the stance of monetary
policy relative to that in the US by the difference between the policy interest rate in the
home country and the US interest rate: dt ≡ it −i∗t . During the zero lower bound period, we
use shadow rates designed to reflect unconventional monetary policy. Wu and Xia (2016)
provide US shadow rates while MacDonald and Popiel (2016) provide Canadian ones, in
each case constructed from a term structure model. The estimation below instruments
dt and so defends against some forms of measurement error. The appendix collects the
definitions of each series.
In figures 3–5 the upper panels show the monthly values of the commodity price
indexes and values of the local currencies in USD (1/St ) since 1986 for each country. The
lower panels show the interest differentials. The commodity price indexes and currency
values appear positively correlated. That correlation certainly features in commentary on
the value of each currency.
Table 1 presents statistics on the properties of the three series. First, it reports
the correlation coefficient between the growth rates in st and xt (the change in the log).
These are negative: -0.46 for Canada, -0.34 for Australia, and -0.18 for New Zealand.
A commodity-price increase thus is associated with a nominal appreciation. We report
the correlation for growth rates to allow for the possibility that the commodity prices are
nonstationary. The next column presents augmented Dickey-Fuller tests that suggest they
are. The null hypothesis of a unit root cannot be rejected for each series {xt }. Floating
exchange rates often are viewed as non-stationary (in fact as random walks, in numerous
studies) and the next column confirms that for the log exchange rates {st }. Comparing
the test statistics for the two series, and looking at figures 1–3, suggests they are similarly
persistent. The fifth column of table 1 then presents ADF tests for unit roots in the interest
differential. These tests too do not reject the null hypothesis of a unit root at the 5% level
for each country.
The final columns of table 1 presents residual-based tests for cointegration between st
and xt , st and dt , and all three series. Here the evidence is more mixed. The evidence of
8

cointegration is strongest for Australia and weakest for Canada.
Table 2 presents trace tests for the cointegration rank in the vector {xt , dt , st }. The
tests statistics are based on VARs with either 3 or 6 lags. We compare the test statistics
to the 95% asymptotic quantile following the top-down recommendation of Juselius (2006,
chapter 8). For Canada and Australia there is evidence for either two unit roots or one
unit root depending on the lag length. For New Zealand the test suggests a single unit
root when the lag length is 3 months.
Conflicts among tests for cointegration are not news. But overall the evidence suggests
modelling the variables as non-stationary and cointegrated, with a single unit root. Section
5 outlines an econometric test consistent with this description. But first section 4 sets this
research in context.
4. Related Empirical Research
4.1 Commodity prices and exchange rates
A range of studies have examined these series, with commodity prices measured with
an index or else using the price of an individual export commodity such as oil. At high
frequency Ferraro, Rogoff, and Rossi (2015) document a correlation between daily changes
in the CAD-USD nominal exchange rate and daily oil price changes. Berg, Guérin, and
Imura (2016) do the same, and find separate roles for an energy commodity price index and
a non-energy commodity price index, especially at higher frequencies. Not all studies find
a significant correlation though. For example, Akram (2004) shows that the Norwegian
krone value against a European basket is not closely correlated with the oil price.
Other studies of this bivariate statistical relationship look at other energy exporters
and also at emerging market economies. For example, Lizardo and Mollick (2010) find oil
prices statistically explain movements in the value of the USD against major currencies
from 1970 to 2008. In particular, increases in the real price of oil lead to a significant
depreciation of the USD against net oil exporter currencies, while currencies of oil importers
depreciate relative to the USD. Bodart, Candelon, and Carpantier (2012) find an overall
9

effect for a large group of emerging market economies using panel restrictions to enhance
precision.
A number of studies also examine the statistical relationship between the real exchange
rate and commodity prices. For example, the influential study by Chen and Rogoff (2003)
studies Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. They find a strong correlation and also
cointegration for Australia and New Zealand. Cashin, Céspedes, and Sahay (2004) examine
the correlation and cointegration between the real exchange rate and xt (measured with
export prices) for 58 countries. They find evidence of a correlation for about a third of
them.
4.2 Commodity price predictability
A wide range of models of the nominal exchange rate characterize it as the present
discounted value of a stream of future, expected fundamentals. An implication of presentvalue models is that the exchange rate should Granger-cause those fundamentals. Engel
and West (2005) and Engel, Mark and West (2007) find some evidence for this, for fundamentals from the monetary model of the exchange rate for example. But they note that
the present-value relationship is not the only explanation for such Granger-causality. For
example, the exchange rate may help predict the interest rate if monetary policymakers
react to the exchange rate with a lag. Thus, it may make sense to focus on predicting the
commodity price in a small, open economy, because that is more likely to be exogenous.
Chen, Rogoff, and Rossi (2010) report a striking finding: nominal exchange rates (for
commodity currencies) help forecast commodity prices. They study the nominal exchange
rates of Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and Chile (each relative to the
US dollar) along with export-earnings-weighted commodity prices for each country, at
quarterly frequency. They find this effect using (a) in-sample Granger-causality tests that
allow for time-varying parameters and (b) out-of-sample forecasting with rolling windows.
The results hold one quarter ahead and at longer horizons up to two years. The exchange
rate predicts commodity prices better than futures prices do. And the reverse effect is not
present: the exchange-rate changes cannot be predicted.
They interpret this pattern using a present-value model. To see how this works,
10

suppose that the commodity price x evolves jointly with some other exogenous variable.
Also suppose the exchange-rate is forward-looking and depends on forecasts of future values
of x. Then st will Granger-cause xt (because it contains information on the additional
exogenous variable) as long as there is some persistent, unobserved component. They
argue that this pattern supports the PV model because x is exogenous to these small,
open economies. In contrast, s Granger-causing interest rates or inflation could just be
measuring a slow reaction of policy, as Engel and West (2005) also noted.
4.3 Exchange-rate predictability
Rossi (2013) surveys the large research literature on nominal exchange-rate forecasting. She reports that linear models are the most successful and that results vary based on
the set of predictors, the sample period, the forecast evaluation method, and the forecast
horizon. The random walk model remains a resilient benchmark. Models based on Taylor rules are the only ones with consistently significant out-of-sample forecasting ability
at short horizons. But there is little evidence that monetary fundamentals help forecast
exchange rates. Commodity prices are included in the fundamentals that Rossi considers.
She concludes there is little evidence that they help forecast exchange rates, a result documented at different frequencies by Chen, Rogoff, and Rossi (2010) and Ferraro, Rogoff,
and Rossi (2015).
Cheung et al (2017) provided updated evidence on prediction with a range of exchangerate models. These include models with central-bank reaction functions that make monetary policy endogenous, a key development in the 2000s. Their study includes one commodity currency: the Canadian dollar. Overall they find that it is difficult to improve
on the random walk model (based on mean-squared error of forecasts) especially at short
horizons, though the findings vary by time period and currency.
Several studies focus on daily data on exchange rates and commodity prices.
Kohlscheen, Avalos, and Schrimpf (2017) find a strong correlation between changes in
the nominal exchange rate and a daily index of export commodity prices for 11 countries. But they also confirm that there is little evidence of out-of-sample prediction using
lagged commodity prices. However, Zhang, Galbraith, and Dufour (2015) find evidence of
11

Granger-causality running from commodity prices to exchange rates (and more so than in
the opposite direction) over daily horizons in high-frequency data.
Engel and West (2004) show that the log exchange rate can follow a random walk
in a present-value model with (a) observed fundamentals that follow a random walk, (b)
unobserved fundamentals that follow a random walk, or (c) fundamentals that are I(1) but
not a pure random walk combined with a discount factor near 1. And a discount factor
near 1 produces volatility in s greater than in fundamentals. Engel, Mark, and West (2007)
provide an overview of models of the nominal exchange rate. They stress the importance of
expected future monetary policy, which reacts endogenously to macroeconomic indicators.
They reiterate the finding that a random walk in s does not refute present-value models.
5. Present-Value Restrictions
The goal of this section is to derive a test of the hypothesis that commodity prices
may affect the nominal exchange rate through their effect on monetary policy. To do this,
we adopt a present-value model in which the nominal exchange rate depends on current
and expected future monetary policy, relative to policy in the US. This framework allows
for a multi-period version of the mechanism we studied in section 2, essentially operating
through the UIP condition. But it also allows consistency with the statistical properties of
in section 3 and with the evidence surveyed in section 4. For example, it can be consistent
with the exchange rate helping forecast commodity prices and with the exchange rate
following a random walk.
Our hypothesis has two components. First, commodity price movements sometimes
lead to a reaction from monetary policy. This is because of their effect on domestic inflation,
as under monetary policy B in the theoretical example. Although there may be some
persistence in the policy rate due to interest-rate smoothing, future monetary policy can
be partly forecasted with commodity prices. Section 3 showed that those prices are highly
persistent, which may enhance their role in forecasts. Second, the nominal exchange rate
responds to both current and expected future policy interest rates, so it reacts immediately
to the commodity price index.
12

Recall that st is the log exchange rate, xt the log, real commodity price, and dt ≡
it − i∗t the differential in policy interest rates relative to the US. The exchange rate is
measured in local currency (so that a decrease is an appreciation). It is described by the
traditional, present-value, monetary model of the exchange rate, with relative monetary
policy measured by dt :
st = α(1 − β)dt + βEt st+1 = α(1 − β)Et

∞
X

β j dt+j ,

(14)

j=0

(with the transversality condition implicit). Engel and West (2005) and Engel, Mark,
and West (2007) outline a variety of models that yield this equation. They also provide
a range of empirical evidence on this approach. They stress the need to allow for the
endogeneity of monetary policy. In our example, monetary policy is expected to respond
to the commodity price and so the current exchange rate does so too. We expect α to be
negative and below find α̂ to be negative: An increase in expected future i, relative to US
i∗ , leads to a fall in s, an appreciation of the domestic currency.
Next, suppose that the international interest differential reacts to the commodity price
and to the current value of the exchange rate:
dt = γs st + γx xt + dt ,

(15)

where dt is a martingale difference series. This is not intended as a complete description
of the relative policy rule, for it excludes other variables such as inflation and also excludes
dynamics from interest-rate smoothing. Rather, we use it to show that one can estimate
and test the present-value model even though dt reacts to st and xt . At monthly frequency
it makes sense to allow for monetary policy to react to both commodity prices and the
exchange rate (among other variables). Thus st and dt are determined simultaneously.
Our focus will be on estimating the parameters of the present-value model (14) (α
and β) and on testing for the role of xt in the forecasts in it. We do not try to identify
the parameters of the interest-differential reaction function (15). But we use a fully solved
statistical example to illustrate why our methods make sense. The example begins with
the commodity price index following an autonomous random walk:
xt = xt−1 + xt .
13

(16)

Using this law of motion and equations (14) and (15), the guess-and-verify method shows
that the projections of the two endogenous variables on xt are:
αγx
xt
1 − αγs
γx
P (dt |xt ) =
xt .
1 − αγs
P (st |xt ) =

(17)

This simplest example illustrates two points. First, dt and st are each cointegrated
with xt . The cointegrating vectors also are given by equations (17) regardless of higherorder dynamics. For example, interest-rate smoothing might add a lagged, value dt−1 to
equation (15) but that would not affect the long-run relationships (17).
Second, this long-run information can be used to identify α. The coefficients (17)
show that α is given by the ratio of the two cointegrating vectors. This is a classic source
of identification via an exclusion restriction: dt reacts to xt directly but st does not and
that distinction identifies α, the effect of dt on st . That exclusion restriction is simply a
restatement of equation (14).
We next extend this example by allowing for higher-order dynamics in {xt }. Section 3
reported that each commodity price series appears to contain a unit root. Unlike nominal
exchange rates, though, these series are not well described as random walks. We find that
the univariate dynamics of each series are well described by a first-order autoregression in
growth rates:
∆xt = ω0 + ωx ∆xt−1 + xt .

(18)

The estimates ω̂x (and HAC standard errors) are for Canada 0.26 (0.09), for Australia
0.49 (0.05), and for New Zealand 0.32 (0.07). Thus each country’s coefficient is positive
and statistically greater than zero. Suppose then that the commodity price index evolves
autonomously following the AR(2) model (AR(1) in growth rates), omitting the constant
term:
xt = (1 + ωx )xt−1 − ωx xt−2 + xt ,
with the parameter constraint so that xt contains a unit root.
14

(19)

Write the projections of the endogenous variables on {xt , xt−1 } with to-be-determined
coefficients as follows:
P (st |xt , xt−1 ) = a0 xt + a1 xt−1
(20)
P (dt |xt , xt−1 ) = b0 xt + b1 xt−1 .
The coefficients are given recursively by:

a0 = α(1 − β)γx 1 − α(1 − β)γs − β(1 + ωx ) +

β 2 ωx
1 − α(1 − β)γs

−1

−βωx
a0
1 − α(1 − β)γs
b0 = γs a0 + γx

a1 =

(21)

b1 = γs a1 .
We use this second solved example to make three further observations. First, even in
this relatively simple example, where xt evolves autonomously, the cross-equation restrictions are quite complicated. They will be more complicated if one adds other sources of
dynamics, such as interest-rate smoothing and forecasting information from other variables
including the exchange rate itself. For this reason we do not estimate the solved model
but instead use a limited-information method to test the hypothesis that xt is correlated
with st because it helps forecast the present-value of dt .
Second, the Engel-West (2005) theorem applies. As β → 1 the exchange rate follows
a random walk. In the system of projection coefficients (21), as β → 1 the coefficient
a1 → −ωx a0 and the application of l’Hôpital’s rule shows that a0 6→ 0, so that
st = a0 xt − ωx a0 xt−1 + st ,

(22)

where the error term arises because of additional information used by forecasters. Thus
st depends on the quasi-difference (xt − ωx xt−1 ) which is a random walk given the law of
motion for xt (19). Thus the solution is consistent with the evidence that {st } follows a
random walk while {xt } does not.
Third, the discount factor β now appears in the system of coefficients (21), which
shows that higher-order dynamics in xt can be used to identify β. Equivalently, there
15

are two intruments and so one can identify the two parameters, α and β. Higher-order
dynamics in xt , while sufficient, are not necessary for identification though. If the interestrate reaction function (15) is extended to include lagged commodity prices (with lag length
greater than 1) then those will be valid instruments even if the commodity price follows a
random walk. Whether the source of dynamics is autonomous (in xt ) or in policy (in the
reaction of dt to xt ), both current and lagged commodity prices become valid instruments
and so allow tests based on over-identifying restrictions. The next section applies this
standard idea from linear, rational-expectations models in a stationary transformation of
the present-value model (14). We are not seeking a complete test of the PV model and
to find fitted values implied by it but rather to test whether the correlation between the
exchange rate and the commodity price is given by the mechanism here. For that reason
we focus on instrumental variables methods that directly test that prediction.
The theoretical example in section 2 suggested that the response of the exchange rate
to the commodity price shock depends on features of the economy including the monetary
policy rule and the nature of price-stickiness. Identifying the components of a fully-solved,
New Keynesian model may be difficult, as shown by Cochrane (2011) for the Taylor rule,
Nason and Smith (2008) for the New Keynesian Phillips curve, and Uribe and SchmittGrohé (2017, chapter 8) for the impact of a terms-of-trade shock on domestic inflation.
Fortunately, understanding these components is not necessary for our test. The test applies
whatever the mechanism by which xt affects dt .
6. Estimates and Tests
A survey of sources on present-value methods with nonstationary variables suggests
that there is no consensus on what method to use for estimation. For example, Kilian
and Lütkepohl (2016) outline a range of methods. We adopt a two-step procedure that is
consistent and that uses tools that have been extensively studied by Monte Carlo methods
and yet are very simple to apply. This choice should aid replication and extension by other
researchers.
The first step follows Campbell and Shiller’s (1987) application of the Granger-Engle
two-step method. Define a new variable yt ≡ st − αdt and then rewrite the present value
16

(14) as:
yt = αβEt ∆dt+1 + βEt yt+1 = αEt

∞
X

β j ∆dt+j .

(23)

j=1

It is easy to see that if dt is I(1) then dt and st are cointegrated and st − αdt is I(0) so
the variables in this second present value are stationary, which facilitates inference.
We estimate the cointegrating relationship between st and dt (with coefficient α̃)
and generate ỹt = st − α̃dt . (A constant term is included but not reported.) In this
environment it is well known that coefficients in the levels regressions will be estimated
super-consistently. It also is well known that there may be bias in such estimates if
dynamics are omitted. We estimate α̃ first by fully modified ordinary least squares as
developed by Phillips and Hansen (1990). This involves corrections for endogeneity and
serial correlation that reduce the bias in OLS estimation of the static regression. Estimation
uses the two cointegrating relationships (17) by FM-OLS with 3 lags. The estimate α̃ is
the ratio of the two cointegrating vectors.
In table 3, the first column lists the countries and the second column gives the estimates α̃ with their standard errors. The estimates are negative and statistically significant
for each country, with t-statistics of 2.3 for Canada, 4.7 for Australia, and 4.4 for New
Zealand. Finding a significant value in this first step is a sine qua non for proceeding to
the next step.
The second step then involves estimation with stationary variables, using standard IV
tools. The present-value model implies that:
ỹt = α̃βEt ∆dt+1 + βEt ỹt+1 + yt .

(24)

Here the error term yt allows for the possibility of unobserved fundamentals or measurement error. We estimate the discount factor β by continuously updated GMM using
(stationary) instruments zt . Estimation uses the constructed measure ỹt and is consistent
given the super-consistency of the first step. With one parameter to estimate, adopting
more than one instrument provides a test based on over-identifying restrictions (and adds
precision to the estimate β̂).
17

This method differs from those of Campbell and Shiller (1987) and Campbell (1987)
in two respects. First, we estimate the difference equation because we wish to estimate
and test the value of β, while given their applications they did not and instead focused
on fully-solved examples while forecasting with a VAR. Second, we focus on the question
of whether commodity prices are correlated with the exchange rate because those prices
forecast differential monetary policy, and so assess that directly, rather than using a fully
solved forecasting model and restricted VAR. Thus we include variables such as ∆xt in the
instrument set, report if they are relevant, and then test the overidentifying restrictions.
The third column of table 3 gives the instruments, zt , which consist of current and
lagged values of ∆xt . The fourth column then reports the p-value from an F -test of
the relevance of the instruments in forecasting the endogenous regressors in equation (24).
Those statistics show that the instruments are highly relevant for Canada and New Zealand
(where p-values are below 0.05) but not for Australia, where we therefore have weak instruments (discussed further below).
The fifth column gives the estimated discount factor β̂ along with its standard error.
The sixth column then reports the p-value from a one-tailed t-test of H0 : β = 1 against
HA : β < 1. There is stronger evidence against this null hypothesis (in favour of a discount
factor below one) for Canada than for Australia or New Zealand. The final column in
table 3 reports the p-value from the J-test of the over-identifying restrictions given each
instrument set. None of the sets of restrictions is rejected at the 5% level of significance.
To summarize, we find a significant, long-run relationship between st and dt for each
country. We then control for the current policy differential and its discounted, expected
future values as forecasted with commodity price changes. We find that the commodity
price terms do forecast these present-value terms for Canada and New Zealand, but only
weakly do so for Australia. And there is some evidence that β is less than one especially for
Canada. Most importantly, once we control for these present value terms in the exchangerate equation there is no evidence of a significant correlation between the residuals and
the commodity price terms.
For Australia, where the instruments are weak, we conduct an Anderson-Rubin (1949)
18

test that is valid in that case. Rewrite equation (24) by taking the future values ∆dt+1
and ỹt+1 (or equivalently st+1 ) to the left-hand side (without forecasting them) and by
adding some list of other variables ut on the right-hand side:
ỹt − α̃β0 ∆dt+1 − β0 ỹt+1 ≡ st − α̃(1 − β0 )dt − β0 st+1 = δut + yt .

(25)

To create this composite variable on the left-hand side of the equation, we need to choose
a value for β, labelled β0 . We cannot use this regression to estimate that value. But it
can be used to test any value for this discount factor. To test the hypothesis that β = β0
we simply perform a traditional F -test of the hypothesis that δ = 0, so that the auxiliary
variables ut are insignificant. The logic is that if we happen to select the correct value
for β, then the two explanatory variables in the present-value model will reproduce the
time-series pattern in the exchange rate st , and there will be no systematic pattern in the
residuals that will be detected by including other macroeconomic variables, ut .
We use ut = {∆xt , ∆xt−1 }. We also use ut = {xt , ..., xt−4 } to allow the regression to
select a stationary combination of those levels, with inference still valid as shown by Sims,
Stock, and Watson (1990). We then run the regression (25) on a grid of values of β0 between
0 and 1. For each such value we record the F -statistic associated with the restriction that
none of the variables in ut enters the equation and calculate the corresponding p-value.
The results (not shown) are very simple to report: The Anderson-Rubin (AR) test does
not reject the restrictions for any value of β. The range of values for which the F -statistic
falls below the 5% critical value of the F distribution (equivalently the p-values lie above
0.05) constitutes the 95% percent confidence interval for β. In this case, all the values we
considered qualify so the confidence interval is very wide, in contrast with those implied
by the rows for Australia in table 3 which are not robust to weak identification. This
means we cannot identify the discount factor even with this robust method. Equivalently,
though, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the x-variables are irrelevant. In fact,
the AR test does not reject H0 : β = 0: Once we control for current, relative monetary
policy, there is no correlation between the exchange rate and commodity prices.
It is possible that the central bank in each country reacts not to the overall index
of export commodity prices but instead to its largest component and that the foreign
19

exchange market expects it to do so. In that case, our test power in table 3 may be low
because the overall index is a noisy measure of this component. And this feature might
explain why the overall commodity price index xt is a weak instrument in the Australian
data. To examine that possibility, we repeat the calculations in table 3 but now with xt
measured by the energy component for Canada, the base metals component for Australia,
and the dairy products component for New Zealand.
The results are in table 4. Again α̃ is negative for each country, though it is estimated
less precisely than in table 3. The t-statistics are 1.2 for Canada, 2.3 for Australia, and 2.8
for New Zealand. All point estimates β̂ are less than 1, and overall there is more evidence
against H0 : β = 1. The test for instrument relevance shows that the instruments now are
stronger for Australia than they were in table 3. The base metals component is a better
predictor of Australian relative monetary policy than the overall commodity price index
is. Finally, the J-test p-values are above 0.05 (though for Australia they are below 0.10).
At the 5% significance level one cannot reject the null hypothesis that the commodity
price index components are correlated with the nominal exchange rate only because they
forecast indicators of relative monetary policy.
The results in table 4 are of course not independent of those in table 3, for the
components in table 4 are central to the indexes in table 3. But even performing our
test across separate commodity price indicators may make it difficult to control test size
(equivalently raise the risk of false rejections), given the relatively small number (389–401)
of monthly observations possible in this study. We hope that the simplicity of the method
will allow researchers to apply it for other countries or time periods.
7. Conclusion
We examined a natural but under-studied explanation for a correlation between a
country’s commodity price index xt and its nominal exchange rate st : st is determined
by current and expected future values of an indicator of relative monetary policy and
that indicator reacts to the commodity price index. A theoretical model of a small, open
economy showed that this correlation depends on the stance of monetary policy and is
induced, for example, by inflation targetting.
20

We studied three countries selected according to the criteria that (a) they have long
histories of floating exchange rates, mainly under inflation targetting and (b) they have
widely-followed export commodity price indexes. Our hypothesis is that the central bank
follows this index in setting monetary policy and so practitioners in the foreign exchange
market react to it too.
For Canada, Australia, and New Zealand we can identify α, the long-run effect of the
policy interest-rate differential on the exchange rate, and estimate it with precision even
though policy also reacts to the exchange rate. For Canada and New Zealand we then
can also identify the discount factor β using commodity prices as instruments while for
Australia these instruments are weak. The J-test for Canada and New Zealand and the
Anderson-Rubin test for Australia show that there is no significant correlation between
the exchange rate and the commodity price once we control for measures of current and
expected future monetary policy, as predicted from commodity prices. When we instead
measure xt with the largest component of each country’s index, we find p-values above 0.05
for the J-test. Thus, these narrower commodity prices again have no significant correlation
with residuals from the present-value model.

21

Data Appendix
1. Canada
x: The commodity price x is the log of the Bank of Canada’s monthly commodity price
index, BCPI (label M.BCPI) expressed in real terms by division by the US CPI, series
CPIAUCSL from FRED. Table 4 then measures x using the energy component of this
index (label M.ENER).
d: The main monetary policy indicator is the difference between the overnight interest rate
in Canada and the effective federal funds rate in the US. At the US ZLB from December
2008 to November 2015 we instead use the shadow rate constructed by Wu and Xia (2016).
At the Canadian ZLB from April 2009 to June 2010 we use the shadow rate constructed
by MacDonald and Popiel (2016).
s: The exchange rate is the log of the monthly average price of the USD in CAD, series
EXCAUS from FRED.
2. Australia
x: The commodity price x is the log of the Reserve Bank of Australia’s monthly commodity
price index, in USD, (series GRCPAIUSD), expressed in real terms by division by the
US CPI. Table 4 then measures x using the base metals component of this index (series
GRCPBMUSD).
d: The policy indicator for Australia is the monthly average of the cash rate target after
August 1990 when it was introduced. Before that we use the interbank overnight cash
rate. The source is f01hist.xls from the RBA. Then d subtracts the effective federal
funds rate described above.
s: The exchange rate is the log of the monthly average price of the USD in AUD, series
EXUSAL from FRED
3. New Zealand
x: The commodity price x is the log of the ANZ commodity price index, in USD, expressed
in real terms by division by the US CPI. Table 4 then measures x using the dairy products
component of this index. The source is www.anz.co.nz/about-us/economic-marketsresearch/commodity-price-index/
d: The policy rate is the official cash rate (OCR) from March 1999 when it was introduced.
Before that we use the overnight interbank cash rate. The source is hb2-monthly.xls from
the RBNZ. Then d subtracts the effective federal funds rate described above.
s: The exchange rate is the log of the monthly average price of the USD in NZD, series
EXUSNZ from FRED.

22

References
Akram, Q. Farooq (2004) Oil prices and exchange rates: Norwegian evidence. Econometrics Journal 7, 476–504.
Anderson, Theodore W. and Herman Rubin (1949) Estimation of the parameters of a
single equation in a complete system of stochastic equations. Annals of Mathematical
Statistics 20, 46–63
Bank for International Settlements (2016) Triennial Central Bank Survey: Foreign exchange turnover in April 2016.
Berg, Kimberly, Pierre Guérin and Yuko Imura (2016) Predictive ability of commodity
prices for the Canadian dollar. Bank of Canada Staff Analytical Note 2016-2.
Bodart, V. , B. Candelon, and J.-F. Carpantier (2012) Real exchange rates in commodity
producing countries: A reappraisal. Journal of International Money and Finance 31,
1482–1502.
Campbell, John Y. (1987) Does saving anticipate decling labor income? An alternative
test of the permanent income hypothesis. Econometrica 55, 1249–1273.
Campbell, John Y. and Shiller, Robert J. (1987) Cointegration and tests of present value
models. Journal of Political Economy 95, 1062–1088.
Cashin, Paul, Luis F. Céspedes, and Ratna Sahay (2004) Commodity currencies and the
real exchange rate. Journal of Development Economics 75, 239–268.
Chen, Yu-chin and Kenneth Rogoff (2003) Commodity currencies. Journal of International
Economics 60, 133–160.
Chen, Yu-chin, Kenneth S. Rogoff, and Barbara Rossi (2010) Can exchange rates forecast
commodity prices? Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 1145–1194.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie D. Chinn, Antonia Garcia Pascual, and Yi Zhang (2017)
Exchange rate prediction redux: New models, new data, new currencies. NBER
working paper 23267.
Cochrane, John H. (2011) Determinacy and identification with Taylor rules. Journal of
Political Economy 119, 565–615.
Engel, Charles and Kenneth D. West (2004) Accounting for exchange-rate variability in
present-value models when the discount factor is near 1. American Economic Review
(P) 94(2), 119–125.
Engel, Charles and Kenneth D. West (2005) Exchange rates and fundamentals. Journal
of Political Economy 113, 485–517.
Engel, Charles, Nelson C. Mark and Kenneth D. West (2007) Exchange rate models are
not as bad as you think. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 22, 381–441.

Ferraro, Domenico, Kenneth Rogoff, and Barbara Rossi (2015) Can oil prices forecast
exchange rates? An empirical analysis of the relationship between commodity prices
and exchange rates. Journal of International Money and Finance 54, 116–141.
Juselius, Katarina (2006) The Cointegrated VAR Model. Oxford University Press.
Kilian, Lutz and Helmut Lütkepohl (2016) Structural Vector Autoregressive Analysis.
mimeo
Kohlscheen, Emanuel, Fernando Avalos, and Andreas Schrimpf (2017) When the walk is
not random: Commodity prices and exchange rates. International Journal of Central
Banking 13, 121–158.
Lizardo, Radhamés A. and André V. Mollick (2010) Oil price fluctuations and US dollar
exchange rates. Energy Economics 32, 399–408.
MacDonald, Margaux and Michal Popiel (2016) Unconventional monetary policy in a small
open economy. Queens Economics Department Working Paper No. 1367.
Nason, James M. and Gregor W. Smith (2008) Identifying the New Keynesian Phillips
curve. Journal of Applied Econometrics 23, 525–551.
Phillips, P.C.B. and Bruce Hansen (1990) Statistical inference in instrumental variables
regression with I(1) processes. Review of Economic Studies 57, 99–125.
Rossi, Barbara (2013) Exchange rate predictability. Journal of Economic Literature 51,
1063–1119.
Sims, Christopher A, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (1990) Inference in linear
time series models with some unit roots. Econometrica 58, 113–144.
Uribe, Martín and Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé (2017) Open Economy Macroeconomics.
Princeton University Press.
Wu, Jing Cynthia and Fan Dora Xia (2016) Measuring the macroeconomic impact of
monetary policy at the zero lower bound. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking
48, 253–291.
Zhang, Hui Jun, John Galbraith, and Jean-Marie Dufour (2015) Exchange rates and commodity prices: Measuring causality at multiple horizons. forthcoming in the Journal
of Empirical Finance

Figure 1. Period 0, Before IT *
Demand for non-traded goods
U’(CT)xPN=U’(CN)

PN

YN
* Demand for non-traded goods shifts out, PN is predetermined

Figure 2. Period 0, With IT *
Demand for non-traded goods
U’(CT)xPN=U’(CN)

PN

YN
* Demand for non-traded goods shifts out, PN is predetermined

Figure 3: Commodity Prices, Exchange Rates, and Interest Rates
Canada

1/St

3.0

0.9

2.5
0.8
2.0

Xt

1.5

0.7

1.0

0.6
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year

6

dt

4
2
0
-2
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year

Notes: In the upper panel the black line (left axis) shows the Bank of Canada's commodity price index
(in USD), divided by the US CPI, monthly. The red line (right axis) shows the monthly average
value of the currency measured in US dollars. The lower panel shows the policy interest-rate
differential d = i-i*.

1/S: value of CAD

1.0

3.5

d: interest-rate differential

X: real commodity price index

1.1
4.0

1.0

1.0

1/St

0.8

0.8
0.6
0.6
0.4

Xt

0.2

0.4
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year

d: interest-rate differential

12
10
8

dt

6
4
2
0
-2
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year

Notes: In the upper panel the black line (left axis) shows the Reserve Bank of Australia's commodity
price index (in USD), divided by the US CPI, monthly. The red line (right axis) shows the monthly
average value of the currency measured in US dollars. The lower panel shows the policy interest-rate
differential d = i-i*.

1/S: value of AUD

X: real commodity price index

Figure 4: Commodity Prices, Exchange Rates, and Interest Rates
Australia

1.1

0.9

1.0

0.8

0.9

0.7

1/St

0.8

0.6

0.7

0.5

0.6

0.4

Xt

0.5

0.3
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year

d: interest-rate differential

25
20
15
10

dt

5
0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Year

Notes: In the upper panel the black line (left axis) shows the ANZ commodity price index
(in USD), divided by the US CPI, monthly. The red line (right axis) shows the monthly
average value of the currency measured in US dollars. The lower panel shows the policy
interest-rate differential d = i-i*.

2015

1/S: value of NZD

X: real commodity price index

Figure 5: Commodity Prices, Exchange Rates, and Interest Rates
New Zealand

Table 1: Statistics for Commodity Prices, Exchange Rates,
and Interest Differentials 1986–2018

Country

r∆xt ,∆st ADFx

ADFs

ADFd

CADFs,x CADFs,d CADFs,d,x

Canada

-0.46

-2.37

-1.71

-1.88

-2.77

Australia

-0.34

-1.62

-2.36

-2.61*

-4.60*** -2.83

-4.57***

New Zealand

-0.18

-2.33

-2.32

-2.70*

-2.94*

-2.98

-1.86

-2.35

-3.14

Notes: x is the log, real commodity price index, s the log nominal exchange rate in
USD, and d the interest-rate differential. There are 389 observations from 1986:1
to 2018:5. r is the correlation coefficient. ADF is the augmented Dickey-Fuller
t-statistic with an an intercept and 6 lags. CADF is the residual-based test
statistic for cointegration, also with 6 lags. The symbols *, **, and *** denote
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels. Overall, a unit root cannot be rejected
at the 5% level for any series. But there is clear evidence of cointegration
only for Australia. Statistics are similar if the sample instead begins in 2000:1.

Table 2: Trace Tests of Cointegration Rank

{xt , dt , st }
Country

r

3−r

τ (3 − r) τ (3 − r)
3 lags

6 lags

C0.95

Canada

1
2
3

2
1
0

32.2
12.7†
2.9

27.2†
8.9
3.4

29.8
15.4
3.8

Australia

1
2
3

2
1
0

25.2†
6.9
1.8

33.0
11.8†
2.9

29.8
15.4
3.8

New Zealand

1
2
3

2
1
0

36.1
14.2†
4.0

32.0
16.4
4.1

29.8
15.4
3.8

Notes: r is the cointegrating rank and 3 − r is the number of
unit roots. τ is the trace test statistic and C0.95 is the 95%
asymptotic quantile. Following the top-down rule, a † shows
the row at which τ < C0.95 for the first time.

Table 3: Estimates and Tests
(Export Commodity Price Indexes)
ỹt ≡ st − α̃dt
ỹt = α̃βEt ∆dt+1 + βEt ỹt+1 + yt

Country

α̃
(se)

zt

Relevance
p

β̂
(se)

β=1
p

J-test
p

Canada

-0.302
(0.131)

∆xt , ∆xt−1

0.02

0.949
(0.027)

0.03

0.20

∆xt , ..., ∆xt−3

0.02

0.962
(0.017)

0.01

0.45

∆xt , ∆xt−1

0.25

1.017
(0.065)

0.39

0.30

∆xt , ..., ∆xt−3

0.51

1.022
(0.064)

0.36

0.67

∆xt , ∆xt−1

0.02

0.927
(0.056)

0.10

0.41

∆xt , ..., ∆xt−3

0.01

0.973
(0.031)

0.20

0.28

Australia

New Zealand

-0.121
(0.026)

-0.071
(0.016)

Notes: x is the log, real commodity price index, s the log nominal exchange rate in
local currency, and d the policy interest-rate differential. T = 389 from 1986:1 to 2018:5
for New Zealand and T = 401 from 1985:1 to 2018:5 for Canada and Australia. The
cointegrating coefficient α̃ is estimated from the system (17) by FM-OLS with 3 lags.
The discount factor β̂ is estimated by continuously updated GMM with instruments
zt . The p-values apply to the first-stage F -test of instrument relevance, the t-test of
H0 : β = 1 vs HA : β < 1, and the J-test of the over-identifying restrictions.
Constants are included in each equation but not shown.

Table 4: Estimates and Tests
(Price Index Components)
ỹt ≡ st − α̃dt
ỹt = α̃βEt ∆dt+1 + βEt ỹt+1 + yt

Country

α̃
(se)

zt

Relevance
p

β̂
(se)

β=1
p

J-test
p

Canada
(energy)

-0.533
(0.457)

∆xt , ∆xt−1

0.02

0.979
(0.015)

0.07

0.31

∆xt , ..., ∆xt−3

0.03

0.984
(0.009)

0.05

0.66

∆xt , ∆xt−1

0.11

0.922
(0.053)

0.07

0.09

∆xt , ..., ∆xt−3

0.08

0.961
(0.026)

0.07

0.07

∆xt , ∆xt−1

0.11

0.917
(0.057)

0.07

0.11

∆xt , ..., ∆xt−3

0.09

0.961
(0.031)

0.11

0.10

Australia
(base metals)

New Zealand
(dairy)

-0.197
(0.087)

-0.144
(0.051)

Notes: x is a log, real commodity price index component: energy for Canada, base
metals for Australia, and dairy products for New Zealand. s is the log nominal
exchange rate in local currency, and d the policy interest-rate differential. T = 389 from
1986:1 to 2018:5 for New Zealand and T = 401 from 1985:1 to 2018:5 for Canada and
Australia. The cointegrating coefficient α̃ is estimated from the system (17) by FM-OLS
with 3 lags. The discount factor β̂ is estimated by continuously updated GMM with
instruments zt . The p-values apply to the first-stage F -test of instrument relevance,
the t-test of H0 : β = 1 vs HA : β < 1, and the J-test of the over-identifying
restrictions. Constants are included in each equation but not shown.

