                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           SKILL OF THE IMMIGRANTS AND VOTE OF THE NATIVES:
      IMMIGRATION AND NATIONALISM IN EUROPEAN ELECTIONS 2007-2016

                                        Simone Moriconi
                                          Giovanni Peri
                                         Riccardo Turati

                                      Working Paper 25077
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25077


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2018




This paper is part of the project "Migration And Labor supplY wheN culturE matterS", financed
by French National Research Agency (ANR, AAPG 2018). We acknowledge ANR for financial
support. We thank colleagues who attended presentations at the International PhD Workshop on
Migration and Integration Hertie School of Governance in Berlin, the Doctoral Workshop at
Université Catholique de Louvain in Louvain-la-Neuve, and the EDP Jamboree at European
University Institute in Florence. We are grateful to Frédéric Docquier and Yannik Schenk for
very useful discussions. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Simone Moriconi, Giovanni Peri, and Riccardo Turati. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Skill of the Immigrants and Vote of the Natives: Immigration and Nationalism in European
Elections 2007-2016
Simone Moriconi, Giovanni Peri, and Riccardo Turati
NBER Working Paper No. 25077
September 2018
JEL No. D72,I28,J61

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper we document the impact of immigration at the regional level on Europeans’ political
preferences as expressed by voting behavior in parliamentary or presidential elections between
2007 and 2016. We combine individual data on party voting with a classification of each party's
political agenda on a scale of their "nationalistic" attitudes over 28 elections across 126 parties in
12 countries. To reduce immigrant selection and omitted variable bias, we use immigrant
settlements in 2005 and the skill composition of recent immigrant flows as instruments. OLS and
IV estimates show that larger inflows of highly educated immigrants were associated with a
change in the vote of citizens away from nationalism. However the inflow of less educated
immigrants was positively associated with a vote shift towards nationalist positions. These effects
were stronger for non-tertiary educated voters and in response to non-European immigrants. We
also show that they are consistent with the impact of immigration on individual political
preferences, which we estimate using longitudinal data, and on opinions about immigrants.
Conversely, immigration did not affect electoral turnout. Simulations based on the estimated
coefficients show that immigration policies balancing the number of high-skilled and low-skilled
immigrants from outside the EU would be associated with a shift in votes away from nationalist
parties in almost all European regions.

Simone Moriconi                                   Riccardo Turati
IÉSEG School of Management                        Université Catholique de Louvain, IRES
1 parvis de La Defense                            College L. H. Dupriez
92044 Paris - La Defense Cedex                    3 Place Montesquieu
France                                            Louvain la Neuve 1348
and LEM                                           Belgium
s.moriconi@ieseg.fr                               r.turati@uclouvain.be

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu


A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25077
1     Introduction
Recent Elections in several European Countries (UK in 2016, France and Germany in 2017, Italy in 2018)
and in the US (in 2016) have shown a common trend: populist parties, with a strong anti-immigration
component, have grown power. They have received more votes and have often been elected to office. The
common narrative is that these parties have expressed the fear, resentment and sometimes anger of citizens
in response to the increased number of immigrants in their communities. The perception of immigrants as
outsiders who compete for jobs, drain public finances and constitute a threat to national values, especially if
they are from different cultures, seems to be the main reason for this sentiment.
    Politicians from populist parties have played into these fears by focusing on immigrants’ economic cost and
their supposed legal violations. They usually portray immigrants as impoverished, unskilled, unproductive,
and hence a drain on the economy. Examining data from recent decades of immigration, however, tells a
different story. They show that there is a large percentage of highly educated and skilled immigrants in
Europe and in the US. Often, the immigrant population contains a higher share of college educated than the
native population (see Docquier et al., 2014). Overall, economists find that immigrants, especially highly
educated immigrants, contribute to the performance and growth of the receiving economy. Immigrants have
enhanced technological and scientific innovation (Kerr and Lincoln, 2010), boosted productivity (Peri, 2012)
and produced, on average, a fiscal surplus (Orrenius, 2017). In general, immigrants are a combination of
more and less educated people, and have a positive effect on a country’s aggregate economic growth and
fiscal balance. The effect of immigrants in specific cases, however, depends on their characteristics and on
the features of the receiving economy.
    European voters likely misperceive the average contribution of immigrants (as shown in Alesina et al.,
2018). But does the exposure to immigrants elicit an electoral response? Does the inflow of different types of
immigrants solicit different electoral responses? What characteristics of citizens affect the voting response to
immigration? In this paper, we address these questions using a sample of elections in 12 European countries,
over the period 2007-2016, when several populist parties in Europe rose to political prominence. We exploit
the large variation of immigrants’ population share in regions within those countries and the differential flows
of more and less educated immigrants by country of origin.
    The question asked in this paper, and in a series of recent papers which we will review below, is about how
immigration has affected the political vote of natives, either by changing their attitudes or their willingness to
vote. A previous branch of the research in economics and political science has focused on a related question,
namely: what determines individual attitudes and policy preferences towards immigrants and immigration?
And do these differ in response to high and less skilled immigrants? Several of these papers looked whether
theories of labor market competition (Mayda, 2006; Scheve and Slaughter, 2001; Hainmueller and Hiscox,
2007) or fiscal effects of immigrants (Facchini and Mayda, 2009; Hanson et al., 2007) could explain the
individual attitudes towards immigrants. The labor market competition theory predicts stronger opposition
from natives with skills similar to that of the majority of immigrants. The fiscal theory predicts stronger
opposition from richer people who will pay the redistributive costs. These studies find at best mixed support
for both explanations.
    In general one robust finding of these studies is that the schooling level of the voters is a very strong pre-
dictor of the attitudes towards immigration. College education is associated with positive attitudes towards
immigrants and approval for open immigration policies. Hainmueller and Hiscox (2010) is a relevant paper


                                                        2
tackling the question of what determines natives’ attitudes towards high/low-skilled immigrants and how this
depends on their education level. Their findings, based on data from a survey of 2,285 people, show that
neither labor market competition nor fiscal competition explains those attitudes well. In fact, more educated
natives have more positive attitudes towards both types of immigrants, relative to less educated natives. This
is at odds with the idea that individuals are more opposed to immigrants with similar labor market skills.
Moreover they find that richer people are more in favor of immigrants than poorer people, and this is even
stronger if they live in states with more redistribution. Hainmueller and Hiscox (2010) argue that economic
self-interest does not motivate the vote, rather the perception of what is good for society does. This would
explain the more favorable opinion for high-skilled immigrants who, arguably, have a larger positive effect on
the overall economy and society. An alternative "cultural" explanation, in which tolerance and preference
for cultural diversity is associated with more education, is also consistent with those findings. Card et al.
(2012) show that the individual "cultural" assessment of immigrants drives overall opinion towards immigra-
tion policies while the economic evaluations of their contribution is less relevant. Poutvaara and Steinhardt
(2018) show that the individual perception of not having what one deserves in life is strongly associated with
worries about immigration, particularly among the low-skilled.
   A more recent strand of the literature has directly tested the link between immigration and the electoral
vote. The specific question asked in several papers is whether an increased inflow of immigrants affected the
vote of natives and in what direction. The common observation of higher immigration flows and growing
electoral consensus for anti-immigration parties has driven scholars to ask to what extent does the first
determines the second. This effect requires that changes in the local presence of immigrants either change
attitudes for (at least) some part of the native population or change their willingness to vote. Whatever is
their initial attitude towards immigrants, natives either become more concerned with this issue and more
aware that this is relevant to them (i.e., the issue gains salience) or they change their opinion of immigrants in
response to their inflow. In line with the literature on "political persuasion" (e.g. Della Vigna and Gentzkow,
2009), some groups may revise their view of immigrants in a Bayesian updating (contact theory, prevalence
of personal experience). In this process, individuals acquire "new information" from meeting or interacting
with immigrants or being exposed to news related to them in their local community. This may change their
vote, and the platform of elected parties in terms of immigration policies would reflects such a shift. In this
perspective, the key question is not what characteristics of people affect their view of immigrants, but what
characteristics of people are associated with larger or smaller revisions of their preferences for immigrants, as
a consequence of immigration. Similarly, it is interesting to know what characteristics of immigrants produce
a positive or negative revision of such preferences.
   A series of recent studies has taken this approach focusing on how immigration has changed the political
landscape in individual countries, especially in terms of votes to populist/nationalistic parties.1 These studies
considered individual countries and asked whether an increase in immigrant share at the local level was
associated with an increase in the vote for specific anti-immigration parties2 . Each of these papers is focused
    1 A recent literature looks at other economic determinants of the increase in the share of populist vote in many European

countries. Algan et al. (2017), for instance analyzes how the intensity of the Great Recession has affected such votes.
    2 Specifically, Otto and Steinhardt (2014) analyze the effect of immigration on the vote for the German People Union in

Hamburg. Barone et al. (2016) look at immigration and vote to the center-right/northern league coalition in Italy. Halla et
al. (2017) look at votes to the Freedom Party of Austria. Harmon (2017) look at cultural distance of immigrants and vote for
the Danish People Party in Denmark. Brunner and Kuhn (2018) analyze the vote to the Swiss People Party in Switzerland.
Edo et al. (2017) look at the French vote for the "Front National" in France. Finally Mayda et al. (2018) show that in the US
high-skilled immigration has been strongly associated with a higher share of Democratic vote and low-skilled immigration with
a higher share of Republican vote.


                                                             3
on a specific country or city, and they use historical location of immigrants and a shift-share instrumental-
variable approach to identify the effect of immigrants on the vote. The specific national context is a limitation
of these papers as the generalization of the findings can be problematic. However, taken together, these studies
present rather robust evidence of different voting responses to high-skilled and low-skilled immigrants. An
increase in the immigrant population share in a region/municipality is associated with a shift of the vote
towards right-wing nationalist parties. Instead, focusing on the effect of highly skilled immigrants only (those
with some tertiary education), one finds a shift of native votes away from right-wing nationalistic parties.
This second finding seems as strong as the first on low-skilled immigrants, although not as much emphasized.
   This observation is the point of departure of our present paper which generalizes the analysis of immi-
gration and voting behavior by homogenizing data for all parties and all elections in 12 European countries.
In order to address more directly the connection between the votes to a party and its policy platform, we
introduce an innovation in this literature. We classify each party on a common scale in terms of the intensity
of their "nationalism". We quantify nationalism using a textual analysis of their political agenda as stated
in their Manifesto (using data from the Manifesto Project Database). We merge this measure of the average
nationalism of parties to the information about what party an individual voted in the previous election, from
the European Social Survey, for a large and representative sample of EU citizens in 12 countries. We use this
information to construct a panel of votes in 28 European elections, and we merge it (using the European Labor
Force Survey) with the change in high and low-skilled immigrants as share of adult population measured for
each European region. Our main specification analyzes how the change in local immigrants was associated
to the revealed "nationalism" of voters in EU regions.
   In order to go beyond correlations we use the shift-share instrument (Card, 2001) to predict, separately,
high-skilled and low-skilled immigration based on the location of immigrants by area of birth in 2005 and the
growth of each national group by skill level. The differentiation in country of origin and skill intensities of
groups allows us to estimate two separate effects for skilled and unskilled immigrants. While the variation in
the inflow of high and low-skilled immigrants is not random across counties, the use of our instrument and
the inclusion of a rich set of fixed effects and controls should reduce concerns about omitted variable bias.
We base our instrument on the immigrant distribution in 2005 and test that the instrument is not correlated
to previous changes in demographic and economic variables in the period 2000-05. This mitigates potential
bias from correlations between pre-trends of the shift-share instrument and existing trends (e.g. Jaeger et
al., 2018).
   An additional contribution of our paper is that by combining datasets, we can analyze different outcomes:
the impact of immigration on votes as captured by elections, on individual party preferences as revealed in
surveys and on individual attitudes towards immigrants (also obtained from the European Social Survey).
This analysis, therefore, connects the studies that analyze immigration and individual attitudes (such as
Hanson et al., 2007 or Hatton, 2016, on refugees and asylum policies) with those analyzing immigration
and voting behavior (e.g. Halla et al., 2017; Barone et al., 2016). Moreover, by looking at the impact of
immigrants on vote turnout, we can discuss whether a change in individual attitudes or a change in voting
participation is the more likely channel for the aggregate effect of immigration on the political success of
"nationalistic" parties.
   Our main findings are three. First, we find a strong negative correlation of highly educated immigrants as
share of the population and intensity of nationalist preferences in the parties voted by citizens. We also find an
opposite and similar positive association of the population share of less skilled immigrants and voted parties’


                                                        4
nationalist preferences. Second, we find that the change in preferences in response to high and low-skilled
immigrant share is stronger for less educated citizen voters than for highly educated citizen voters. It is also
stronger for older voters than younger voters. This is consistent with the idea that people with less previous
exposure to immigrants respond more significantly to their presence, both in positive and negative terms.
Third, we find that average changes in voting behavior do not derive from changes in participation rates of
different groups but are instead consistent with changes in individual opinion, both in vote preferences and
in the attitudes towards immigrants. In particular, an increase in low-skilled immigrants moves individual’s
vote and attitudes towards opinions and parties that are more "nationalistic".
    A possible interpretation of these results is that individuals have only weak preferences on immigration
policies, or weak priors on the desirability of immigrants, and when they interact with them at the local
level they revise these preferences, in the light of their local experience. If this is the case, the results seem
to indicate that interactions with highly educated immigrants bring individual to revise their preferences in
favor of them. However, interactions with less educated immigrants may produce the opposite effect. This
revision of priors or updating of preferences implies that changes in individual preferences affect political
opinions. A recent paper by Alesina et al. (2018) analyzes how individual views about immigration affect
the preference of citizens for redistribution. The paper shows, interestingly, that less educated people in
sectors with high immigrant competition tend to overestimate the presence and the cost of immigrants. This
effect is also associated with higher demand for redistribution. That paper shows a larger mis-perception
of less educated citizens about the cost and salience of immigrants. This could be a reason for the larger
pro-nationalist effect of low-skilled immigration on this group that we find in our analysis.3
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we discuss the data and specifically we document
the intensity of nationalistic preferences in recent elections and the increase in immigrants as share of resident
population. In Section 3 we present the empirical strategy first and then a simple decomposition that allows
us to analyze the impact of immigration on individual opinions and turnout. In Section 4 we discuss the
baseline results on immigration and nationalist voting. In Section 5 we present our results by exploiting
individual level heterogeneity. In Section 6 we decompose the channels of nationalist voting behavior focusing
on individual opinion and turnout. In Section 7, we present some scenarios that simulate the potential effect
on vote of different immigration flows. Section 8 concludes the paper.


2     Data and Summary Statistics
An important innovation of this paper is the construction of an index of political nationalism based on each
party’s ideology and agenda. We built on four different datasets. Our primary data source is the European
Social Survey (ESS). This is a multi-country survey, which was administered in 8 waves (one every two years)
in 36 countries between 2002 and 2016. The ESS selects a random sample of individuals that is representative
of the population over 18 in each country. On average, each wave contains around 1500 individuals for each
country. The data include detailed information on personal and family characteristics such as age, gender,
education, marital status, number of children in the family, place of birth and labor market characteristics

    3 Alternative explanation would be that people’s opinion on immigrants (either positive or negative) do not change much,

but the presence of immigrants makes the issue more salient for some groups of natives and pushes them to vote in response
to such an issue. In this case high-skilled immigration may encourage the more pro-immigrant groups to vote, while low-skilled
immigrants may push to vote the more nationalist. In our analysis however we find that differential change in participation to
the vote by different groups does not seem to be a relevant channel for the aggregate effects.


                                                              5
such as employment status and work characteristics. It also includes detailed information on the parental
background, such as parents’ education, employment status, occupation when the respondent was 14 years
old and their country of birth.
    ESS data report also two specific questions on voting and political preferences of individuals: (i) “which
party did you vote in the last national election? ”, and (ii) “which party do you feel close to? ”. The answers
to those questions are the actual names of the parties in each surveyed country, which we link to information
on the political agenda of these parties, available from the Manifesto Project Database (MPD). This dataset
describes the political manifesto of 1093 parties over 715 parliamentary elections.4 Each party’s political
agenda is studied through a content analysis of its political manifesto: the share of quasi-sentences related
to a topic as a fraction of all sentences in the whole political manifesto is taken as a measure of the relevance
of that topic for that party. For each topic the MPD identifies two measures: one of favorable/positive
mentions of the topic, and the other of unfavorable/negative mentions. This prompts the construction of
two measures. The first one is a measure of salience of the topic in the political agenda of the party. This
is computed as the sum of the mentions (both positive and negative) related to the topic relative to total
quasi-sentences. The second one is a measure of party preferences on the topic, computed as the difference
between positive and negative mentions relative to total quasi-sentences. Several topics are analyzed, such as
protectionism, the role of traditional morality, civic mindedness, multiculturalism and several others. In our
analysis we focus on parties’ political preferences on: (i) European Community/Union and (ii) National way
of life. The former takes into account all mentions on the EU like the desirability/opposition of expanding
the EU or increasing EU competences. The latter contains all mentions of nationalism, patriotism, pride of
citizenship, etc. We compute the average over time of those indicators for each party,5 and we consider those
averages as the measures of "salience" and "intensity" for that party on each specific issue. We then combine
the two topics (EU and national way of life) using a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) summarizing the
Salience and the Intensity of political parties on what we call "nationalism", which correlates negatively
with favorable mentions of EU variable and positively with favorable mentions of the national way of life.
Results of the PCA are available in the on-line Appendix II. Finally, we harmonize and link this index with
the voting/political preferences of individual from ESS. In the main part of the analysis, we exploit within
region variation over time in voting behaviors between consecutive elections.
    ESS data report information on regional location of respondents within a country at NUTS2 level for all
EU countries with few exceptions (e.g. Austria, Germany, UK) where it is at NUTS1 level.6 We use this
information to attach to each ESS respondent the number of migrants in the region of residence in a given year.
We retrieve this information by aggregating individual data from the European Labor Force Survey (EULFS)
that reports individual information on age, employment status and education, representative of the population
above 15. Starting from 2005, EULFS also reports for each individual the birthplace, distinguishing fifteen
different regions of origin.7 We use this variable to compute the share of immigrants in the total population

    4 The MPD includes all parties that participated to national elections, and obtained at least one seat in the parliament over

the 1945-2017 period, covering all democratic countries in the OECD and Eastern Europe.
    5 While the majority of parties we observe in ESS data appear in the political arena by the end of the 1990s, for the oldest

parties we drop all years before the 1990. In this way we focus on a period in which the European integration process becomes
more explicit in the parties policy agenda. The MPD tracks changes in parties’ denomination, as well as parties’ fusions and
splits. The list of the parties included in the analysis is available in Table A9 in the on-line appendix Appendix III.
    6 The "Nomenclature for Territorial Units for Statistics","NUTS" system, partitions EU countries into Macro-Regions,

Regions and Provinces which are called NUTS1, NUTS2 and NUTS3 levels. We use the intermediate, NUTS2, level commonly
indicated as "regions" in our analysis.
    7 These are the residence country, a foreign EU15 country, a foreign EU member state entered in the EU on 2004, a foreign




                                                               6
in 2005 at regional level as follow:

                                                                   O
                                                                 Mr,s,t
                                                    mO
                                                     r,s,t =              ,                                                (1)
                                                               P opr,2005

    where mO                                   O
           r,s,t is the share of migrants and Mr,s,t is the total stock of migrants in NUTS2 region r born in
the group of origin countries O ∈ {All, N on EU 28, EU 28}, with skills s ∈ {All, HS, LS} at time t.
    Combining individual ESS country samples with EULFS migration data and MPD data on political
agenda of parties, we obtain information on 12 European countries for the 2007-2016 period. The countries
in our final sample are Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Portugal, Spain,
Switzerland, Sweden and United Kingdom. For these countries, we build origin-skill specific shares of mi-
grants at the regional level.8 The sample covers 114 regions; for these regions we also extract from Eurostat
and OECD sources regional data on GDP per capita, population density, unemployment rate, percentage of
tertiary educated individuals, value of social benefits other than social transfer in kind per capita, the ratio
0-14 over 15-65 years old population and a measure of total number of crimes.9


    [INSERT TABLE 1 HERE]


    Our final sample includes countries for which ESS data cover at least two national elections. The main
identifying variation in our empirical analysis is the within region changes in voting behaviors over different
elections.10 Table 1 reports the number and year of elections covered by ESS questions for each country in
columns (1) and (2) and the number and years of the surveys in columns (3) and (4). In our main dataset
we focus on individual votes at the latest elections, and hence we only use variation between elections, even
if the ESS was conducted more than once between elections. For instance, in the case of France, we exploit
variation in voting behaviors between French national election years in 2007 and 2012 (see column (2) in
Table 1), even if the ESS survey was conducted in years 2010, 2012, 2014 and 2016 (see column (4)). In
this specification we pool the individual data in repeated representative cross sections. By including a region
fixed effect, we treat them as a region-level pseudo panel.
    Alternatively, we use the data to construct a genuine longitudinal dataset at the individual level. For
each individual we consider as one data point the party preference expressed at the time of the survey which
is available each survey year. We then consider as another data point the party she/he voted for at the
last election. Hence, we have two observations for each individual, over time, and we can use these data to
analyze the individual evolution of party preference in a longitudinal approach and controlling for individual
fixed effects. Table A2 in the on-line appendix provides descriptive statistics for the sample of individuals
who reveals their current party preference. Table A3 provides a measure of differences in terms of political
preferences between the party voted at the last national elections and the currently preferred party. On
average 16% of the sampled individuals changed party preference between the last national election and the
year of the survey. While the database using repeated cross-section of electoral votes will be used to perform

EU Accession country in 2007/2013, EFTA, Other Europe, North Africa, Other Africa, Near and Middle East, East Asia, South
and South East Asia, North America, Central America and Caribbean, South America and Australia and Oceania.
    8 Germany provides information on the total stock of the foreign born population, but not on their birthplace. We use

information on the nationality of immigrants instead to impute the birthplace of the foreign born population.
    9 An extended data section is available in the on-line Appendix I and Table A1.
   10 We excluded Italy and Greece from the analysis, as the ESS data during 2005-2016 only cover one election in each of these

countries (2013 in Italy, and 2009 in Greece).


                                                               7
the analysis of the vote across regions over time, the longitudinal dataset allows a more careful analysis of
the change in individual political preferences over time.


    [INSERT TABLE 2 HERE]


    Table 2 describes the final sample. This includes 48767 individuals between 18 and 90 years old. The
sample is balanced between males and females. Overall, 35% of the respondents have tertiary education, and
19% of respondents have a father with tertiary education. On average, the party for which these individuals
voted included 3.2% of their sentences mentioning the EU and 1.5% mentioning issues related to the national
way. These measures reveal how salient these issues were for the electorate. On average, the mention about
the EU were positive (1.6% is the positive minus negative incidence) and also about national way of life
(1.2% is the net average positive incidence of mentions of national way of life). We construct the indicators
of party preferences for the EU and a national way of life to obtain synthetic indicators of nationalism and
its salience. These are obtained from principal component analyses performed on the indicators of prefer-
ences for EU and nationalism, and the salience of these two, respectively. There is a very strong negative
correlation between EU preferences and national way of life preferences, so the first principal component
of the two captures a very large fraction of common variance. This is what we call "nationalism" and we
standardize the index so that a one-unit change corresponds to one standard deviation. Then, the lower
part of Table 2 shows some summary statistics of variables measured at the regional (NUTS2) level. Focus-
ing on the presence of immigrants, the average share (2007-2016) of extra-EU immigrants in the considered
sample was equal to 7.1% of the population and it was larger than the population share of EU immigrants
(5.9% of the population). low-skilled immigrants account for about three fourths of total migrant population
(9.7% vs. 3.3% of total population in the region). The significant inflow of low-skilled immigrants and their
recent presence are considered by some an important element in the rise of the nationalistic parties in Europe.


    [INSERT Figure 1 HERE]


    Our electoral data originate from the ESS and we use them to evaluate individual voting. Hence, we check
whether the aggregate vote shares for the most important parties at the national level, calculated using our
dataset, correspond to the official figures reported in the elections. We use the European Election Database
(EED), which is the most reliable source for this type of information, to measure the party vote shares at
elections. Figure 1, panel (a) plots the total share of votes to the top three parties for each national election
obtained using ESS data (vertical axis) against the same share obtained from the EED (horizontal axis).
Panel (b) performs the same exercise, focusing on share of votes received in each election-country by the top
five parties.11 As there may be measurement error in the ESS, we would like to check if there is systematic
under or over measurement of votes going to the top parties in the analyzed election. Figure 1 shows that
country-election observations are close to the 45 degree line, which would imply exact same measure from
the two sources. The departures are relatively small, sometimes positive and sometimes negative, and they
show no specific pattern. This reassures us that the distribution of votes recorded in the ESS is close to the

   11 Table A4 in the on-line appendix shows the results in terms of differences between ESS and EED for each election for the

top 5 parties. Considering the whole set of elections, the average difference between the two datasets is small (about 0.63% on
average).


                                                              8
officially recorded one and does not seem to exhibit systematic deviations from it.


      [INSERT Figure 2 HERE]


      Figure 2 describes the range of variation in the nationalism index, across parties. The figure shows that
some parties have a very strongly nationalistic platform and focus. Panel (a) of Figure 2 shows the value
of the nationalism index for the top and bottom ten European parties according to that index.12 Parties
with the most nationalist policy agenda are EU skeptical, anti-immigrants and occupy the right-wing of
the spectrum. The top one, UK independent Party, was one of the more aggressive campaigner for Brexit.
The second one, the Danish People Party, has brought an extreme nationalistic view in a country usually
considered very tolerant. The fourth, the Front National in France, had significant electoral success at the
recent French presidential elections, with a very strong anti-immigrants message. Many of these parties are
also in the top ten in terms nationalism’s salience (see panel (b)), namely how much of their manifesto they
devote to issues of nationality and EU relative to all other issues. At the other end of the spectrum, parties
with the less nationalist agendas support a more active role for European institutions and take a more open
view of immigrants. They are usually left-wing parties (e.g., Nouveau Centre, Parti Radical de Gauche, Les
Verts), center-left parties as the Moderate Coalition Party (MSP), as well as regional minority parties that
support a European policy agenda to escape national centralism (e.g., "We Ourselves" in Northern Ireland;
the Basque Nationalist Party in Spain).


      [INSERT Figure 3 HERE]


      Figure 3 presents average levels of nationalism when we aggregate parties into broad "political families"
according to the Chapel Hill Dataset. This picture provides an idea of where nationalism resides in European
parties. We assign parties in the ESS to political families using parties’ membership or affiliation with inter-
national EU parties and self-identification defined by the Chapel Hill Dataset. Unsurprisingly, nationalism
is very high among parties belonging to the "radical right" group and among those with high attachment to
local territory and culture (e.g. Agrarian/Center and Confessional families). Nationalism is relatively low
among parties belonging to the liberal and socialist tradition.


      [INSERT Figure 4 HERE]


      Figure 4 shows the average nationalism of individuals based upon their self-positioning on a political scale
that ranges from 0 (extreme left) to 10 (extreme right). Moving from from left to right across the political
spectrum, the intensity of individual preferences for nationalism increases almost monotonically with the
political scale. Individuals who self-identify as "left leaning" tend to vote anti-nationalist policy agendas. To
the contrary right leaning individuals vote parties with a more pro-nationalist agenda.


      [INSERT Figure 5 HERE]


  12 The   level and salience of nationalism of each party in our sample is available in the on-line appendix in Table A9 and Figure
A1.


                                                                 9
     Figure 5 shows the range of variation in the nationalism index considering the vote across European
regions. We only report the top and the bottom twenty European regions in terms of average nationalism.
Regions where people voted for the least nationalist political agenda are Spain, France, Belgium and, to a
lesser extent, Sweden. Moreover, the more nationalist voting comes from regions in countries that are less
engaged into European economic and political integration such as Switzerland, UK, and Denmark. Voters
in these regions privilege a nationalist policy agenda. This figure shows average levels of the nationalism
index, while in our empirical analysis changes in the index within regions over time represent the relevant
identifying variation.


     [INSERT Figure 6 HERE]


     Providing a sense of how the nationalism index has evolved over time in the sample, Figure 6 plots na-
tionalism levels across countries as produced by different elections. We see a clear upward trend in average
nationalism over time during the ten years considered. Even when looking at individual countries, both
with initially high (e.g. Switzerland and Great Britain) and low (Spain and Sweden) level of nationalism we
observe widespread increase in the index.


     [INSERT Figure 7 HERE]


     Figure 7 shows the evolution of the share of high (panel (a)) and low (panel (b)) educated migrants
over the total population, following the same timing of the available elections. Overall, we notice a positive
upward trend, which is steeper for highly educated immigrants. Notice, however that low educated immigrant
share of the population is almost double than the high educated immigrants population. Comparing Figure
6 and Figure 7 we can intuitively point out a common trend, which is interesting but far from proving any
causation.


3       Empirical Specification and Identification
In this section we present our basic empirical approach to investigate the impact of immigration on nationalism
of EU citizens as revealed by their vote. As key explanatory variable we include, in the basic specification,
the adult population share of more and less educated immigrants. As our goal is to focus on how immigrants
may change the vote of EU citizens, we only include natives’ voting as outcome. This eliminates the direct
effect of naturalized immigrants on voting. We define as N ationi,r,e the normalized value of nationalism
index (first principal component of favorable mentions towards EU and national way of life) voted by native
citizen i in region r (NUTS2) in election e. In our basic specification, we allow additional individual and
regional characteristics to affect individual preferences, in addition to our main variables of interest. The
basic specification is as follows:


                           N ationi,r,e = α + βH mH         L
                                                  r,e + βL mr,e + ζXi,r,e + γΓr,e + θe + ηr + i,r,e .                     (2)

     The two variables of interest are mH        L
                                        r,e and mr,e . They represent migrant with tertiary (H) schooling
                                                                                                         13


    13 Specifically,   we define highly educated immigrants as those who have completed at least one year of tertiary education


                                                                 10
and secondary or less (L) schooling, respectively, as share of the total 2005 population in region r in election
e.14 The vector Xi,r,e contains a set of individual characteristics of voter i including age, gender and whether
the individual is tertiary educated. The vector Γr,e contains a set of NUTS2 regional characteristics of region
r including the level of GDP per capita, population density, unemployment rate and percentage of tertiary
educated individuals. We also capture fixed regional factors, such as institutions and local culture, with
regional fixed effects ηr , while aggregate trends through elections can be captured by the election fixed effects
θe .
       Estimating equation (2) using OLS produces a measure of the partial correlation between the high and low-
skilled immigration share and natives’ voting preferences. The estimates of coefficients βH and βL will capture
such correlations. However, it is likely that individual and regional unobserved characteristics captured by
i,r,e may be correlated with natives’ voting preferences and may also affect new immigrants location decision.
If this is case, the OLS estimation will be a biased estimate of the causal effect of immigration on votes. To
mitigate this potential bias, we use an instrumental variable approach based on a variation of the widely used
shift-share methodology (see Card, 2001, Mayda et al., 2018). The intuition of this instrumental variable
approach is to use past location of immigrants by country of origin as predictor of subsequent inflow of
immigrants, as uncorrelated (or less correlated) with current factors affecting vote and political preferences
of individuals. The changes in aggregate flows of immigrants across countries of origin, likely driven by
aggregate push factors, are allocated to EU regions according to the early distribution of immigrants. Hence
such a shift-share or "enclave" instrument generates variation of regional migration over time due to the
interaction between previously established immigrants settlement and aggregate national flows. Both those
components are likely to be less correlated with economic and political region-specific changes than the actual
migrant flows and this should reduce the severity of the omitted variable bias. We will also test the correlation
of such an instrument with the pre-period (2000-2005) economic and demographic regional trends. This will
reduce worries of pre-trend correlations, and hence of potential endogeneity and omitted variables bias, if
persistent trends are correlated with immigration. These checks would significantly reduce the worries raised
in recent criticism of this kind of IV strategy (see Jaeger et al., 2018 and Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2018).
       A novel aspect of our analysis, as we want to capture skill-specific effects of immigration, is the construction
of two different instrumental variables taking into account the aggregate variation of immigrant flows by skill,
and applying it to the same pre-period distribution of immigrants, by origin, across regions.15 Namely we
define the initial presence of immigrants from origin country c in year 2005 in each NUTS2 region r as share
of their total population in 12 European countries in 2005 as follow:

                                                              Mc,r,2005
                                            shc,r,2005 = P                   ,                                        (3)
                                                            r∈EU12 Mc,r,2005

       where Mc,r,2005 is the stock of immigrants born in country c and residing in region r in year 2005, while
the denominator is the total stock of immigrants residing as of 2005 in countries of our sample who are born
in country c. Year 2005 is the earliest year to construct such regional distribution from the EULFS. The
EULFS, in its harmonized codification scheme, grouped the origin countries in 15 groups that we use as
"countries" of origin.16 Then, we compute the total stocks of migrants resident in the EU 12 countries, born
which corresponds to level 5 or above of the ISCED classification.
  14 In the empirical analysis we will consider those shares as well as separate shares for immigrants from EU28, and from

outside of EU28.
  15 This is also done in Mayda et al., 2018.
  16 The fifteen birthplace regions recognized by the EULFS are the following: natives, EU15, New European member state




                                                           11
in countries of origin c in each year t ∈ {2007, 2008, ..., 2016} separately for two skill levels s equal to H, for
college educated and to L. Namely we compute:

                                                         X
                                            s                 s
                                         T Mc,t =            Mc,r,t for s = H, L.                                     (4)
                                                    r∈EU12

   We can then predict the total number (stock) of immigrants of skill s, origin c in region r and year t as
the interaction (product) of those two values, as follows:

                                             s                      s
                                           M
                                           cc,r,t = shc,r,2005 ∗ T Mc,t .

We sum across all countries of origin and standardize for the initial total population in region r to have the
predicted skilled and unskilled immigrant as share of the population in region r and year y as follows:


                                                          P cs
                                                              Mc,r,t
                                                b sr,t
                                                m        = c         .
                                                          P opr,2005

   We will use these imputed shares as instrumental variables for each skill level H and L. The prediction
power of our IVs for each skill will depend on the tendency of that group to locate where previous immigrants
from the same origin did. The pre-period distribution across regions by country of origin is not skill specific,
as to avoid correlation with regional features that would select high or low-skilled workers. In this way, the
independent variation of the two instrument is only generated by the differential aggregate flows of immigrants
by skill from the same country of origin.
   Instrumental variables based on the shift-share methodology have been used before to explore the relation
between immigration and voting (see e.g. Otto and Steinhardt, 2014; Mendez and Cutillas, 2014; Brunner and
Kuhn, 2018; Halla et al., 2017; Barone et al., 2016). They have also been subject to a fair amount of discussion
and criticism (e.g. Jaeger et al., 2018 and Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2018). Persistent local conditions that
influence immigrants location decision and natives voting preferences can threaten the identification of our
instrumental variables. To reduce those concerns we will check the correlation between the instrument and
pre-2005 economic and demographic trends. Moreover in our case two sources of variation in the flows
of immigrants in the EU post 2007 were important and orthogonal to cross-regional presence of previous
immigrants and to the local political sentiment. First, the access to the EU and the implementation of the
Schengen Agreement between 2004 and 2006 for 9 new EU member states17 produced an increased inflow
of immigrants from these new EU countries to the countries of Western Europe. Second, the widespread
economic and financial crisis of 2007-2009, increased emigration especially of highly skilled from countries of
Southern and Eastern Europe generating important exogenous variation of these flows in receiving countries.
Both shocks were large and independent of previous regional conditions, hence uncorrelated with past shocks.
Hence, these large aggregate shocks may have reduced the correlation of the instruments and unobserved
regional factors. Table 3 shows the coefficients of regressing the IV at the regional level on pre-2005 growth
of GDP per capita, employment rate, population and share of tertiary educated. Specifically the dependent
from 2004, new European member state of 2007/2013, EFTA, Other Europe, North Africa, Other Africa, Near and Middle
East, East Asia, South and South East Asia, North America, Central America and Caribbean, South America and Australia
and Oceania. Additional information on data and more details on the construction of the IV is available in Appendix I.
   17 Signed on the 16th of April 2003 by Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and

Slovenia, the Schengen Agreement became operative for those countries on December 2007.


                                                              12
variable is the imputed growth of immigrants 2007-2012 either for all immigrants (column 1) or for high
and less educated (2 and 3) and then separating non-EU immigrants (columns 4-6) and EU immigrants
(columns 7-9). The independent variable is the 2000-2005 growth of GDP per capita (row 1), employment
rate (row 2) population (row 3) and share of tertiary educated (row 4). Most of the correlations are non
significant. The only significant coefficient, which drives a few correlations, is the negative correlation between
predicted growth of non EU high-skilled 2007-2012 and employment rate growth 2000-2005. This would
suggest that regions whose employment growth was slow in 2000-2005 are associated with larger share of
non EU immigrants whose inflow of high-skilled increased. While this correlation may add a caveat to
the regression results, this is not the correlation that would generate positive association between skilled
immigrants and anti-nationalist attitudes of voters.


3.1     Allowing heterogeneity across individuals and regions
We explore two important sources of heterogeneity in the effects of immigrants on native vote. First, different
types of citizens, especially in terms of education levels, may respond differently to the inflow of immigrants.
As we discuss below, if immigration is an "event" that reveals information and may change the attitudes or
the beliefs of citizens towards immigrants, it may have a different effect across groups of voters depending on
their perceptions and priors. Pursuing this line of analysis, we split the native population by education (not
tertiary and tertiary), age groups (18-37, 38-57 and 58+), location (rural, small town and cities) and gen-
der.18 We estimated equation (2) across different subsamples through the 2SLS estimation presented above.
Investigating the heterogeneous effects of immigrants on natives’ voting behavior is one of the contributions
of this paper.
    Second, it is also interesting to analyze whether effects of immigration vary depending on region specific
socio-economic characteristics. For instance, natives from regions with strong redistributive policies may
perceive more competition on the welfare system from low educated immigrants and shift their vote towards
nationalist platforms. At the regional level we focus on the importance of the welfare system (see Otto and
Steinhardt, 2014 and Becker and Fetzer, 2017), children education (see Halla et al., 2017) and the local crime
rate (see Mendez and Cutillas, 2014). These specific features affect local public goods (local government,
schooling, policing) that could be crowded or depleted, in the view of natives, by less educated immigrants or,
possibly, helped by highly educated immigrants. Defining φ̄2010 the median value of the regional characteristic
in 2010, we estimate with 2SLS the following equation:



      N ationi,r,e =α + β1H mH                           H H                            L L
                             r,e 1(φr,2010 > φ̄2010 ) + β2 mr,e 1(φr,2010 < φ̄2010 ) + β1 mr,e 1(φr,2010 > φ̄2010 )

                     + β2L mL
                            r,e 1(φr,2010 < φ̄2010 ) + ζXi,r,e + γΓr,e + θe + ηr + i,r,e .                                 (5)

    The estimated parameters β̂1s and β̂2s are respectively the impact of the share of s ∈ {H, L} skilled
immigrants in region r at election e on individual voting preferences in the regions above and below the
median of the regional characteristic considered indicated as φ. To test the effect across different levels of
welfare system, we compute as a proxy the social benefits other than social transfer in kind per capita. Halla

   18 Barone et al. (2016) show that the presence of immigrants increase the votes for center-right parties in Italy, and that

the results are heterogeneous across municipality size: the results are significant only in middle sized municipalities and not
significant in big cities, due to segmented neighborhoods, earlier immigration settlement and higher education level of natives.


                                                              13
et al. (2017) show that the presence of immigrants could affect the quality of local neighborhoods and schools
and that could influence voting preferences of parents who are worried about the education of their children.
We test this second channel by looking at the ratio of children to adults at the regional level. Finally,
the crime level across regions is computed as the total number of crimes, including robberies, homicides,
burglaries and thefts.


3.2    Decomposing the effect: turnout and voting preferences
The reduced form structure of equation (2) does not allow us to identify the channels that connect migration
with natives’ voting behavior. To examine potential mechanisms, we think of the inflow of immigrants
as an "event" that takes place in a local area. We can think of it as providing exposure of local voters to
immigrants. This "event" may produce a change in vote by affecting individual attitudes towards immigrants.
The interaction with migrants and/or getting local news about them produces a negative/positive revision
of the degree of individual nationalism. An "event" that implies contact with (or coverage of) immigrants
perceived as enriching and helping the area would likely generate a reduction in nationalism. An event which
implies contact/interactions with immigrants perceived as not contributing positively to the local area, may
result in an increase in nationalism.
   In addition, an increase in immigrants may contribute to make "immigration" a more salient issue in the
voting decisions of some groups. In this sense, immigrants’ presence may not only affect the nationalistic
view of a person but also make it more likely that those views are turned into vote. If people reinforce
their nationalist views, they may act upon it and vote for parties whose agenda is more nationalist (anti-
immigrants) and for which this dimension is more salient. This channel has been emphasized by studies that
show that attitudes are not easy to change but events, information and news may change the willingness to
act upon these attitudes with one’s vote (see Barone et al., 2015).
   Let’s define two groups s and u with different average preferences for the intensity of "nationalism" of
their elected officials. These groups can be thought as the group of skilled and unskilled citizens, but they
may also be sub-groups of those. Standardizing n, an indicator of nationalist intensity, to be between 0 and
1, we label the two groups so that u has "initial" or "basic" preferences that are more nationalistic than
group s. This implies at period t=0: 0 ≤ n0s < 0.5 < n0u ≤ 1.
   Next, we define a revision of average preferences for each group as a function of the local change in high and
low-skilled immigrants as shares of the population. This variable proxies the change in likelihood/frequency
of interactions of the local population with immigrants and/or the change in intensity of local news related
to them. Hence, the preferences of natives in period t=1 may change as a result of immigrants’ flow to a
region. This is captured by the following relation:
                                                                      
                                                           ∆sm ∆um
                                n1j   =   n0j   + fj           ,           ,   for j = s, u.                 (6)
                                                           P op P op
   In equation (6), the function fj (., .) captures the extent to which the average person of group j revised her
position in terms of nationalism, as a consequence of being exposed to a change in skilled (sm ) and unskilled
(um ) immigrants.
   It is plausible to think that an increased probability of interaction with skilled immigrants would allow
citizens to revise their priors towards less nationalism. Contact theory predicts that people fear less what
they know (see e.g. McLaren, 2003) and highly skilled immigrants are likely to be perceived as contributing


                                                                14
citizens. They are likely to work and unlikely to be involved in "negative news stories" about crime or cultural
differences. In that case, the derivative of the function with respect to skilled immigrant change would be
              0
negative i.e fj,s m
                    < 0. Instead, stereotypical thinking may induce natives to attribute local social cohesion
or economic problems to the presence of low-skilled immigrants. These immigrants may be perceived to be
less likely to work, thus net receivers from local economy and welfare. They may also be more likely to be in
local negative news stories, even if it is only a very small percentage of them. In this case, a larger inflow of
                                                                     0
low-skilled may produce a revision in favor of nationalistic views (fj,u m
                                                                           > 0). A recent paper by Alesina et
al. (2018) shows that people in many countries tend to exaggerate the share of immigrants and the share of
non-educated ones in the population. They also show that for some groups, such as less educated exposed
to large immigration in their occupations, this distortion in perception is even stronger.
   The extent of the revisions in nationalistic opinions may vary from group to group depending on several
features of the groups. If the reason for the revision is a Bayesian updating of the assessment of immigrants
and their contributions, then groups who are initially less informed and aware of immigrants and their role
would have larger revisions. Existing literature (e.g. Della Vigna and Gentzkow, 2009) suggests that this
can be the case for less educated people. These individuals might respond to the immigration "event" and
adjust their nationalism level, both in positive or in negative, more than educated citizens. Alternatively,
if the revision is driven by confirmation bias (so that signal confirming our beliefs have a stronger effect),
groups who are more nationalistic to begin with will respond to immigrants’ inflow, especially low-skilled one,
increasing their nationalism. These groups will not reduce their nationalism much in response to high-skilled
immigration instead.
   The preferences of individuals are not the only relevant component when we consider the vote. The other
crucial factor is the probability of actually going to vote, measured by the turnout. This can also be affected
by the change in skilled or unskilled immigrants,
                                                   whichaffects the "salience" of the immigration topic on
                                               ∆sm ∆um
deciding whether voting or not. So calling δj P op , P op for j = s, u the probability of voting of individuals
of group j, we can analyze the impact of immigration on the probability of voting. This is an important
measure of whether being reminded of the presence of immigrants by more frequent interactions affects the
probability of translating one’s preference into vote.
   The synthetic index of political nationalism is produced by aggregating the voting behavior and turnout
of the two groups of individuals, weighted by their relative population. We standardize the index to one and
denote by S and 1 − S for skilled and unskilled, respectively:


                                                                     
                                     ∆sm ∆um                  ∆sm ∆um
                          n1 =Sδs         ,        n0s + fs        ,        +
                                     P op P op                 P op P op
                                                                           
                                            ∆sm ∆um                  ∆sm ∆um
                               (1 − S)δu        ,         n0u + fu       ,        .                          (7)
                                            P op P op                P op P op

   Immigration affects the index through the turnout channel and through the individual preference channel,
and each channel can be specific to a group. Using our data we will be able to investigate these channels
by estimating separately how the turnout of each individual group (high and low-skilled) is affected by
nationalism, and how their preferences are affected too.
   In terms of turnout channel we can estimate the following:




                                                         15
                    T urnouti,r,e = α + βH mH         L
                                            r,e + βL mr,e + ζXi,r,e + γΓr,e + θe + ηr + i,r,e .                         (8)

    The main regressors in equation (8) is analogous to equation (2) above. These are the shares of skilled
and unskilled migrants over the regional population in 2005 in region r, with skill s = H, S. The outcome of
interest is the probability that individual i, resident in region r votes at national elections e. The explanatory
                                                                                                 ∆sm          ∆um
variable of interest are the changes of msr,e determined by shift-share-driven changes in        P op   and   P op .   These
changes allow to estimate coefficients βˆs for s = H, L.
    The second channel discussed in equation (7) is the change in individual preferences. The information
available from the ESS allows to gain some insight over this channel too, by looking also at longitudinal
                                                          c
changes in party preferences.19 Defining N ationπi,r,t the normalized level of nationalism of the party π c
preferred by voter i in region r at year t and N ationπi,r,t−1 the normalized level of nationalism of the party
π voted in election year t − 1, we can then compute:

                                                                   c
                                    ∆N ationi,r,t = N ationπi,r,t − N ationπi,r,t−1 ,                                    (9)

that is the variation of the level of nationalism for individual i capturing preference shift, independent from
participation to vote. Using equation (9) as our dependent variable we can perform an individual panel
analysis (both with Least Squares and 2SLS) with the following equation:

                ∆N ationi,r,t = α + βH ∆mH          L
                                         r,t + βL ∆mr,t + γ∆Γr,t + η∆Y eari,r,t + θt + ∆i,r,t ,                        (10)

where ∆msr,t and ∆Γr,t are respectively the variation of the migration share and regional characteristics of
region r between the year t and the year of the last election t−1. The variable ∆Y eari,r,t captures the number
of years between the year of last election (t − 1) and the year (t) when the individual reveals his preferred
party. This should correspond to a linearization of function fj in equation (7). Let us emphasize that the
individual panel analysis fully controls for individual characteristics, avoiding the potential omitted variable
bias at the individual level and bypassing the issue of change/selection into vote participation because it
includes all people who voted in the early election independently of their later participation. Poutvaara and
Steinhardt (2018) is the only paper that we know of that exploits variation in individual preferences over
time. However, that study looks at the effect of "bitterness" on attitudes towards migration in Germany,
while we analyze the effect of local migration on individual voting across the Europe.


4     Main Results
Table 4 presents our baseline results. The reported coefficients capture the impact of immigrants as share of
the population on the intensity of nationalism in local electoral outcomes. We report a first set of estimates
for all migrants in the sample (top panel), and two additional sets of results where we focus on migrants from
non-EU origins (middle panel) and migrants from EU origins (bottom panel). For each set of estimates, we
run different specifications by OLS and IV. In columns (1) and (2), the share of total immigrants relative to
the total population of residents in 2005 is the main regressor. Then, we focus on the immigrant share of

  19 The question in the ESS is defined as follow:"Which party feel closer to?". As it is shown in Table A3 in the on-line

appendix, the percentage of "don’t know" answers is not surprisingly high (on average 34%).


                                                              16
high-skilled (columns (3) and (4)) and on the immigrant share of low-skilled (columns (5) and (6)), respec-
tively. In columns (7) and (8), we include both shares of high-skilled and low-skilled in the same regression.
All specifications include NUTS2 regional dummies, election year fixed effects, plus regional and individual
controls.


    [INSERT Table 4 HERE]


    The F-stat of the first stage (reported in the table for all IV estimates) shows that the shift share
instrument has significant power. However, when the two shares (high and low-skilled) are included together
as explanatory variables and instrumented, the F-stat deteriorates significantly and drops below 10. This is
likely an effect of the high correlation between the IV for high and low skills. The OLS and IV estimated
coefficients are qualitatively consistent with each other in all specifications. Baseline estimates in the top
panel of Table 4 suggest that, on average, a higher share of immigrants among residents encourages citizens
to vote for more nationalistic policy agendas in the elections.20 However, when separating the effect of the
shares of low- and high-skilled immigrants, we see a clear and significant difference. A higher share of low-
skilled immigrants is associated with votes for more intense nationalistic agendas. Conversely, a higher share
of high-skilled migrants is associated with vote for less nationalistic agendas21 . The coefficients are more
precisely estimated for the low-skilled than the high-skilled migrant shares, particularly when it comes to IV
estimates. The size of the coefficients is larger under IV compared with OLS estimations. This suggests IV
corrects for omitted factors that produce an attenuation bias in OLS estimates.22 Estimates in the middle
and bottom panel of Table 4 show that not only skills, but also migrants’ origins matter. The positive effect
of low-skilled migrant shares on nationalist voting seems mostly driven by migrants from extra EU countries
(see IV estimates in columns 6 and 8). The anti-nationalist voting effect of skilled migration is similar for
migrants coming from EU and non-EU countries, but more precisely estimated for the former compared to
the latter group.
    We can evaluate the economic magnitude of these effects by using the estimated marginal effect of migra-
tion shares, together with the corresponding standard deviations reported in Table 2. Taken at the their face
value, IV estimates in column (8) top panel of Table 4 indicate that one standard deviation increase in the
share of low-skilled migrants (6.1 percentage points) shifts voting of individuals towards a more nationalist
agenda by 0.73(= 6.1 ∗ 0.12) standard deviation of the nationalism indicator. This is a sizable effect, almost
equivalent to the distance in the nationalist policy pursued by a party belonging to the Socialist family (-0.29)
and a Confessional (0.55) family. The magnitude of the negative effect of one standard deviation increase of
the share of high-skilled migrants on nationalist voting is smaller. This is due to the fact that skilled immi-
gration and its variation was small across European regions, so that a similar coefficient multiplies a smaller
standard deviation. The effect is equal to −0.34(= 3.1 ∗ (−0.11)) standard deviations. This anti-nationalist
effect slightly increases, and is more precisely estimated, when we focus on EU skilled migration only. It

   20 Our population of voters includes individuals that were born in the country of destination; i.e., also second and higher

generation of migrants.
   21 This result is consistent with the main finding of Mayda et al (2018) on US election. They find that an increase in skilled

immigrants in the US reduces the percentage of votes to Republicans, while an increase in low skilled immigrants increases the
Republican share of votes.
   22 e.g. Low-skilled immigrants may decide not to go to European regions characterized by a high intensity of nationalist voting.

Similarly, omitted economic or social factors at the regional level may determine both low immigration rates and pro-nationalist
voting. We discuss the role of local regional conditions more in detail in Table 7 below.


                                                                17
is roughly equivalent to shifting voting of individuals from the agenda of a Radical Left party, guided by
economic concerns regarding the European integration process, to the open views of most Socialist parties
in Europe.


   [INSERT Table 5 HERE]


   Table 5 analyzes whether the electoral vote response to immigrants also reveals a change in salience
of nationalism in the party agenda. The estimates suggest that the effect of immigration on the index of
salience of nationalism in voted parties is similar to the effect on intensity of nationalism itself. Low and
high-skilled migration have opposite effects on salience, both when indicators are entered individually (in
columns from (3) to (6)), and when the shares of low/high-skilled migrants are included together (in columns
(7) and (8)). A higher share of low-skilled migrants makes nationalism a more salient topic among voted
parties. Conversely, a higher share of high-skilled migrants reduces the salience of nationalism among voted
parties. Signs of the coefficients are stable across specifications. As in the previous results, coefficients are
larger in IV relative to OLS estimates. Estimates in the middle and bottom panel of Table 5 show that
the negative effect of high-skilled migration is significant for both EU and non EU migrants, while the posi-
tive effect of low-skilled immigrants is more precisely estimated and somewhat larger for extra EU immigrants.


   [INSERT Table 6 HERE]


   Table 6 shows robustness of the main coefficients as estimated in Table 4, column (8), top panel, to the
inclusion/exclusion of individual and regional controls, using the IV estimation strategy. In column (1), we
drop from the specification the set of individual and regional controls and we keep the regional and election
fixed effects. Results are very similar both in terms of size and significance to those in Table 4, column (8),
top panel. In column (2), we include migration flows, measured as the change in migrants stocks between
the most recent consecutive election years, as a control. The reason for including these controls is to check
whether, recent acceleration of immigrant flows, besides their level, matters to Voters’ preferences. These
variables are not significant, and their inclusion does not make any difference in our results. In column
(3), we include a baseline set of individual characteristics i.e. a dummy for female/male, a dummy for
tertiary education and linear age. In column (4), we include the set of regional controls i.e. per capita GDP,
population density, regional unemployment rate, and share of residents with tertiary education, without
individual controls. Finally, in column (5) we include the complete set of individual and regional controls, so
as to obtain our baseline specification.
   Our main results remain stable across all the specifications. Among individual controls, being female, and
having tertiary education are associated with voting for parties with a significantly less nationalistic agenda
compared to being male or less educated, respectively. Age does not have any significant correlation with the
intensity of nationalist vote. Among regional controls, the negative significant coefficient of unemployment
and the positive significant coefficient of the share of residents with tertiary education signal that residents in
better off regions, surprisingly, vote for more nationalist and Eurosceptic policy agenda. However, the effect
of immigration on voting preferences is not related to regional level of unemployment/economic performance.
This is shown in Tables A11 and A12 in the on-line appendix, where we test the effect of immigration on
voting by subgroups on regional unemployment rate quartiles and variations. The negative and marginally


                                                        18
significant coefficient of population density suggests that residents in more dense/urban regions in Europe
have less nationalistic views.


     [INSERT Table 7 HERE]


     In Table 7 we discuss the interaction between the possible relevance of regional public goods and the
pro-nationalist voting behavior of individuals in a framework as described in equation (5). We look at three
indicators of regional economic and social conditions: the value of per capita social benefits as a measure of
welfare generosity; the ratio of children to adults as a proxy for the importance of schooling; and the total
number of crimes in the region as a proxy for the value of public safety.23 For each variable, we construct a
dummy for regions above the median, and a dummy for regions below the median. In columns (1) and (4),
we show the interactions with social transfer below/above the sample median. In columns (2) and (5) we
show those with children-to-adult ratios below/above the sample median. Finally, in columns (3) and (6) we
show the interactions with crime rates below/above the sample median. The first finding is that the point
estimates of the high-skilled immigrants share is always negative and the effect of low-skilled immigrants
share always positive on nationalism, in any set of regions. For social transfers and crime rates, the estimates
are noisy and we cannot reject that the effect of high-skilled and low-skilled immigrants is the same for regions
above and below the mean. However regions with high children-to-adult ratio show a stronger pro-nationalist
shift in response to low-skilled immigrants and a weaker anti-nationalistic shift in presence of high-skilled
immigrants. This suggests that in places where school crowding may be an important issue, citizens are more
likely to be driven to nationalistic platforms in response to immigration. Those results seem to confirm the
suggestion of Halla et al. (2017), where the votes of Austrian citizens for their populist party are higher for
municipalities where the concerns about the education of children was higher. Differences in level of crime
do not seem a strong driver of different responses, confirming the results of Mendez and Cutillas (2014).24


5       Heterogeneity in Individuals’ Voting Response
The baseline results implicitly assume that the effect of high and low-skilled immigration on citizens’ voting
is homogeneous across individuals. To allow for heterogeneous effects of migration across voters’ individual
characteristics, we run regressions on separate subsamples of citizens by their education level, separating
tertiary and non tertiary educated, by age (grouping 18-37, 38-57, and 58+ together), by gender (male and
female) and by place of residence, separating rural areas, cities, or small towns. We summarize these coef-
ficients in figures rather than tables. Figure 8 plots the estimated effect of high-skilled migration (Mig HS,
blue line), and low-skilled migration (Mig LS, green line) for each of these subgroups. Shaded areas denote
the 95% confidence intervals around the estimated value.


     [INSERT Figure 8 HERE]


     Panel (a) reports results by education level and shows a remarkable difference in the response of more and
less educated natives to high and low educated immigrants. Interestingly, less educated citizens are pushed

    23 See   the on-line Appendix I for details on source and construction of these variables.
    24 Results   with origin specific share of immigrants are available in Table A10 in the on-line appendix.


                                                                  19
towards nationalism significantly more than more educated citizens, in response to less skilled immigration
(top green line). At the same time, they are also pushed away from nationalism more intensely than highly
educated citizens in response to high-skilled immigrants. One standard deviation increase in the share of
low-skilled migrants raises nationalist voting by individuals without tertiary education by 1.04(= 6.1 ∗ 0.17)
standard deviations of the nationalism indicator. This is a very large effect, comparable almost to the
distance in policy preferences between voters of a Liberal party (-0.55) and a Confessional party (0.55),
on average. Symmetrically, less educated natives are also rather responsive to high-skilled migration. One
standard deviation increase in high-skilled migration reduces nationalist voting by −0.74(= 3.1 ∗ (−0.24))
standard deviations of the nationalism indicator. Education of citizens seems to reduce the responsiveness
of voting behavior to the migration phenomenon. Highly educated citizens respond little to skilled/unskilled
immigrants in their preference for nationalism (which we have seen are already smaller than for low-skilled).
This may be a story consistent with Bayesian updating of beliefs: individuals with vague and less formed
priors revise their preference more in either direction. Highly educated people are likely to have travelled and
have been exposed to immigrants and foreigners in college, hence larger local immigration does not change
much their view, which is already a more positive one on immigration. To the contrary, less educated people
may know less about immigrants and they use local experience/contact to revise their preferences.
    Age seems a somewhat relevant dimension too in affecting citizens’ response (see Panel (b)). Size and
statistical significance of the marginal effect of low-skilled migration on nationalist voting increase somewhat
with age. The response to high-skilled immigration does not seem to change monotonically with age and is
stronger for the age group 38-57. This probably reflects a higher frequency of migrant-native interactions in
this age category (e.g. for work reasons). Panel (c) displays the gender heterogeneity. Low-skilled immigration
increases nationalist voting both among males and females, while high-skilled migration encourages anti
nationalist voting only among males. Females show less sensitivity to immigration on the content of their
vote, just as more highly educated did, and they also are on average less likely to vote for nationalistic
agendas. Finally, Panel (d) reports results by voters’ place of residence. The strongest response in either
direction belongs to individuals living in mid-size towns rather than in cities.25 This probably reflects the fact
that an increase in the number of migrants in a city, where exposure is already high, does not add much to the
information set of local voters. Nationalist voting behavior of individuals living in towns is instead affected
positively by low-skilled migration and negatively by high-skilled migration. This suggests that frequency of
interactions or change in intensity in local news may play a bigger role in small towns. Voters in rural areas
respond to low-skilled migration by voting for more nationalist parties, while they do not seem to respond
to high-skilled migration.26
    In modern parliamentary democracies, individuals reveal their political preferences for policy platforms
only indirectly, by voting for parties whose political agenda cover multiple issues. For this reason we in-
vestigate to what extent the mechanisms highlighted into our baseline analysis and captured there by a
constructed index, translate into actual voting for specific party groups. Figure 3 shows that Liberal and
Radical Right party families stand at opposite sides of the nationalist political spectrum. The former group
presents a policy agenda, which favors immigration, being open to economic, political and cultural Euro-

   25 Similar results were found by Barone et al. (2016), where the effect of immigration on voting shares for right parties in

Italy are mainly driven by middle sized municipalities.
   26 In the appendix we report the full set of results, also by migrants’ origins. Estimates in the middle and bottom panels

of Tables A-1 to A-4 confirm the effect of low-skilled migrants is generally related to extra-European migration, while the
anti-nationalist, pro-European voting effects of skilled migration is driven by intra-European migrants.


                                                              20
pean integration. The latter group has often strong anti-immigration views, and rejects EU integration on
the basis of sovereignty arguments and cultural claims. We thus estimate a linear probability model to
analyze how migration affects voting shares to parties belonging to both groups. Results in Table 8 sug-
gest that low-skilled immigration encourages voting for radical right parties, having no effect on voting for
liberal parties. Symmetrically, high-skilled immigration encourages voting for liberal parties, while having
no effect on voting for radical right parties. These effects are consistent with previous results and describe
shifts towards the two opposite sides of the political spectrum in response to high and low-skilled immigrants.


    [INSERT Table 8 HERE]


    In Table A-5 in the appendix, we disentangle this effect further, and distinguish the voting behavior of
tertiary and non-tertiary educated individuals. Results show that the effects of migration on the propensity
to vote for radical right and liberal parties regards both tertiary and non-tertiary educated individuals in a
rather similar manner.27


6     Effects on Turnout and on Longitudinal Individual Preferences
Baseline results in Table 4 suggest that low and high-skilled migration have opposite effects on voting for
nationalistic political agendas. The repeated cross-sectional structure of ESS data that we used so far implies
that these effects may be driven by two channels. The first one is voting turnout. Individuals with nationalist
political views may respond to immigration by voting in larger proportions when more immigrants flow in.
The second one is change in individual preferences: if individuals change their views on nationalism over
time, in response to migration, independently of their propensity to vote.
    Table 9 presents the estimated coefficients on the share of high and low-skilled immigrants on voters’
turnout, defined as the probability of voting for individuals 18 years or older. The specification is similar
to the one for nationalism, except that a dummy "voting at last election" is used as outcome instead of the
nationalism index. Neither low-skilled nor high-skilled migration seem to be correlated with the propensity
to vote at the elections. This is also true when we consider separate subsamples by individual education
(tertiary and non tertiary) and age (18-37, 38-57, over 58+).28
    As we discussed in the data section, information in ESS data also allows an investigation of the effects
of migration on the change in individual preferences, by exploiting a longitudinal component of the data.
There are two specific questions on voting preferences of individuals i.e. “which party did you vote in the
last national election?”, and “which party do you (currently) feel close to?”. Answers to those questions refer
to different moments in time i.e. the year of last national elections, and the year of the survey interviews.
This allows us to estimate equation (9) and exploit variation over time in the voting preferences of the ESS
respondent between the current year and the last national elections. Let us emphasize that we can collect the
information on current political preferences for all people who voted at the last elections, independently if
they would vote or not today. Hence, not only we control de facto for all individual characteristics by taking

   27 In on-line Appendix VI we further explore the effect of voting for radical right and liberal parties by migrants countries of

origin (Tables A13 and A15 ) and voters education (Tables A14 and A16) .
   28 Additional results are available in the on-line Appendix VII, where we explore the effects by migrants origin (Table A17),

voters education (Table A18), age (Table A19) and political self-orientation (Table A20). On average we do not find any
significant results.


                                                                21
a within-individual difference, but, conditional on voting in the past elections, we also abstract from changes
in the voting probability in the more recent period. Hence this exercise selects only changes in individual
party preferences. The results shown in Table 10 confirm a positive and significant effect of the change in the
low-skilled migrant share on change of individual preferences towards nationalist parties. This effect is more
precisely estimated for less educated individuals, and driven by not European migrants. Both features are
consistent with the estimates of repeated cross section. Moreover the estimated coefficients are not far from
those in Table 4.29 Results also confirm the negative effect of high-skilled migration on nationalism, although
this effect is not statistically significant. Caution is needed when interpreting these results. In general, a
statement of current party preference may not be as strong as a measure of party voting at the last elections.
The way political preferences change since an election depends on the program implemented by the newly
elected government. More importantly, individuals are better informed and more involved into party policy
platforms when national elections are close. Their interests may be reduced in non-electoral times. This
may generate a larger measurement error of preferences in the more recent period, which could result in an
attenuation of the effects. The subsample we use for estimates in Table 10 is also smaller than our baseline
sample, as only the 60% of individuals that voted at national elections, also responded to the question about
party closeness.30 With these caveats in mind, we can still say that results in Tables 9 and 10 are consistent
with the view that the effect of migration on nationalist voting is mainly due to an individual preferences’
shift rather than a change in voting turnout of specific groups of voters.
    Finally, to further document the plausibility of the preference shift in response to immigrants, we analyze
the change in individual attitudes towards migration, reported in the ESS. In Table 11 we present results for
the effect of skilled and unskilled immigrant shares on individual attitudes towards immigration. Specifically
we consider some questions in the survey and we follow the existing literature (see e.g. Card et al. 2012)
distinguishing assessments about the economic and the cultural desirability of immigrants. We also consider
an overall assessment revealing the general view on the role of migration in a country. In columns (1)-(3), we
analyze the effect of migrants’ shares on individual evaluation whether migrants are good for the country’s
economy. In columns (4)-(6), we look at the effect on their assessment whether migrants enrich a country’s
culture. In columns (7)-(9), we analyze the effect on individuals’ opinion whether migrants make a country a
better place to live. We normalize each variable so that each one takes value between 0 (negative evaluation)
and 1 (positive evaluation). The negative coefficients of migration shares suggest that higher migration is
associated with more negative evaluations of immigration by natives. In particular, low-skilled immigration
has negative and significant impact on the cultural and overall assessment while high-skilled immigration has
generally non significant effects. The stronger effects on cultural rather than economic variables are consistent
with a view in which "national values" come into play in affecting natives assessment more than economic
effects. Results from individual panel analysis in Table 10 are consistent with the significant negative effects
of less skilled immigrants on natives attitudes. Taken with the rest of the evidence, it appears that individuals
are pushed to more nationalistic views by low-skilled immigration, while high-skilled immigration has the
   29 The coefficient of the low-skilled migrants’ share in column (1) indicates that one standard deviation increase in the variation

of low-skilled migration (0.97) increases the variation of individual nationalism by 0.068(= 0.97 ∗ 0.07), that is almost 10% a
standard deviation of the variation of nationalism indicator (0.628).
   30 In Figure A2 in the on-line appendix we show that the nationalism distribution of individuals in the subsample is the same

as in the main sample. Moreover estimating equation (2) using the subsample of people that express the party voted during
the last national election and the party they actually feel close to, we obtain the same results as in Table 4. This reassures us
that the results in Table 10 are not driven by selective attrition into non-response in the current period. In Tables A21 and
A22 available in the on-line appendix we perform the same analysis by country of origin and on subsamples of individual level
of education. The results are similar to our baseline.


                                                                 22
opposite effect. Additional results are available in the on-line Appendix IX, where we decompose the results
by immigrants country of origin.


7     Simulations of Nationalist Voting Scenarios
Our results provide a new understanding of how local inflows of low and high-skilled immigrants interact
with characteristics of local residents and affect their intensity of nationalist voting behavior. In particular
the education level of European citizens turns out to be a very important factor in their vote response to
immigrants. This is interesting and relevant from a policy perspective, as education policies and achievements
will affect the politics of regions vis-a-vis immigration (see e.g. Braga et al., 2013). In this section, we produce
some simulation exercises based on our estimates. These simulations offer scenarios on the possible response
of nationalism levels across European regions under alternative hypotheses regarding potential inflows of
immigrants and potential education level of the local population.
    We use as a benchmark the regional change in levels of nationalism (of voted parties) predicted by the
coefficients on the skill specific migration shares estimated separately by education category (as in Figure 8,
panel (a)). We first feed into this prediction the observed changes in the stock of low-skilled and high-skilled
migrants during the last ten sample years (i.e. over the period 2007-2016). In practice, we predict the regional
response of nationalism to immigration 2007-2016 using the following equation:


                                                               HS                             HS
                                   HS
                                                           ∆Mr,16−07                      ∆Mr,16−07
                     ∆N
                      \ ationr = β̂N T (1 − T ertr,16 )              + β̂THS (T ertr,16 )           +
                                                            P opr,05                       P opr,05
                                                                    LS                             LS
                                         LS
                                                                ∆Mr,16−07                      ∆Mr,16−07
                                       β̂N T (1 − T ertr,16 )             + β̂TLS (T ertr,16 )           .     (11)
                                                                 P opr,05                       P opr,05

                        s
    In equation (11), β̂E is the estimated coefficient of the share of migrants with skill s = HS, LS (high-
skilled, low-skilled) for natives of education E = T, N T (tertiary, non tertiary educated). Each coefficient is
weighted by the corresponding share of natives with and without tertiary education (T ertr,16 ) and multiplied
by the observed change in the stock of migrants in the corresponding skill group, (normalized by population
                        s
                    ∆Mr,16−07
size in 2005 i.e.    P opr,05 ).   Even though we could not include Italy and Greece in our estimations due to a
lack of voting data, we include them in our simulations. By so doing, we assume that the response of their
citizens is similar to that of other EU countries, and we can predict their simulated response as they are
important immigration-recipient countries in the EU context.


    [INSERT Table 12 HERE]


    In Table 12, we report results from this simulation at country level. Results in column (3) show that,
on average, the combination of natives’ education and skill composition of migration flows in the last ten
years increased nationalism levels in the EU. However there is a lot of cross-country heterogeneity. Column
(2) shows country-specific average predicted effects, using the regional population as weights. The model
predicts an increase in nationalism in countries characterized by relatively low share of people with tertiary
education (e.g. Italy) and/or a prevalence of low-skilled migration (as in Belgium, Denmark, Italy). On the
contrary, predicted nationalism decreases in countries such as Austria, Sweden and Switzerland, as these are


                                                                  23
characterized by high shares of tertiary educated individuals (more than 30%) and more balanced inflows of
low and high-skilled immigrants in the considered period. The share of tertiary educated people in the coun-
try is reported in column (4), and the 2007-2016 inflow of high-skilled and low-skilled as percent of the group
is reported in columns (5) and (6) of Table 12. Notice that immigration-predicted changes in nationalism in
each country have quite different magnitudes and sometimes opposite signs compared to the actual changes
presented in column (1) of Table 12. This makes clear that several other factors have affected nationalist
voting behavior, besides the actual inflow of immigrants (e.g. economic conditions, the increased inequality,
frustration with EU bureaucracy and so on. See Algan et al., 2017).


   [INSERT Figure 9 HERE]


   Figure 9 displays the predicted changes of nationalism at the NUTS2 regional level for all countries of
Western and Northern Europe. In several regions, the skill composition and the migration inflows during
2007-2016 predict a reduction of nationalism levels (areas in light and dark blue). This is the case of regions
such as Madrid (-0.202) in Spain or Thuringia (-0.09) in Germany. These places are characterized by low levels
of low-skilled immigration and large net flows of highly educated immigrants, combined with a significant
share of tertiary educated natives. Nationalism decreases even more in regions such as Provence-Alpes-Côte
d’Azur (-0.498) in France, Zurich (-0.960) in Switzerland and Great London (-0.500) in the UK, where growing
economies and high prices attracted large shares of high-skilled migrants relative to low-skilled migrants.31
On the opposite side of the spectrum, we find areas that attracted many low-skilled migrants compared to
high-skilled migrants. The rise in low-skilled immigration compared to high-skilled immigration increased the
level of nationalism in regions as Basilicata (0.385) in Italy, West Midlands (0.614) in UK, and Syddanmark
(0.470) in Denmark, where the rise of low-skilled immigration was more than 10 times higher than the rise
of high-skilled immigration and the level of tertiary educated natives is not particularly high.
   In Figure 10 we use our estimated model to simulate four alternative scenarios of nationalist responses
to different migration outcomes. The first scenario hypothesizes a skill selective migration that allows high-
skilled immigrants and deters low-skilled immigrants altogether. This scenario is depicted in panel (a), and
is obtained by setting ∆M LS = 0 in equation (11) while leaving ∆M HS as on 2007-2016. Country-specific
results are available in column (7) of Table 12. Compared to the benchmark in Figure 9, this selective policy
induces a decline of nationalism almost everywhere in Europe. Such fall is significant and produces a different
effect compared to the benchmark in regions of Italy, North of France and UK, where natives experienced
a high presence of low-skilled migrants. This scenario is discriminatory, and explicitly violates Schengen
rules of free circulation of European citizens. In panel (b) we present a second scenario: a skill selective
policy that allows low-skilled migration from EU countries only but prevents unskilled non-Europeans from
                                        LS
entering. This is obtained by setting ∆MnonEU = 0 for all regions in equation (11). This policy would be
less effective in preventing nationalism in regions in Italy, Spain and UK, as it would not prevent low-skilled
migration from Central European EU countries. The two scenarios above impose full restrictions to low-
skilled migration and their effects are not surprising: they reduce the nationalistic drift, since low-skilled
immigration enhances nationalistic positions. The next two scenarios allow low-skilled migration as long as
it is balanced by high-skilled migration. These are in line with more open policies towards immigrants, but
balanced ones that allow-skilled and unskilled immigrants. In panel (c) we consider a skill balanced migration
  31 In   some cases the variation of low-skilled immigrants is negative, like in Provence-Alpes-Côte d’Azur.


                                                                24
policy obtained by setting ∆M LS = ∆M HS in equation (11) so that immigration would not alter the skill
ratio of a region. Interestingly enough, this policy32 induces a decline of nationalist voting, which is quite
sizable, although not as strong as the first policy (panel (a)). The effects of this policy are also shown in
column (8) of Table 12 for each country. In panel (d) we consider a balanced skilled migration from non-
                          LS        HS
EU countries only, i.e. ∆MnonEU = ∆MnonEU . Again, we see anti-nationalistic shifts in most regions by
balancing the skilled-unskilled inflow from extra EU.
    Figure 11 presents, instead, four alternative predictions based on alternative education achievements in
EU regions. In panel (a), we present a scenario that shows only the direct effect of a higher share of tertiary
educated individuals on nationalism. In practice, we add the term β̂T T ertr,16 to the predictive equation (11).
The coefficient β̂T measures the direct effect of a higher share of tertiary educated individuals in the region
on the change in nationalism, as we estimated in individual regressions. This simulation scenario is not too
different from the benchmark in Figure 9. It shows somewhat lower nationalist voting in Northern regions
of Spain, Continental and Northern European regions in Germany, Sweden, and Finland as the generalized
increase in college educated produced such direct attenuation. Education is an effective means to contrast
nationalist attitudes in most of these regions. In panel (b), we then hypothesize a European education policy
that raises the share of tertiary educated individuals by 20% in all regions, and we keep the immigration
flows as they were in 2007-2016. Results are available in column (9) of Table 12. This policy reduces voting
for nationalistic parties in the same set of places: the Northern regions of Spain and the Continental and
Northern European regions. It is much less effective in the UK and Southern European regions (e.g. in Italy,
Spain and Greece), where nationalistic views are mostly driven by the presence of low-skilled migration. In
panel (c), we present the effects of an alternative education policy that increases in each country the share of
tertiary educated individuals up to the best region in the country. Results from this policy are qualitatively
similar to the previous one. There are fewer votes for nationalist parties in the usual set of Continental and
Northern European regions and Northern Spanish regions. Relative to simulation in panel (b), nationalism
decreases also in Northern Greek regions. The scenario does not reduce nationalism levels in the UK, Italy
and the South of Spain. Finally, in panel (d) we simulate the effects of a similar education policy that
increases everywhere the share of tertiary educated individuals up to 57%, which is the highest regional share
in our sample (that we observe in Great London). Results are available in column (10) of Table 12. Compared
to simulation in panel (c), this policy somewhat moderates nationalism voting in some Italian regions and
produces a significant reduction of nationalism in response to immigration in almost any place in Europe.
However, nationalism still increases in this scenario in some Italian regions such as Lombardy, Latium, Umbria
and Emilia Romagna.33 Overall, a more balanced immigration seems a good antidote away from nationalism
vote. If politicians had the intelligence of promoting and encouraging high-skilled immigration in Europe
they would have political support, likely, also for a certain amount of less skilled one.




   32 For each region we do not change the size of the immigrants population, but we equally split between high and low-skilled

migrants.
   33 Country specific results not available in Table 12 are then available in Table A25 in the on-line appendix. Moreover, in the

online Appendix X we perform other simulations and robustness checks. First, using only the statistically significant coefficients
from our estimations, (i.e. keeping in equation (11) only not tertiary natives) we plot the results in Figure A3 Panel(a). Second,
in Figure A3 Panel (b) we plot the results using origin specific coefficients and migrants variation. Results are similar to our
baseline. Finally, in Table A26 and Figure A4 we show the level of nationalism after our predicted variation. Interestingly,
several regions that experienced a strong variation towards nationalism were originally less nationalistic.


                                                               25
8     Conclusions
In this paper we investigated the effects of different types of immigrant inflows on voters’ political preferences
and the effects of individual and regional (social and economic) characteristics on voting for nationalist parties.
    We addressed these questions using a sample of elections in 12 European Countries, over the period 2007-
2016 and measuring the change in high and less skilled immigrants as shares of adult population in regions
within those countries. In order to address more directly the connection between party-vote and nationalism,
we classified each party on a common scale in terms of the intensity of their "nationalism", based on their
political Manifesto. We linked this information to the current political preferences (in terms of party) and
the vote in the last election, for a large sample of citizens in 12 EU countries. A skill-specific shift share
based on the location of immigrants by country of origin in 2005 provides the IV to proxy exogenous changes
in immigrants population. The significant differentiation in country of origin and skill intensities of groups
of immigrants allowed us to estimate two separate effects for skilled and unskilled immigrants on residents’
voting preferences.
    We found a robust negative effect of high-skilled immigration, measured as share of the population, on the
intensity of nationalist preferences in the vote of citizens. We also found an opposite and positive association
of approximately the same magnitude between low-skilled immigration growth and citizen’s nationalist pref-
erences. We also uncovered that the change in preferences driven by immigrants is stronger for less educated
citizen voters than for highly educated. While the main results are obtained using a repeated cross section of
voting citizens, we found the same effects in longitudinal individual data on preferences for political parties.
We finally found that those results are mainly driven by a shift of voting preferences and not by an increasing
vote participation of nationalist segments of the population in the national elections.
    We also present a number of simulations regarding potential scenarios changing the educational attainment
and migration flows in European regions. These simulations point to three main facts. Immigration policies
producing more balanced inflows of low and high-skilled migrants would shift political preferences away from
nationalist voting. These policies would not reduce immigration but re-balance it, allowing the pro-growth
impact of immigrants. Second, closing borders to non EU migrants would also be associated, in most cases,
with lower nationalist voting. However, it will forsake the benefits of immigration for the economy and
the demographic decline of European regions. Finally, policies increasing the share of tertiary educated
individuals may reduce nationalist voting in some countries, particularly Northern European countries. This
is because college educated people tend to cast fewer votes for nationalistic parties, and their voting behavior
responds less to changes in immigration. We hope these intriguing ideas will stimulate further research in
this area.




                                                        26
                           Table 1: Elections and ESS rounds by country and year

                         (1)             (2)          (3)                                     (4)
       Country        # Elections      Years       # Rounds                                 Years
       Austria            2          2008, 2013        3                               2010, 2014, 2016
       Belgium            2          2010, 2014        4                            2010, 2012, 2014, 2016
       Denmark            2          2007, 2011        3                               2010, 2012, 2014
       Finland            3       2007, 2011, 2015     4                            2010, 2012, 2014, 2016
       France             2          2007, 2012        4                            2010, 2012, 2014, 2016
       Germany            2          2009, 2013        4                            2010, 2012, 2014, 2016
       Ireland            2          2011, 2016        4                            2010, 2012, 2014, 2016
       Portugal           3       2009, 2011, 2015     4                            2010, 2012, 2014, 2016
       Spain              3       2008, 2011, 2016     4                            2010, 2012, 2014, 2016
       Sweden             2          2010, 2014        4                            2010, 2012, 2014, 2016
       Switzerland        3       2007, 2011, 2015     4                            2010, 2012, 2014, 2016
       United Kingdom     2          2010, 2015        4                            2010, 2012, 2014, 2016
       Note: Column (1) shows the number of elections available from ESS and column (2) the year of each elections.
       Column (3) shows the number of ESS rounds after 2010 by country and column (4) the year of each round.
       Source: ESS.



                                            Table 2: Summary statistics

Voting Data                                                            Obs.      Mean      Std. Dev. Min     Max
Individual Characteristics Age                                         48767     52.264     16.899     18     90
                           Female                                      48767     0.502       0.500      0      1
                           Tertiary                                    48767     0.356       0.478      0      1
                           Tertiary (father)                           40916     0.194       0.395      0      1
                           Preferences Pro EU                          48319     0.016       0.028   -0.242 0.080
                           Salience EU                                 48319     0.032       0 .019     0   0.262
                           Preferences Pro National way                48319     0.012       0 .018  -0.061 0.116
                           Salience National way                       48319     0.015       0 .018     0   0.117
                           Nationalism (PCA, std)                      48319        0           1    -1.607 8.113
                           Salience Nationalism (PCA)                  48319      0.023      0.015      0   0 .174

Regional Characteristics        GDP per capita                           261     31.644      11.749      13.267 69.901
                                Pop density                              261    420.592     1040.895      3.3   7393.4
                                Unemployment rate (%)                    261     9.632        5.491         0    30.1
                                Tertiary rate (%)                        261      30.69       8.038       11.2   55.1
                                Share of Mig (%)                         261      13.08        8.75       1.24   48.9
                                Share of Mig (HS) (%)                    261       3.31         3.1         0    19.1
                                Share of Mig (LS) (%)                    261       9.68        6.13        0.9   33.9
                                Share of Mig (not EU) (%)                261       7.11        5.02        0.2   30.6
                                Share of Mig (not EU, HS) (%)            261       1.69        1.62         0    13.4
                                Share of Mig (not EU, LS) (%)            261       5.42        3.79         0    22.6
                                Share of Mig (EU) (%)                    261       5.88        5.52         0    34.4
                                Share of Mig (EU, HS) (%)                261       1.62        1.86         0    11.7
                                Share of Mig (EU, LS) (%)                261       4.26        3.88         0    24.5
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS and ELFS data.




                                                           27
                                        Figure 1: ESS data and actual voting




            (a) ESS and actual votes - Top 3 parties                   (b) ESS and actual votes - Top 5 parties

Note: authors’ calculation on ESS and European Election Database (EDD). The figure plots the share of votes of top 3 parties
(panel (a)) and top 5 parties (panel (b)) in terms of votes in each election available computed with the EDD (x-axis) and ESS
(y-axis).




                         Figure 2: Salience and Preference for Nationalism across Parties




            (a) Nationalism (top/bottom 10 parties)                   (b) Salience of Nationalism (top 10 parties)

Note: authors’ calculations on Manifesto Project Database. The figure plots parties with the highest and lowest level of
nationalism index (panel (a)) and parties with highest salience of nationalism (panel (b)) in their political manifesto.
                                                              .




                                                             28
                                        Figure 3: Nationalism by Party Family




Note: authors’ calculation on Manifesto Project Database and Chapell Hill Database. The figure plots the average level of
nationalism index by parties’ political families. Political families are identified by the Chapell Hill Database, using parties
self-identification and belonging in the Europeans parties group.




                               Figure 4: Nationalism by Left-Right Political position




Note: authors’ calculation on ESS and Manifesto Project Database. The figure shows the average level of nationalism index
associated with each individual self-declared political position on the axis Left-Right.




                                                              29
                          Figure 5: Average nationalism across regions - top/bottom 20




Note: authors’ calculations on ESS and Manifesto Project Database. The figure plots the highest and lowest average level of
nationalism index at regional level.




                                           Figure 6: Nationalism over time




Note: authors’ calculations on ESS and Manifesto Project Database. The figure plots the average country level of nationalism
after each election event in our analysis.




                                                            30
                       Figure 7: Share of high-skilled and low-skilled immigrants over time




               (a) Share of high-skilled immigrants                       (b) Share of low-skilled immigrants

Note: authors’ calculations on EULFS data. The figure plots the average share of immigrants at regional level by country and
education.




  Table 3: Correlation between 2000-2005 Economic Indicators and post-2006 Predicted Migrants Growth

                              (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)      (5)     (6)                 (7)      (8)        (9)
 Predicted Mig growth         All      AllHS      AllLS    N o EU N o EUHS N o EULS               EU      EUHS       EULS

 GDP Capita05                 -0.01     -0.14      0.05     -0.01        -0.11         0.02       -0.01 -0.14*        0.04
                             (0.05)    (0.10)     (0.03)   (0.10)       (0.16)        (0.08)     (0.09) (0.07)       (0.11)
 Observations                  96         96        96       96            96           96         96     96           96
 Adj. R-Square                -0.01      0.12      0.02     -0.01         0.04         -0.01      -0.01  0.06         -0.00

 Empl. Rate05                 -0.00 -0.32*** 0.13**         -0.01       -0.35*         0.11       0.04   -0.21        0.14
                             (0.06) (0.08) (0.04)          (0.16)       (0.18)        (0.14)     (0.22) (0.19)       (0.24)
 Observations                  99      99      99            99           99            99         99      99          99
 Adj. R-Square                -0.01   0.21    0.06          -0.01        0.12          0.01       -0.01   0.04        0.00

 P opulation05                0.04      -0.14      0.10     0.14         0.05          0.13       -0.15 -0.43         -0.05
                             (0.09)    (0.14)     (0.08)   (0.21)       (0.23)        (0.18)     (0.47) (0.43)       (0.51)
 Observations                  109       109       109      109           109          109         109   109           109
 Adj. R-Square                -0.01      0.01      0.01     0.01         -0.01         0.00       -0.00  0.08         -0.01

 T ertiary05                  0.01      -0.02      0.03     0.04         0.02          0.04       -0.05 -0.09         -0.03
                             (0.02)    (0.05)     (0.03)   (0.05)       (0.07)        (0.05)     (0.06) (0.06)       (0.06)
 Observations                  99        99         99       99           99            99          99    99           99
 Adj. R-Square                -0.00     -0.00      0.02     0.02         -0.01         0.02        0.01  0.09         -0.00
 Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. Standard errors are clustered
 at country level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. The table shows the predicted coefficients regressing the growth rate of
 regional macro indicators between 2000 and 2005 on the regional predicted migration growth with our shift-share strategy over
 the period 2007 and 2012.




                                                             31
                                    Table 4: Nationalism Intensity and Immigrant Share

                           (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
                          OLS        IV       OLS        IV       OLS        IV       OLS        IV
Time                    2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016

All Migrants
Share                       0.01       0.11**
                           (0.01)      (0.05)
Share HS                                            -0.06*        -0.16*                               -0.08**        -0.11
                                                    (0.03)        (0.08)                                (0.03)       (0.10)
Share LS                                                                      0.04**      0.14***      0.05***      0.12***
                                                                              (0.02)       (0.04)       (0.02)       (0.04)
Observations               48319        48319        48319        48319       48319        48319        48319        48319
K-P rk Wald F-stat                      24.96                     19.92                    46.24                      5.34
Adj. R-Square               0.13         0.13        0.13          0.13        0.13         0.13         0.13          0.13

Non EU Migrants
Share N o EU                0.00       0.12**
                           (0.01)      (0.05)
Share N o EU HS                                      -0.08         -0.17                                -0.10*        -0.33
                                                    (0.05)        (0.19)                                (0.05)       (0.29)
Share N o EU LS                                                                0.01       0.15***        0.03       0.17***
                                                                              (0.02)       (0.05)       (0.02)       (0.05)
Observations               48319        48319        48319        48319       48319        48319        48319        48319
K-P rk Wald F-stat                      31.36                     12.11                    38.27                      7.00
Adj. R-Square               0.13         0.13        0.13          0.13        0.13         0.13         0.13          0.13

EU Migrants
Share EU                    0.03         0.89
                           (0.02)       (4.45)
Share EU HS                                          -0.08        -0.23*                               -0.10**      -0.23**
                                                    (0.05)        (0.12)                                (0.05)       (0.11)
Share EU LS                                                                  0.09***        -0.06      0.11***        -0.02
                                                                              (0.03)       (0.11)       (0.03)       (0.16)
Observations               48319        48319        48319        48319       48319        48319        48319        48319
K-P rk Wald F-stat                       0.04                     11.88                     5.45                      2.22
Adj. R-Square               0.13         0.02        0.13          0.13        0.13          0.13        0.13          0.13

NUTS2 f.e.                  Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Year f.e.                   Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
NUTS2 Controls              Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Individual Controls         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. Standard errors are clustered at
NUTS2 level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. As individual controls age, gender and education dummy are included. As NUTS2
controls we include GDP per capita, unemployment rate, population density and share of tertiary educated individuals. The
dependent variable is our standardized measure of nationalism.




                                                             32
                                    Table 5: Salience of Nationalism and Immigrant Share

                           (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
                          OLS        IV       OLS        IV       OLS        IV       OLS        IV
Time                    2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016

All Migrants
Share                     0.000**        0.001
                          (0.000)       (0.001)
Share HS                                             -0.001        -0.005**                            -0.001**     -0.004**
                                                    (0.001)         (0.002)                             (0.000)      (0.002)
Share LS                                                                      0.001***    0.002***     0.001***      0.002**
                                                                               (0.000)     (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.001)
Observations               48319         48319       48319          48319       48319       48319        48319        48319
K-P rk Wald F-stat                       24.96                      19.92                   46.24                      5.34
Adj. R-Square               0.12          0.12       0.12            0.12       0.12         0.12        0.12          0.12

Non EU Migrants
Share N o EU               0.000        0.002**
                          (0.000)       (0.001)
Share N o EU HS                                      -0.001        -0.007**                             -0.001      -0.010**
                                                    (0.001)         (0.003)                            (0.001)       (0.004)
Share N o EU LS                                                                0.000      0.003***     0.001**      0.004***
                                                                              (0.000)      (0.001)     (0.000)       (0.001)
Observations               48319         48319       48319          48319      48319        48319       48319         48319
K-P rk Wald F-stat                       48.39                      19.10                   64.78                      9.55
Adj. R-Square               0.12          0.12       0.12            0.12       0.12         0.12        0.12          0.11

EU Migrants
Share EU                 0.001***        0.050
                          (0.000)       (0.244)
Share EU HS                                          -0.001        -0.006**                             -0.001*    -0.005***
                                                    (0.001)         (0.003)                             (0.001)     (0.002)
Share EU LS                                                                   0.002***     0.004*      0.002***      0.005
                                                                               (0.001)     (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.004)
Observations               48319         48319       48319          48319       48319       48319        48319       48319
K-P rk Wald F-stat                        0.06                      21.30                    6.05                     2.76
Adj. R-Square               0.12         -1.36       0.12            0.12       0.12         0.12        0.12         0.12

NUTS2 f.e.                  Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Year f.e.                   Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
NUTS2 Controls              Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Individual Controls         Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. Standard errors are clustered at
NUTS2 level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. As individual controls age, gender and education dummy are included. As NUTS2
controls we include GDP per capita, unemployment rate, population density and share of tertiary educated individuals. The
dependent variable is our measure of salience of nationalism.




                                                              33
            Table 6: Nationalism and Immigrant Share- Including controls

                                (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)                     (5)
                                IV        IV        IV        IV                      IV
Time                         2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016               2007-2016

Share HS                      -0.137        -0.092       -0.133       -0.113         -0.110
                             (0.0922)      (0.1033)     (0.0913)     (0.1042)       (0.1017)
Share LS                     0.190***      0.172***     0.191***     0.119***       0.121***
                             (0.0573)      (0.0474)     (0.0575)     (0.0428)       (0.0424)
F lows HS                                    0.017
                                           (0.0876)
F lows LS                                   -0.057
                                           (0.0425)
F emale (ind)                                          -0.083***                   -0.082***
                                                        (0.0178)                    (0.0178)
Age (ind)                                                -0.001                       -0.001
                                                        (0.0008)                    (0.0008)
T ertiary (ind)                                        -0.194***                   -0.193***
                                                        (0.0300)                    (0.0294)
GDP cap (N U T S2)                                                    -0.000          0.001
                                                                     (0.0091)       (0.0092)
P op. Dens. (N U T S2)                                                -0.001         -0.001*
                                                                     (0.0007)       (0.0007)
U nemp. rate (N U T S2)                                              -0.015**       -0.015**
                                                                     (0.0064)       (0.0065)
T ertiary (N U T S2)                                                 0.060**        0.058**
                                                                     (0.0255)       (0.0249)
Observations                   48319        48319         48319       48319           48319
K-P rk Wald F-stat             17.81         2.92         17.82        5.34            5.34
Adj. R-Square                   0.12         0.12          0.12        0.12            0.13

NUTS2 f.e.                      Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
Year f.e.                       Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. Stan-
dard errors are clustered at NUTS2 level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. The dependent variable
is our standardized measure of nationalism. Flows in column (2) are instrumented with predicted
flows using a shift-share strategy.




                                              34
           Table 7: Nationalism and Immigrant Share- Interaction with Regional Characteristics

                                       (1)             (2)       (3)                 (4)             (5)       (6)
                                       IV              IV        IV                  IV              IV        IV
Time                                2007-2016       2007-2016 2007-2016           2007-2016       2007-2016 2007-2016

Regional Characteristic           Social Transf.     Children       Crime       Social Transf.     Children       Crime

Share HS (above M edian)              -0.13*           - 0.06       -0.19*
                                      (0.08)           (0.13)       (0.10)
Share HS (below M edian)              -0.21*          -0.23**       - 0.09
                                      (0.11)           (0.10)       (0.06)
Share LS (above M edian)                                                             0.13           0.24*          0.02
                                                                                    (0.12)          (0.14)        (0.33)
Share LS (below M edian)                                                            0.14**           0.03          0.89
                                                                                    (0.06)          (0.10)        (2.51)

F-stat (HP : same coef f )              1.21            3.01         1.34            0.00            0.84          0.09
P-value F-stat                          0.27            0.09         0.25            0.96            0.36          0.76

Observations                           48319           48319        48319           48319           48319         48319
K-P rk Wald F-stat                      4.60            6.29         6.68            2.65            4.17          0.07
Adj. R-Square                           0.13            0.13         0.13            0.13            0.13          0.08

NUTS2 f.e.                              Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes
Year f.e.                               Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes
NUTS2 Controls                          Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes
Individual Controls                     Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. Standard errors are clustered
at NUTS2 level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. As individual controls age, gender and education dummy are included.
As NUTS2 controls we include GDP per capita, unemployment rate, population density and share of tertiary educated
individuals. The dependent variable is our standardized measure of nationalism. Columns (1) and (4) distinguishes on the
                                                                                             0−14
level of social transfer per capita. Columns (2) and (5) distinguishes regions on the ratio 15−65 old. Columns (3) and (6)
distinguishes on the total number of crime.




                                                              35
         Figure 8: Nationalism Response to Immigrant Share and Natives’ Individual Characteristics




                        (a) Education                                                       (b) Age




                          (c) Gender                                                      (d) Domicile

Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. The graphs plots the coefficients of
the share of migrants HS and LS estimated on different subsamples by individual characteristics: education (a), age (b), gender
(c) and domicile (d). All the coefficients are estimated with IV estimations. The shadowed area represent the 95% interval of
confidence. All the regressions includes individual and regional controls, NUTS2 and year fixed effects. The dependent variable
is our standardized measure of nationalism. The F-stat of the first stage is always above 10. The results are available in Tables
A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4
.




                                                               36
             Table 8: Voting for Radical Right/liberal parties and Immigrant Share

                              (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)                                (6)
                              IV        IV        IV        IV        IV                                 IV
Time                       2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016                          2007-2016

Party Family                           Radical Right                                     Liberal

All Migrants
Share                        0.03**                                      0.02*
                             (0.01)                                      (0.01)
Share HS                                     -0.04                                      0.15*
                                            (0.02)                                      (0.08)
Share LS                                                  0.02***                                         0.00
                                                           (0.01)                                        (0.01)

Observations                 45771          45771          45771          45771         45771            45771
K-P rk Wald F-stat            9.74           5.69          24.92           9.74          5.69            24.92
Adj. R-Square                 0.09           0.10           0.10           0.11          0.10             0.12
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database, Chapell Hill Database and Eurostat
data. Standard errors are clustered at NUTS2 level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. As individual controls
age, gender, education dummy are included. As NUTS2 controls we include GDP per capita, unemployment
rate, population density and share of tertiary educated individuals. The dependent variable is a dummy that
takes value of 1 if voter for a party that belongs to the Radical Right political family (col. (1),(2) and (3)) or to
the Liberal political family (col. (4),(5) and (6)). The definition of the political family of parties is determined
by the Chapell Hill survey dataset.




                             Table 9: Voting Turnout and Immigrant Share

                              (1)             (2)                (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                              IV              IV                 IV        IV        IV        IV
Time                       2007-2016       2007-2016          2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016

Natives                                           Education                             Age Groups
Subsample                      All       Not Tertiary         Tertiary       18-37          38-57           58+

All Migrants
Share HS                      0.00             0.00             -0.01         0.06           -0.03          -0.01
                             (0.02)           (0.01)           (0.03)        (0.04)         (0.03)         (0.02)
Share LS                      0.00             0.00             0.00          0.02           -0.01           0.00
                             (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)        (0.02)         (0.01)         (0.01)

Observations                 78814            53675            25139         20730          28605          29478
K-P rk Wald F-stat            3.64             3.41             3.79          3.84           2.83           4.47
Adj. R-Square                 0.10             0.10             0.07          0.13           0.06           0.03
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. Standard errors
are clustered at NUTS2 level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. As individual controls age, gender, education
dummy are included. As NUTS2 controls we include GDP per capita, unemployment rate, population density
and share of tertiary educated individuals. The dependent variable is a dummy that take values of 1 if the
individual voted during the last national elections. From column (2) to column (6) we perform our analysis
on subsample by education (col. (2) and (3)) and age groups (col. (4),(5) and (6)).




                                                         37
                                  Table 10: Nationalism and Immigrant Share - individual panel

                              (1)             (2)             (3)       (4)                 (5)             (6)       (7)                 (8)             (9)
                              IV              IV              IV        IV                  IV              IV        IV                  IV              IV
Time                       2007-2016       2007-2016       2007-2016 2007-2016           2007-2016       2007-2016 2007-2016           2007-2016       2007-2016

Immigrants                                     All                                    N ot European                                    European
Natives                        All       Not Tertiary       Tertiary         All       Not Tertiary       Tertiary         All       Not Tertiary       Tertiary

Share HS (∆)                   -0.07          -0.10           -0.03         -0.13           -0.20           -0.05         -0.04           -0.10           0.03
                              (0.07)         (0.09)          (0.05)        (0.12)          (0.17)          (0.08)        (0.13)          (0.20)          (0.14)
Share LS (∆)                 0.07***         0.08**          0.06*         0.11**          0.12**          0.09*           0.17           0.30            0.04
                              (0.03)         (0.03)          (0.03)        (0.05)          (0.05)          (0.05)        (0.14)          (0.22)          (0.14)
∆Y ears                        0.01            0.01            0.01         0.00            -0.00            0.01         0.01             0.01           0.02
                              (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)        (0.01)          (0.02)          (0.01)        (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)

Individuals                   29238           18229          11009          29238          18229           11009         29238           18229           11009
K-P rk Wald F-stat             2.77            2.95           2.53           1.97           2.22            1.67          1.52            1.62            1.26
Adj. R-Square                 -0.00           -0.00          -0.00          -0.01          -0.01           -0.00         -0.01           -0.04            0.00

Year f.e.                      Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
NUTS2 Controls (∆)             Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. Standard errors are clustered at NUTS2 level. * p<0.1, **
p<0.05, *** p<0.01. As NUTS2 controls we include the differences in GDP per capita, unemployment rate, population density and share of tertiary educated
individuals. The dependent variable is the difference between our standardized measures of nationalism of the party that they feel close to and the party for
which they voted for in the last national election. The analysis is performed with different immigrants shares: all migrants (col (1),(2),(3)), not European
migrants (col (4),(5),(6)) and European migrants (col (7),(8),(9)). Moreover the analysis is performed on different samples of natives voters based on their
level of education: all kind of education (col (1),(4),(7)), not tertiary education (col (2),(5),(8)) and tertiary education (col (3),(6),(9)). The estimation is
performed trough an IV estimation procedure. The analysis is performed on subsamples by natives education: not tertiary (col. (1),(3),(5) and (7)) and
tertiary (col. (2),(4),(6) and (8))




                                     Table 11: Attitudes towards Migrants and Immigrant Share

                              (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)                                                 (9)
                              IV        IV        IV        IV        IV        IV        IV        IV                                                  IV
Time                       2010-2016 2010-2016 2010-2016 2010-2016 2010-2016 2010-2016 2010-2016 2010-2016                                           2010-2016

Attitudes                              Good Economy                                 Enrich Culture                               Better place to live

All Migrants
Share HS                       -0.02                         -0.00          -0.02                         -0.00         -0.07*                          -0.05
                              (0.03)                        (0.04)         (0.03)                        (0.03)         (0.04)                         (0.03)
Share LS                                      -0.04          -0.04                        -0.05*        -0.04**                       -0.09***        -0.07**
                                             (0.03)         (0.02)                        (0.02)         (0.02)                        (0.03)          (0.03)

Observations                  74072          74072          74072          74085          74085          74085          74091          74091           74091
K-P rk Wald F-stat            71.06          23.87           8.50          71.09          23.88           8.50          71.09          23.88            8.50
Adj. R-Square                  0.13           0.13           0.13           0.13           0.13           0.13           0.12           0.11            0.12

NUTS2 f.e.                     Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Year f.e.                      Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
NUTS2 Controls                 Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Individual Controls            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS and Eurostat data. Standard errors are clustered at NUTS2 level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
Individual controls are age, gender and education dummy are included. NUTS2 controls are GDP per capita, unemployment rate, population density
and share of tertiary educated individuals. The dependent variable are different standardized (mean 0, sd 1) measures of attitudes towards immigrants:
good for the economy (col (1)-(3)), enrich country cultural life (col (4)-(6)) and make the country a better place to live (col(7)-(9)). Higher values
imply positive attitudes.




                                                                               38
            Table 12: Simulated Effect of Immigration/Education changes on nationalism: Country level and EU
                                                        averages

                          (1)           (2)         (3)              (4)     (5)        (6)              (7)       (8)              (9)          (10)
                                         Standard Sim.               Country Characteristics              Mig. Policies              Educ. Policies


Country              ∆N ationc ∆N
                                \          ationEU T ert16
                                  ationc ∆N\            c  ∆M igcHS ∆M igcLS N o LS Balanced +20% T ert. M ax T ert.

Austria                   0.04        -0.253          0.064        0.314       2.641        1.597      -0.492      -0.071         -0.297          -0.312
Belgium                 -0.018         0.269          0.064        0.375       2.131        4.183      -0.324      -0.074          0.188           0.166
Denmark                 -0.092         0.368          0.064        0.377        0.47        2.898       -0.1       -0.038          0.269           0.246
Finland                  0.222         0.09           0.064        0.428       1.254        2.185      -0.122      -0.019         -0.006          -0.007
France                   0.255        -0.069          0.064        0.349       0.676        0.445      -0.178      -0.023         -0.136          -0.149
Germany                  0.141         0.025          0.064        0.282       1.086        1.499      -0.235      -0.055         -0.033          -0.041
Greece                                -0.067          0.064         0.3        0.081        0.399      -0.023         0           -0.131          -0.144
Ireland                  0.28          0.202          0.064         0.43       0.477        2.081      -0.082      -0.024          0.096           0.113
Italy                                  0.454          0.064        0.177       0.473        3.357      -0.101      -0.098          0.404           0.399
Portugal                0.043         -0.141          0.064        0.239       0.728        0.107      -0.122      -0.012         -0.188          -0.195
Spain                   0.045         -0.039          0.064        0.357       0.339        0.178      -0.045      -0.007         -0.116           -0.13
Sweden                  0.103         -0.112          0.064        0.409       3.018        3.319      -0.541      -0.066         -0.164          -0.184
Switzerland             0.494          -0.34          0.064        0.411       5.621        3.347      -0.833      -0.091         -0.361          -0.381
United Kingdom           0.55          0.056          0.064        0.421       1.779        2.739      -0.317       -0.04         -0.015          -0.053
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. Column (1) the country averages of the regional differences
in nationalism between the last and the first election available. Columns (2) and (3) show country averages and EU average, respectively, of the simulated
standardized nationalism from the standard simulation using as regional weights the total population. Column (4) shows the country regional average of
tertiary individuals. Columns (5) and (6) show the country average variation of migration share of HS and LS immigrants respectively over the 2007-2016
period. Column (7) shows the result of the simulation when we remove the variation of low educated immigrants. Column (8) shows the result of the
simulation when we assume skill-balanced immigration. Column (9) shows the result of the simulation when we increase by 20% the share of tertiary
educated natives by region. Column (10) shows the result of the simulation when each region has the same share of tertiary educated natives as the
highest educated one in the same country.




                                                                            39
                                         Figure 9: Baseline simulation analysis




Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. The figure plots the results of
equation (11) at NUTS2 level, which simulate the average level of nationalism over 2007-2016 due to the variation of immigrants
by education and the level of natives education. For Germany, United Kingdom and Austria the results are plotted at NUTS1
level. Azores islands, Madeira islands and Canary islands are not plotted for visual reasons.




                                                              40
                               Figure 10: Simulations for different Migration Scenarios




                      (a) No LS Migration                                    (b) No Extra-European LS Migration




               (c) Balanced Migration (LS=HS)                         (d) Balanced Extra-European Migration (LS=HS)

Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. The figure plots the simulated
average level of nationalism after different migration policy scenarios, due to the variation of immigrants by education and level
of education of natives over the 2007-2016 . The figure plots the results of equation (11) at NUTS2 level when: LS immigrants
are excluded (panel (a)), not European LS immigrants are excluded (panel (b)), LS and HS immigrants are exactly balanced in
each region (panel (c)) and not European LS and HS immigrants are exactly balanced in each region.




                                                               41
                               Figure 11: Simulation for Different Education Scenarios




                    (a) Direct Tertiary effect                                  (b) + 20% in the share of Tertiary




            (c) Tertiary Share=Highest in Country                      (d) Tertiary Share=Highest in EU (Great London)

Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. The figure plots the simulated
average level of nationalism after different education policy scenarios, due to the variation of immigrants by education and level
of education of natives over the 2007-2016. The figure plots the results of equation (11) at NUTS2 level when: the direct effect
of tertiary education on nationalism is included (panel (a)), regional level of tertiary educated natives is increased by 20% (panel
(b)), each region has the same level of tertiary educated natives as the highest region in the same country (panel (c)) and each
region has the same level of tertiary educated natives as the highest in our sample (Greater London) (panel (d)).




                                                                42
References
Alesina, A. & A. Miano & S. Stantcheva (2018). Immigration and Redistribution. NBER Working paper
  24733.

Algan, Y. & S. Guriev & E. Papaioannou & E. Passari (2017). The European trust crisis and the rise of
  populism. CEPR Discussion Paper DP12444.

Arzheimer, K. (2009). Contextual Factors and the Extreme Right Vote in Western Europe, 1980-2002
  American Journal of Political Science 53: 259-275.

Barone, G. & F. D’Acunto & G. Narciso (2015). Telecracy: Testing for channels of persuasion. American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(2): 30–60.

Barone, G. & A. D’Ignazio & G. De Blasio & P. Naticchioni (2016). Mr. Rossi, Mr. Hu and politics. The
  role of immigration in shaping natives’ voting behavior. Journal of Public Economics 136: 1–13.

Becker, S.O. & T. Fetzer (2017). Does Migration Cause Extreme Voting? Center for Competitive Advantage
  in the Global Economy and The Economic & Social Research Council.

Braga, M., Checchi, D., and Meschi, E. (2013). Educational policies in a long-run perspective. Economic
  Policy, 28(73): 45-100.

Brunner, B. & A. Kuhn (2018). Immigration, Cultural Distance and Natives’ Attitudes Towards Immigrants:
  Evidence from Swiss Voting Results Kyklos 71(1): 25-58.

Card, D. (2001). Immigration Inflows, Native Outflows and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher
  Immigration. Journal of Labor Economics 19: 22-64.

Card, D. & C. Dustmann & I. Preston (2012). Immigration, Wages and Compositional Amenities. Journal
  of the European Economic Association 10(1): 78–119.

Dahlberg, M. & K. Edmark & H. Lundqvist (2012). Ethnic Diversity and Preferences towards redistribution.
  Journal of Political Economy 120(1): 41–76.

Della Vigna, S. & M. Gentzkow (2009). Persuasion: Empirical Evidence NBER Working paper 15298.

Docquier, F. & C. Ozden & G. Peri (2014). The Labour Market Effects of Immigration and Emigration in
  OECD countries. The Economic Journal 124: 1106-1145.

Edo, A. & J. Öztunc & P. Poutvaara (2017). Immigration and Electoral Support for the Far Left and Far
  Right. CEPII Working Paper No. 2017-20.

Facchini, G. & A.M. Mayda (2009). Does the welfare state affect individual attitudes towards immigrants?
  Evidence across countries The Review of Economics and Statistics 91(2): 295-314.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, P. & I. Sorking & H. Swift (2018). Bartik Instruments: What, When, Why, and How.
  NBER Working Paper No. 24408.

Hainmueller, J. & M.J. Hiscox (2007). Educated preferences: Explaining attitudes toward immigration in
  Europe. International Organization 61(2): 399-442.

                                                   43
Hainmueller, J. & M.J. Hiscox (2010). Attitudes toward highly skilled and low-skilled immigration: Evidence
  from a survey experiment. American Political Science Review 104(1): 61-84.

Halla, M. & A. F. Wagner & J. Zweimuller (2017). Immigration and voting for far right. Journal of the
  European Economic Association 15(6): 1341–1385.

Hanson, G.H. & K. Scheve & M.J. Slaughter (2007). Public Finance and individual preferences over global-
  ization strategies. Economics & Politics 19(1): 1-33.

Harmon, N.A. (2017). Immigration, Ethnic Diversity and Political Outcomes: Evidence from Denmark.
  Journal of Scandinavian Economics, forthcoming.

Hatton, T. (2016). Immigration, public opinion and the recession in Europe. Economic Policy 31(86):
  205-246.

Jaeger, D. A. & J. Ruist & J. Stuhler (2018). Shift-Share Instruments and the Impact of Immigration. NBER
  Working Paper No. 24285.

Kerr, W. R. & W. F. Lincoln (2010). The supply side of innovation: H-1B visa reforms and US ethnic
  invention. Journal of Labour Economics 28(3): 473-508.

Mayda, A.M. (2006). Who is against Immigration? A cross-country investigation of individual attitudes
  towards immigrants The Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3): 510-530.

McLaren, M.L (2003). Preferences for the Exclusion of Migrants. Social Forces, 81(3): 909-936.

Mayda, A.M. & G. Peri & W. Steingress (2018). The political impact of immigration: Evidence from the
  United States. NBER Working Paper No. 24510.

Mendez, I. & I.M. Cutillas (2014). Has Immigration affected Spanish presidential elections results? Journal
  of Population Economics 27: 135-171.

Orrenius, P. (2017). New Findings on the Fiscal Impact of Immigration in the United States Dallas FED
  Working Paper 1704.

Otto, A.H. & M.F. Steinhardt (2014). Immigration and election outcomes - Evidence from city districts in
  Hamburg. Regional Science and Urban Economics 45: 67-79.

Peri, G. (2012). The effect of immigration on productivity: Evidence from US states Review of Economics
  and Statistics 94(1): 348-358.

Poutvaara, P. & Steinhardt, M. (2018). "Bitterness in Life and Attitudes Towards Immigration," European
  Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Scheve, K.F. & M.J. Slaughter (2001). Labor market competition and individual preferences over immigration
  policy. Review of Economics and Statistics 83(1): 133-145.

Steinmayr, A. (2016). Exposure to Refugees and Voting for the Far Right:(Unexpected) results from Austria.
  IZA DP No. 9790.

Vasilakis, C. (2017). Massive Migration and Elections: Evidence from the Refugee Crisis in Greece. Inter-
  national Migration 56(3): 28-43.


                                                    44
appendix A       Additional Tables

                          Table A-1: Nationalism and voters’ education

                                             (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)
                                             IV               IV            IV             IV
       Time                               2007-2016        2007-2016     2007-2016      2007-2016

       Subsample                               Education                     Education
       Natives Education                 Not Tertiary Tertiary         Not Tertiary Tertiary

       All Migrants
       Share HS                             -0.24**          -0.03
                                             (0.11)         (0.08)
       Share LS                                                           0.17***          0.08*
                                                                           (0.05)          (0.05)
       Observations                          31103          17214          31103           17214
       K-P rk Wald F-stat                    20.05          18.51          47.15           42.50
       Adj. R-Square                          0.13           0.16           0.13            0.16

       Not European Migrants
       Share N o EU HS                        -0.23          -0.01
                                             (0.26)         (0.18)
       Share N o EU LS                                                    0.20***           0.07
                                                                           (0.06)          (0.05)
       Observations                          31103          17214          31103           17214
       K-P rk Wald F-stat                    19.30          17.86          65.75           60.84
       Adj. R-Square                          0.14           0.16           0.13            0.16

       European Migrants
       Share EU HS                          -0.35**          -0.05
                                             (0.16)         (0.11)
       Share EU LS                                                          0.02            -0.22
                                                                           (0.12)          (0.15)
       Observations                          31103          17214          31103           17214
       K-P rk Wald F-stat                    21.42          20.33           6.71             5.43
       Adj. R-Square                          0.13           0.16           0.14             0.15

       NUTS2 f.e.                             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
       Year f.e.                              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
       NUTS2 Controls                         Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
       Individual Controls                    Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
       Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data.
       Standard errors are clustered at NUTS2 level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. As individual
       controls age, gender and education dummies are included. As NUTS2 controls we include
       GDP per capita, unemployment rate, population density and share of tertiary educated
       individuals. The dependent variable is our standardized measure of nationalism. Analysis
       by subsamples based on individual education groups: not tertiary education (col. (1)-(3))
       and tertiary (col. (2)-(4)).




                                                      45
                                  Table A-2: Nationalism and voters’ age

                                     (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                                     IV        IV        IV        IV        IV        IV
Time                              2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016

Subsample                                       Age Group                                 Age Group
Individual age group                 18-37        38-57           58+          18-37        38-57           58+

All Migrants
Share HS                              -0.14        -0.19*         -0.15
                                     (0.14)        (0.11)        (0.10)
Share LS                                                                       0.11*        0.14***       0.15***
                                                                               (0.06)        (0.04)        (0.06)
Observations                         10847         17787         19681         10847         17787         19681
K-P rk Wald F-stat                   13.84         18.53         24.32         40.72         45.62         48.30
Adj. R-Square                         0.14          0.12          0.17          0.14          0.12          0.17

Not European Migrants
Share N o EU HS                       0.03          -0.28         -0.18
                                     (0.28)        (0.21)        (0.29)
Share N o EU LS                                                                0.12*        0.14***       0.17**
                                                                               (0.07)        (0.05)       (0.07)
Observations                         10847         17787         19681         10847         17787        19681
K-P rk Wald F-stat                   13.07         19.30         23.13         64.84         65.97         61.21
Adj. R-Square                         0.14          0.12          0.17          0.14          0.12          0.16

European Migrants
Share EU HS                           -0.30         -0.23         -0.21
                                     (0.20)        (0.14)        (0.14)
Share EU LS                                                                     0.02          -0.08         -0.07
                                                                               (0.14)        (0.13)        (0.16)
Observations                         10847         17787         19681         10847         17787         19681
K-P rk Wald F-stat                   15.92         19.57         26.11          5.75           5.82          6.07
Adj. R-Square                         0.14          0.12          0.17          0.14           0.12          0.17

NUTS2 f.e.                            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Year f.e.                             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
NUTS2 Controls                        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Individual Controls                   Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. Standard errors are
clustered at NUTS2 level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. As individual controls age, gender and education
dummies are included. As NUTS2 controls we include GDP per capita, unemployment rate, population density and
share of tertiary educated individuals. The dependent variable is our standardized measure of nationalism. Analysis
by subsamples based on individual age groups characteristics: from 18 to 37 (col. (1)-(4)), 38 to 57 (col. (2)-(5)),
58+ (col. (3)-(6)).




                                                          46
                    Table A-3: Nationalism and voters’ gender

                                     (1)       (2)       (3)                    (4)
                                     IV        IV        IV                     IV
Time                              2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016              2007-2016

Subsample                                Gender                          Gender
Natives Gender                       Male     Female            Male          Female

All Migrants
Share HS                           -0.26**         -0.06
                                    (0.11)        (0.08)
Share LS                                                       0.16***        0.11***
                                                                (0.06)         (0.04)
Observations                        24054         24265         24054          24265
K-P rk Wald F-stat                  21.99         17.82         42.94          48.66
Adj. R-Square                        0.14          0.13          0.14           0.13

Not European Migrants
Share N o EU HS                     -0.42*         0.07
                                    (0.24)        (0.20)
Share N o EU LS                                                0.17**         0.12***
                                                               (0.06)          (0.05)
Observations                        24054         24265        24054           24265
K-P rk Wald F-stat                  19.77         18.62         62.47          65.93
Adj. R-Square                        0.14          0.13          0.14           0.13

European Migrants
Share EU HS                        -0.31**         -0.15
                                    (0.15)        (0.12)
Share EU LS                                                     -0.07           -0.03
                                                               (0.14)          (0.10)
Observations                        24054         24265        24054           24265
K-P rk Wald F-stat                  22.34         19.79          6.24            5.92
Adj. R-Square                        0.14          0.13          0.14            0.13
NUTS2 f.e.                           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
Year f.e.                            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
NUTS2 Controls                       Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
Individual Controls                  Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data.
Standard errors are clustered at NUTS2 level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. As individual
controls age, gender and education dummies are included. As NUTS2 controls we include
GDP per capita, unemployment rate, population density and share of tertiary educated
individuals. The dependent variable is our standardized measure of nationalism. Analysis
by subsamples based on individual gender: male (col. (1)-(3)) and female (col. (2)-(4)).




                                             47
                               Table A-4: Nationalism and voters’ domicile

                                     (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                                     IV        IV        IV        IV        IV        IV
Time                              2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016 2007-2016

Subsample                                        Domicile                                  Domicile
Voters domicile                      Rural        Town            City         Rural        Town            City

All Migrants
Share HS                              -0.12        -0.24*         -0.07
                                     (0.10)        (0.13)        (0.12)
Share LS                                                                      0.17**        0.17***         0.08
                                                                              (0.07)         (0.06)        (0.05)
Observations                         18938         15087         14289        18938          15087         14289
K-P rk Wald F-stat                   22.87         28.16          9.20         23.35         43.07         45.10
Adj. R-Square                         0.15          0.14          0.13          0.14          0.13          0.13

Not European Migrants
Share N o EU HS                       -0.07         -0.23         -0.08
                                     (0.50)        (0.39)        (0.18)
Share N o EU LS                                                               0.14**        0.22***         0.07
                                                                              (0.06)         (0.08)        (0.05)
Observations                         18938         15087         14289        18938          15087         14289
K-P rk Wald F-stat                    7.37         16.21         13.31         48.52         57.66         58.30
Adj. R-Square                         0.15          0.14          0.13          0.14          0.13          0.13

European Migrants
Share EU HS                           -0.16       -0.36**         -0.09
                                     (0.10)        (0.17)        (0.17)
Share EU LS                                                                    -0.19*         0.10          -0.15
                                                                               (0.10)        (0.11)        (0.31)
Observations                         18938         15087         14289         18938         15087         14289
K-P rk Wald F-stat                   34.91         30.16          9.72          17.16        10.77           1.05
Adj. R-Square                         0.15          0.14          0.13           0.14         0.14           0.13

NUTS2 f.e.                            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Year f.e.                             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
NUTS2 Controls                        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Individual Controls                   Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database and Eurostat data. Standard errors are
clustered at NUTS2 level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. As individual controls age, gender and education
dummies are included. As NUTS2 controls we include GDP per capita, unemployment rate, population density and
share of tertiary educated individuals. The dependent variable is our standardized measure of nationalism. Analysis
by subsamples on voters domicile location: farm or country village (col. (1)-(4)), town or small city (col. (2)-(5))
and big city or suburbs of it (col. (3)-(6)).




                                                          48
                        Table A-5: Voting for radical right or liberal parties - Voters Education

                              (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)
                              IV              IV              IV              IV             IV              IV             (IV)             (V)
Time                       2007-2016       2007-2016       2007-2016       2007-2016      2007-2016       2007-2016       2007-2016       2007-2016

Party Family                                   Radical Right                                                       Liberal
Natives Education         Not Tertiary      Tertiary     Not Tertiary       Tertiary     Not Tertiary      Tertiary     Not Tertiary       Tertiary

All Migrants
Share HS                       -0.05          -0.01                                          0.16*            0.14
                              (0.03)         (0.02)                                          (0.08)          (0.09)
Share LS                                                    0.03***           0.02***                                         -0.00          0.02
                                                             (0.01)            (0.00)                                        (0.01)         (0.01)

Observations                  29574           16195          29574            16195          29574           16195           29574          16195
K-P rk Wald F-stat             5.76            5.16          25.85            22.89           5.76            5.16           25.85          22.89
Adj. R-Square                  0.12            0.04           0.12             0.03           0.08            0.12            0.11           0.13
Note: authors’ calculations on ESS, EULFS, Manifesto Project Database, Chapell Hill Database and Eurostat data. Standard errors are clustered
at NUTS2 level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. As individual controls age, gender, education dummy are included. As NUTS2 controls we
include GDP per capita, unemployment rate, population density and share of tertiary educated individuals. The dependent variable is a dummy
that takes value of 1 if voter for a party that belongs to the Radical Right political family (col. (1),(2), (3) and (4)) or to the Liberal political
family (col. (5),(6),(7),(8)). The definition of the political family of parties is determined by the Chapell Hill survey dataset.




                                                                         49
