                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             INFORMATION: HARD AND SOFT

                                        José María Liberti
                                       Mitchell A. Petersen

                                       Working Paper 25075
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25075


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2018




This is a significantly revised version of the working paper previously circulated as “Information:
Hard and Soft” (2004) by Mitchell A. Petersen. The authors thank the editors Efraim Benmelech
and Paolo Fulghieri for their patience and guidance in bringing this paper to fruition. We also
thank Sumit Agarwal, Alan Berger, Richard Cantor, Bruce Carruthers, Beverly Clingan, Barry
Cohen, Kent Daniel, Diane Del Guercio, Bob DeYoung, Joey Engelberg, Scott Frame, Andreas
Fuster, Jon Garfinkel, Michael Faulkender, Andrew Karolyi, Juhani Linnainmaa, Tamim Majid,
David Matsa, Gregor Matvos, Amit Seru, Philip Strahan, and conference participants at the
University of Oregon, the Midwest Finance Conference, the University of South Carolina, and
SFS Cavalcade for their suggestions and advice. The research assistance of Sang Kim, Austin
Magee, and Mark Scovic is greatly appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by José María Liberti and Mitchell A. Petersen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Information: Hard and Soft
José María Liberti and Mitchell A. Petersen
NBER Working Paper No. 25075
September 2018
JEL No. G2,G21,G3

                                         ABSTRACT

Information is a fundamental component of all financial transactions and markets, but it can
arrive in multiple forms. We define what is meant by hard and soft information and describe the
relative advantages of each. Hard information is quantitative, easy to store and transmit in
impersonal ways, and its information content is independent of its collection. As technology
changes the way we collect, process, and communicate information, it changes the structure of
markets, design of financial intermediaries, and the incentives to use or misuse information. We
survey the literature to understand how these concepts influence the continued evolution of
financial markets and institutions.

José María Liberti
DePaul University
1 E. Jackson Blvd.
DePaul Center 6131
Chicago
Illinois, 60604
jliberti@depaul.edu

Mitchell A. Petersen
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
mpetersen@northwestern.edu
I)     Introduction.

       Information is an essential component in all financial transactions and markets. A major

purpose of financial markets and institutions in general is to collect, process, and transmit

information. Given the importance of information and its transmission to the study of finance, as

technology changes the way we communicate, it must fundamentally change financial markets,

securities, and institutions, especially financial intermediaries. However, new technologies (i.e.,

those developed in the past fifty years) are more adept at transmitting and potentially processing

information that is easily reduced to numbers. We call this hard information. Information that is

difficult to completely summarize in a numeric score, where context matters, and where it is

difficult to separate the collection of the information from its use is what we call soft information.

Building upon the extensive literature on soft and hard information we examine the definition of

these terms and their role in understanding financial markets and institutions.

       The distinction between soft and hard information arose in the finance literature as a way

to understand the evolving organization of lenders, although the theoretical ideas reach back much

further. Banks have historically been a repository of information about borrowers’

creditworthiness and the kinds of projects available to them. This information was collected over

time through frequent and personal contacts between the borrower and the loan officer. Over time

the banks built up a more complete picture of the borrower than was available from public records.

This private information, whether hard or soft was valuable. The value, however, would be driven

by the inability to replicate or transmit this information outside the bank (i.e., soft information).

       The growth in the amount of numerical data available about borrowers and the ability to

automate the credit decision transformed banking from an exclusively local and personal market

to a national, competitive, and in some cases impersonal market. Some functions and decisions



                                                      1
which had resided inside the firm have been moved outside the firm due to a greater reliance on

soft versus hard information. Information type (i.e. soft versus hard information) is an important

characteristic of the lending environment and helps explain how the design of lending markets and

institutions in which they operate have evolved.

       The study of hard and soft information began in the banking literature. However, as

technology progressed the role of soft or hard information in financial markets and institutions

outside of banking and even outside of finance has grown. Not only did researchers use these

concepts to examine a variety of financial markets and institutions (e.g., public equity markets,

venture capital, municipal bonds, and real estate), but they examined how the type of information

available to an institution helped determine the feasible and efficient organizational structures.

Organizational constraints fed back into the kinds of information an institution could effectively

use.

       The purpose of the paper is to survey the literature on soft and hard information and to

provide a review of what we know but also which questions remain unanswered. We describe what

we believe to be the fundamental characteristics that define hard versus soft information in Section

II. This provides a framework of how these terms have been used in the literature and which can

be used to inform future work. We also discuss two historical examples of the hardening of soft

information: the origin of credit ratings and the creation of the Center for Research in Security

Prices. An institution’s or market’s decision to rely on hard or soft information is driven by what

is available but also by the relative advantages of each. In Section III, we describe the main

advantages of each type of information using the literature to provide examples and intuition. In

Section IV we return to the roots of the soft and hard information literature. We start with a

discussion of its foundation in the theoretical banking and organizational design literature, before



                                                     2
turning to efforts by the empirical literature to measure information type, directly and indirectly

(e.g., by using geographic or organizational distance). This leads us to a discussion of the empirical

challenge of designing incentives as a function of the type of information an institution uses. In

the next section, we examine applications of soft and hard information outside of the banking

literature. Specifically, we examine the lessons learned from the financial crisis as seen through

the lens of information type. We also discuss the emerging work on FinTech which in many ways

is the newest attempt by markets and firms to replace soft information with hard information. This

section provides a guide to the future evolution of this literature as financial innovation and

financial crisis are reoccurring themes in finance. Section VI concludes.

II)     Defining Soft and Hard Information.

        An initial challenge of using soft and hard information as useful constructs has been

creating precise definitions. As the literature has expanded, the problem has not gotten easier. Thus,

we will start with a brief description of the attributes of information that make it soft or hard. This

description should be both consistent with much of the literature but also useful in framing research

questions. Like many labels in finance (e.g., debt versus equity), there is no a clear dichotomy.

Rather than two distinct classifications, we should think of a continuum along which information

can be classified. Our interest is what characteristics of information, its collection, and use makes

it hard or soft, and how these characteristics influence the structure of financial markets and

institutions.

        A)      Characteristics of Soft and Hard Information.

                1)     Numbers versus text.

        Hard information is almost always recorded as numbers. In finance we think of financial

statements, the history of payments which were made on time, stock returns, and the quantity of



                                                      3
output as being hard information. Soft information is often communicated as text.1 It includes

opinions, ideas, rumors, economic projections, statements of management’s future plans, and

market commentary. The fact that hard information is quantitative means that it can easily be

collected, stored, and transmitted electronically. This is why the advent of computers, large

database programs, and networking has generate such growth in the use of production technologies

that rely on hard information (e.g., quantitative lending, quantitative trading, and FinTech more

generally).

                  2)       The unimportance of context.

         One can always create a numerical score from soft information, for example by creating an

index of how honest a potential borrower is. This in and of itself doesn’t make the information

hard. Your interpretation of a 3 must be the same as mine. Thus, a second dimension of hard

information is the unimportance of the context under which the information is collected. One can

collect and code information and then transmit it to someone else. The meaning of the information

depends only upon the information that is sent. It does not depend upon dimensions of the

environment under which it was collected but which are not encoded in the data (Ijiri 1975). Thus,

the receiver of the data knows all that the sender knows (or at least all that is relevant). With soft

information, the context under which the information is collected and the collector of the

information are part of the information. It is not possible to separate the two. This constrains the

environments in which the data is collected and used. The environment has to be well-defined and

predictable. In some cases, prior to entering the environments and collecting the data (e.g., talking



1
  Can’t text be converted to numbers? Text files can obviously be translated into numbers; this is how they are stored
and transmitted. Can’t text files be processed electronically? Again, the answer has to be yes, conditional on what one
means by processed. The ability of computers algorithms to process and generate speech (text) has improved
dramatically since we first discussed soft and hard information. Whether it can be interpreted and coded into a numeric
score (or scores) is a more difficult question. A numeric score can always be created, the issue is how much valuable
information is lost in the process. We call this process the hardening of information and will discuss it below.

                                                               4
to a potential borrower), we know what variables we need to collect, what possible values those

variable can take (i.e., a signal will be either good or bad; one, two, or three), and precisely how

they will be used in the specific decision (values above 2 lead to a loan approval).2 In other cases,

prior to collecting the information, we are unsure what we might find or why it may be valuable

until we after we collect the data.3 Think of this knowledge as arising out of training and experience

(Berger and Udell 2006). Later, when we are confronted with a decision, we recall the information

collection process (e.g., the experience), and it is only then that is it apparent how the information

we collected is useful. This is another characteristic of soft information. If we don’t know what

the information will be used for, or which parts of the information are relevant or useful, it is

difficult to code and catalog it for future use.

         The importance of context for soft information is related to the distinction in the contracting

literature of whether a signal that is observable by outsiders is also verifiable by outsiders (Hart

1995; Aghion and Tirole 1997; Baker, Gibbons, and Murphy 2002). For a signal to be verifiable,

the interpretation of the signal by the two contracting parties—and any third party who may be

required to enforce the contract—must be the same. This is a characteristic of hard information.

By contrast, soft information is private and not verifiable as it involves a personal assessment and

depends upon the context, which is not easily captured and communicated. I can produce records


2
  A firm’s sales revenue or their stock return is an example of such hard information. There is wide agreement as to
what it means for a firm to have had sales of $10 million last year or the firm’s stock price has risen by 10%. However,
if we say the owner of the firm is trustworthy, there is less agreement about what this means and why it is important.
Our definition of trustworthy may be different from yours and the context under which we evaluate their
trustworthiness may be relevant.
3
  This distinction is reminiscent of the difference between the approach we take when we teach first-year graduate
econometrics and the way empirical research is done in practice. In Econometrics 101, we assume we know the
dependent variable, the independent variables, and the functional form. The only unknown is the precise value of the
coefficients. In an actual research project, we have priors about the relationships between important economic concepts,
but we don’t know how to precisely measure the concept behind the dependent and independent variables nor the
functional form. Only after collecting the data, and examining the preliminary results, that we understand how the
variables are related. This leads us to modify our hypothesis and often requires the collection of additional data or
alter our initial hypothesis and/or our interpretation of the data. The research process helps us see and understand the
missing context.

                                                               5
that a borrower has paid their bills on time (hard information), but I cannot fully document that a

borrower is honest as this relies on multi-dimensional observations and my personal assessment

and standards. Following the organizational economics literature, hard and soft information can

also be referred to as objective or subjective information.

                  3)       Separation of information collection and decision-making.

         The unimportance of context for hard information means it is possible to separate the

collection of hard information and the decision-making based on that information. Adam Smith

observed that the division of labor and specialization can create value in manufacturing; the same

principal applies to the collection and processing of hard information. Knowing what information

you are looking for and why it is valuable (i.e., what will it be used for) is essential if information

collection is to be delegated. The collection of hard information does not even need to be personal.

Hard information can be entered into a form without the assistance of or significant guidance from

a human data collector (home mortgage mobile apps are an example). The data collector does not

need to understand what decisions the data will be applied to. Soft information must be collected

in person, and the information collector and the decision maker are often the same person.4 This

is the intuition in Stein (2002) for why smaller, less hierarchical firms are better able to use soft

information in their decisions. This is also why relationship lending is built upon soft information

(Berger and Udell 1995).

         B)       History of Soft and Hard Information

         Historically, most information collection and decision-making was local and between

individuals who were familiar with each other, and thus the distinction between hard and soft


4
  A typical example is the relationship-based loan officer. The loan officer has a history with the borrower and, based
on a multitude of personal contacts, has built up an impression of the borrower’s honesty, creditworthiness, and
likelihood of defaulting. Based on this view of the borrower and the loan officer’s experience, the loan is approved or
denied. Uzzi and Lancaster (2003) provide detailed descriptions of the interaction between borrowers and loan officers.

                                                              6
information was not relevant. As technology made it feasible for financial transactions to occur

between more distant and less familiar participants, the distinctions that we have discussing started

to arise. We have implicitly been assuming that information type is static. Information is either

hard or soft; it is not malleable. This simplification allows us to focus on the definition and

advantages of each type of information. How discrete and immutable is information type? That is

an empirical question. We can think of hard information as a numeric index, but soft information

can and is converted into an index, but not without losing of information or context. Markets and

individuals are constantly taking in soft (and hard) information and condensing (hardening) it into

binary decisions: whether to fund a project, sell a stock, or make a loan. This does not create a

meaningful loss of information if the decision is the final step and does not feed into later

decisions.5 Before moving on to the relative advantages of hard and soft information, we discuss

two historic examples of the hardening of information and how the process changed the market or

institutions that rely on this information. The examples are: the origin of credit ratings and the

creation of the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).

                  1)        The Origin of Credit Ratings.

         Credit ratings originated in the United States during the nineteenth century. Prior to this

time, most trade among merchants was local. The extension of trade credit was common and

merchants traditionally relied on soft information accumulated over time and through repeated

personal interactions to make their credit decisions (Carruthers and Cohen 2001, Carruthers and

Cohen 2009). 6 The development of communication and transportation technologies made it



5
  In Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch’s (1992) study of informational cascades, they model sequential decisions
where agents see the (binary) decisions of prior agents but not the information upon which the information is made.
This reduction (hardening) of information leads to agents ignoring their own (soft) information and following the
crowd.
6
  The authors’ description of trade credit markets during this period is strikingly similar to Nocera’s (2013) description
of the US consumer lending market of the 1950s.

                                                                7
possible to sell one’s goods to a geographically much larger market. These were new customers

with whom merchants had no prior personal experience, and thus their traditional approach to trade

credit lending was not possible. These technological shocks created demand for new sources of

information about creditworthiness that did not rely on direct personal connections, i.e., hard

information. This led to the formation of firms which collected information about remote

customers starting in the latter half of the 19th century.7 These firms promised precise, standardized

ratings that would allow merchants to avoid extending credit to distant customers who were not

creditworthy.

        The credit rating bureaus established local offices in major cities and relied on local

merchants, lawyers, or bankers as the sources of their information. The input to the process was

the same soft information that had previously been the basis of credit decisions. 8 The credit

agencies used this information to create two credit scores which were sold to merchants: pecuniary

strength (essentially net worth) and general credit (ability and willingness to repay). In this way,

the agencies were able to take the soft information based on personal contacts and available to

local merchants and provide it in a form that was useful to distant merchants. Merchants could

make lending decisions based on this number, even though they had no contact with the potential

customers or the data collectors. The standardization of the information in the form of the credit

reports was a very early form of hard information and allowed the geographic reach of trade credit

lenders to expand. It is also an example of how soft information can be hardened.

                 2)       Creation of Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).




7
  The precursor to Dun and Bradstreet, the Mercantile Agency was founded in 1841 and the precursor to Standard and
Poor’s, the History of Railroads and Canals in the United States by Henry Poor was founded in 1860.
8
  “What went into the reports was a variable and unsystematic combination of facts and rumors about the firm, its
owners, his personality, and family” (Cohen 1998).

                                                            8
         The second historical example comes from the equity markets. The Center for Research in

Securities Prices began as a database of monthly and then daily returns on all NYSE stocks in the

early sixties: stereotypic hard information. There is rarely disagreement about what a return of four

percent means. Prior to the construction of the CRSP databases, however, there was limited

knowledge about what the returns on equities actually were, let alone what the determinants of

equity returns were.9 The existence of a comprehensive database containing the returns on all

stocks unleashed a torrent of research into the determinants of both expected returns (e.g., factor

models) and realized returns (e.g., event studies). It was now possible to carefully document what

announcements or events influence stock prices (MacKinlay 1997). The dependent variable is a

unidimensional index of value: the stock price (or changes in the stock price). The independent

variables in this work are also coded into numeric values. Initially the coding was rudimentary:

dividends increased, decreased, or did not change. Over time, the independent variable used to

explain stock returns in the event study became more elaborate. However, they were always

quantitative simplifications of the underlying events.

         Although the event studies often found important determinants of stock prices, even when

they focused on the individual days when seemingly large announcements were made, the fraction

of cross-sectional variability that the models can explain is small (Roll 1984; Roll 1988). This




9
  CRSP began with a question from Louis Engel, a vice president at Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner and Smith. He
wanted to know what the long-run return on equities was. He turned to Professor Jim Lorie at the University of Chicago,
who didn’t know either but was willing to find out for them (for a $50,000 grant). The process of finding out led to
the creation of the CRSP stock return database. The fact that neither the investment banks nor academic finance knew
the answer to this question illustrates how far we have come in depending upon hard information such as stock returns.
Professor Lorie described the state of research prior to CRSP in his 1965 Philadelphia talk “Until recently almost all
of this work was by persons who knew a great deal about the stock market and very little about statistics. While this
combination of knowledge and ignorance is not so likely to be sterile as the reverse-that is, statistical sophistication
coupled with ignorance of the field of application-it nevertheless failed to produce much of value.” In addition to
CRSP, he talks about another new dataset: Compustat (sold by the Standard Statistics Corporation) which had 60
variables from firm’s income statement and balance sheet.
http://www.crsp.com/research/james-lorie-recognized-importance-crsp-future-research

                                                               9
omission could be due to daily movements driven by the trading process (market micro-structure

effects) or by the inadequacy of the explanatory variables. There are many forces that move stock

price (rumors, news accounts, different interpretation of public releases) that are not easily and

accurately converted to a numeric score. Although market participants capture this soft information

and impound it into the hard information of stock prices, the academic models have had difficulty

replicating the process.

III)       Advantages and Disadvantages of Hard Information.

           The choice between hard and soft information is driven by its availability and more

importantly the relative costs of each. In this section, we describe the relative advantages of hard

or soft information. The objective is both to explain why one kind of information is preferable in

a given context, but also to more fully understand the definition of each.

           A)     Lower Costs of Production and Market Competition.

           One of the major advantages of using hard information is the lower transactions costs

(Frame, Srinivasan, and Woosley 2001). These come from several sources. First, by its nature,

production technologies (such as loan origination) that depend upon hard information are easier to

automate. The job of collection, and in some cases processing of information, can be delegated to

lower-skilled workers or computers. Expensive labor can be replaced by cheaper labor or cheaper

capital.

           Hard information is more standardized. By construction it arrives in the same format and

is processed in the same way for each application or transaction. The expertise of how to make the

decision given the possible inputs is embedded into the decision rules or the computer code. This

standardization introduces savings into the production process due to economies of scale. Once

the computer system is designed and built to retrieve credit scores from the credit bureau and make



                                                     10
an approval decision, adding additional applications to the system has a small incremental cost.

This is one reason why lending based on hard information (e.g., credit cards) has come to be

dominated by large lenders much more so than traditional relationship lending (Cole, Goldberg,

and White 2004; Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and Stein 2005; Berger and Black 2011). These

potential cost savings have created economic pressure to find ways to automate small loans to

firms or individual as a large fixed cost can make these loans prohibitively expensive.10

         The greater reliance on hard information may also increase the competitiveness of financial

markets.11 First, the standardization of information and the resulting lower transactions costs can

expand the size of the market by increasing the number of suppliers who can profitably offer such

loans or services. In addition to expanding the number of suppliers in a given market, a reliance

on hard information can also increase the geographic reach and competitive impact on existing

suppliers. The evolution of the mortgage and signature loan (now called the credit card) market is

an example.12 In the 1950s, the market was local and based on soft information obtained through

personal contact. It is now national and based on hard information often obtained through

impersonal contact. This has led to a wider availability of and arguably cheaper capital for the

middle class (Nocera 2013).

         The nature of the information may also increase the competitiveness of the markets. Once

information is systematized and easy to communicate (hard), it also becomes more difficult to

contain. In the early years of the credit reporting agencies (e.g., Bradstreet or R. G. Dun), only a

summary of the information the agencies had on borrowers was published in their quarterly books.


10
   For small business loans, the size of the fees is independent of the size of the loan. Thus, the percentage fee declines
with loan size (Petersen and Rajan 1994).
11
   The causation can also run in the opposite direction. Greater competition, which can arising from deregulation for
example, increases the pressure to lower costs and thus transform the production process to depend more on hard
information.
12
   Subprime mortgage loans are less standardized and more informationally sensitive than normal mortgages because
sometimes borrowers are not able to provide full disclosure of their income (Mayer, Pence, and Sherlund 2009).

                                                                11
This disclosed information was quantitative and easy to compare and communicate. For an

additional fee, subscribers could visit the office of the agencies to view a detailed report on a

potential customer. The credit rating bureaus were either unable or unwilling to quantify and

include all of the soft information they held into their reported credit scores. Interestingly,

information in these private reports was better at predicting bad outcomes (business failures) than

the published credit ratings (Carruthers and Cohen 2001). By keeping the information difficult to

replicate and transmit, by maintaining its softness, the credit reporting agencies hoped to maintain

their control over the information and thus extract greater rents from the information they had

collected. Once information is hard, providers have difficulty preventing one customer from

passing it to additional customers who can then capture the information’s full value. Information

that is hard can be understood independent of the collector and the context under which it was

collected. If the collector is not necessary once the user has the data, this makes charging high rates

for the information more difficult.

       B)      Durability of Information.

       The durability of information is also greater when it is hard. The fact that it is easily stored

means that the cost of maintaining it for future decisions is low. The fact that the information can

be interpreted without context means that it is possible to pass it along to individuals in different

parts of an organization (Stein 2002). Individuals or even firms no longer need to be part of the

data collection process to be part of the decision-making process. This is especially important if

the people involved in data collection are not expected to be around in the future. This frees the

decision process from constraints of space (distance) and time. Given the increased turnover in

many finance professions (loan officers or investment bankers), the movement toward hard




                                                      12
information seems inevitable. 13 As described in Crane and Eccles (1988), junior investment

bankers used to rise through the bank as junior employees of their clients simultaneously rose

through the ranks at their own firms. By the time junior bankers became senior bankers, they had

developed a relationship with the people who were now in senior positions in the bank’s clients.

There is no need to rely on formal records (hard information) in the presence of these long-term

relationships. However, if bankers turn over more frequently, new bankers must rely on the records

left behind by the previous bankers (Morrison and Wilhelm 2007). This creates a greater reliance

on hard information.

         C)       Lost Information.

         Part of the reason that hard information is less costly to communicate is that there is less

of it. The replacement of soft with hard information inevitably results in a loss of information (as

when an analog signal is converted to a digital signal). This is why it is possible to use a smaller

bandwidth to transmit the information. As an example, compare two methods of making a loan

approval decision. First is the stereotypic credit scoring decision, in which a finite number of

quantitative variables are weighted and summed to obtain a credit score. The loan is approved if

the value of the score is above a critical value. Now compare this to the traditional relationship

approach to lending. After spending several hours discussing the borrower’s investment plans and

using the loan officer’s years of experience with the borrower and knowledge of the local business

environment, a decision is rendered. Both decision-making methods lead to a binary approval or

rejection decision, but the first requires less information as inputs to the decision.




13
   Karolyi (2017) finds that the relationship lies with the individuals not the firms. After exogenous changes in
leadership (the death of retirement of a CEO), firms are significantly more likely to switch to lenders with whom the
new CEO has a relationship (see also Degryse, Liberti, Mosk, and Ongena 2013). This is one reason why firms that
rely on soft information in securing debt capital care about the fragility of the banks from which they borrow (Schwert
2017).

                                                              13
         The reduction of information is never good, as long as processing costs are zero. However,

decision makers (e.g., the loan approval committee of a bank) has limited time and attention to

devote to each decision.14 To prevent information overload, decision makers need the information

to be boiled down to what is important.15 The larger the organization and the higher one goes in

the organization, the more the information needs to be concentrated or decision-making authority

delegated. The question is how important is the lost information. The concern about small firms’

and individuals’ access to capital in the presence of bank consolidation and the growing use of

credit scoring type lending decisions is driven by this question (O’Neil 2016). If there are

borrowers that are really good credit risks, but they look bad on paper (i.e., when only hard

information is considered), then such borrowers would be incorrectly denied credit. The empirical

evidence thus far is mixed. It is clear that some small borrowers are dislocated by their banks when

the banks merge, but there is also evidence that existing and new small banks may fill the gap

(Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and Stein 2005; Berger, Goulding, and Rice 2014; DeYoung,

Gron, Torna, and Winton 2015; Berger, Bouwman, and Kim 2017).

         D)        Gaming the System.

         Accounting numbers, such as firm’s income statement and balance sheet, are a classic

example of hard information. The information is all quantitative, easy to store and transmit

electronically, and there is relatively uniform agreement about what numbers like revenues and

costs mean. This is why quantitative decisions from asset allocation to credit approval rely on these



14
   Using a randomized control trial, Paravisini and Schoar (2015) evaluate the adoption of credit scores in a small
business lending setting. They find that using credit scores improves the productivity of credit committees (e.g., less
time is spent on each file).
15
   Friedman (1990) argues this is one advantage of a market versus a planned economy. He argues that all of the
information that is relevant to a consumer or producer about the relative supply of a good is contained in the price.
Thus, it is not necessary for a supplier to know whether the price has risen because demand has risen or supply has
fallen. The supplier only needs to know that the price has risen, and this will dictate his decision of how much to
increase production. His description of the market is a classic hard information environment.

                                                              14
numbers. Newspaper accounts of accounting manipulation and the size of the credit rating manuals

make it clear that these decisions are not simply a function of the numbers the firms disclose. This

raises another cost of using hard information (e.g., automated or delegated decisions methods):

who controls the information which is fed into the decision-making process.

         The discussion thus far has focused on the decision maker (e.g., the bank making a loan

decision), not the target of the decisions (e.g., a loan applicant). By choosing to use hard versus

soft information, the decision maker is trading off the lower cost of collecting and processing the

information with potential loss in accuracy of the information upon which they are basing their

decisions. The way a decision is made, and the type of information upon which the decision

depends, will also influence the actions of the target of the decision.

         The behavioral response of borrowers (or other targets of the decision) places restrictions

on how decisions based on hard information can be made. Having a decision depend only upon

the numbers and a transparent decision rule can work only if the cost of manipulating the numbers

is sufficiently high relative to the benefit of the preferred outcome.16 If a firm can raise its reported

assets or sales by a small amount for a small cost, and this will raise its credit rating and lower its




16
  In the financial crisis of 2008, a large number of investment grade securities defaulted. The magnitude of the defaults
suggested there was a problem with the rating process (see Benmelech and Dlugosz 2009a; Benmelech and Dlugosz
2009b). Observers in industry, academics, and government suggested possible sources of the problem and potential
solutions. What is intriguing is the defaults experience was very different in the corporate bond market (debt of
operating companies) compared to the structured finance market (e.g., RMBS). Defaults in the corporate bond market
spiked in 2009, but the peak is not drastically different than the peak in prior recessions (see Vazza and Kraemer 2016,
Chart 1). The peak in defaults in the structured finance in 2009 is dramatically larger (see South and Gurwitz 2015,
Chart 1). Although the collapse of the housing market hit the structured finance securities harder, this suggests that a
part of the problem with the rating process resides uniquely in the structured finance segment of the market. For an
operating company, a low cost of capital is an advantage but not its only or predominant source of competitive
advantage. For a securitization structure, a lower cost of capital is one of its few source of “competitive advantage.”
A bank might change which mortgages are placed into a securitization if this increased the faction of the securitization
rated AAA and thus lowered the cost of capital. An auto-manufacturing firm is unlikely to close plants or close down
a division solely to get a higher credit rating. The costs of altering the business to improve a credit score are higher
and the benefits are (relatively) lower for an operating firm. This may be why we saw relatively fewer defaults in the
corporate bond sector relative to the securitized sector. This issue prompted the credit rating agencies to consider
different rating scales for structured finance versus corporate debt (Kimball and Cantor 2008).

                                                               15
cost of capital sufficiently, it has an incentive to inflate its reported assets or sales.17 The rules

cannot be a direct and transparent functions of the hard numbers if the hard numbers are under the

discretionary control of the market participants. In this case, the decision maker has an incentive

to make the decision a fuzzy and opaque function of the inputs. The line between an AA and an A

rating can be kept secret or additional sources of soft information can be included.18 In practice,

ratings models that try to explain the ratings as a function of the firm’s financial numbers have R2

appreciably below 100 percent.

         E)       The Role of Discretion.

         Hard information reduces the information that is used, but equally importantly delegates

the decision-making authority. The individual collecting the data does not make the decision. This

has been delegated to a higher up or to an algorithm (whose author is divorced from the target of

the decision). This should eliminate discretion, and this can be a positive or a negative.

Relationships are useful as a way to elicit information that is not available in the numbers.

Relationships have additional, non-informational, dimensions as well. Relationships generate a

sense of mutual obligation (reciprocity). You help me out and I want to help you out (Uzzi 1999).

Thus, when a loan officer is evaluating a potential loan from a long-term borrower, they can use

their discretion to more accurately evaluate the borrower’s current credit quality as well as changes

in the likelihood of repayment. A borrower is not defaulting on an obligation to an unknown



17
   Hu, Huang, and Simonov (2017) see the same behavior in the market for individual loans. The theoretical
importance of nonlinearities in the mapping of inputs (hard information) to outputs (decisions) is discussed in Jensen
(2003). In his examples, the incentives to misstate one’s information are smaller if the payoff function is linear. Small
changes in the reported information have only small changes in the manager’s payoff.
18
   There may also be strategic reasons to avoid a transparent mapping between the numbers and the credit rating. The
business model of credit rating agencies relies on market participants being unable to replicate the ratings at lower
cost than the agency. If the mapping were a direct function of easily accessible inputs (e.g., the income statement and
balance sheet) and nothing else, some clever assistant finance or accounting professor would figure out the function.
This is one reason that the early credit reporting agencies released only a fraction of their information publicly in the
form of a credit score. For additional fees, users could review a more complete report (Carruthers and Cohen 2001).

                                                               16
faceless financial institution, in these cases, but to someone with whom they have worked for

years.19 This is the positive side of the relationship that can be lost with decisions based on hard

information.

         Loan officers can also use their discretion to put a thumb on the scale and influence a loan

decision for their own benefit. A number of academic papers have documented that loan officers

do use their discretion, and in the documented cases, the discretion does not improve the quality

the decision.20 The challenge is one of incentives. The loan officers are not lending their own

capital, but the bank’s. The bank manager or shareholder must trade-off the value of the loan

officer using their soft information (better quality decision and lower transactions costs) against

the misaligned incentives between the loan officer and the bank. The advantage of hard

information is it can remove the loan officer’s discretion. The relevant variables and the mapping

from the variables to the decision is beyond the control of the loan officer in these cases.21

IV)      Traditional Banking and the Organizational Design of Lending.

         The evolution of financial markets over the past forty years has been in part a replacement

of soft information with hard information as the basis for financial transactions. The full



19
   Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2013) find that borrowers feel less obligated to repay an underwater mortgage if the
mortgage has been sold in the marketplace.
20
   Brown, Schaller, Westerfeld, and Heusler (2012) find that loan officers use discretion to smooth credit, but there is
limited information in discretionary changes. Degryse, Liberti, Mosk, and Ongena (2013) provide evidence that soft
information helps predict defaults over public information (e.g. financial statements), but discretionary actions do not
predict default. Gropp, Gruendl, and Guettler (2012) show that the use of discretion by loan officers does not affect
the performance of the bank portfolio. Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen (2011) document the widespread use of discretion
inside a German savings bank but find no evidence that loans approved base on discretion perform differently than
those that do not use discretion. Cerqueiro, Degryse, and Ongena (2011) find that discretion seems to be important in
the pricing of loans, but plays only a minor role in the decision to lend.
21
   This turns out to be an imperfect solution when the loan officers has an incentive to manipulate the inputs, just as
the borrower might. The loan officers in Berg, Puri, and Rocholl (2016) work for a bank that uses an internal credit
score to evaluate loans. They show that loan officers repeatedly enter new values of the variables into the system until
a loan is approved. Not only are they able to get loans approved that were originally rejected, but they also learn what
the model’s cut offs are and thus what is required to get a loan approved. These results suggest that even hard
information decision-making algorithms which are transparent and depend upon data subject to the control of either
participant (local decision maker or the target of the decision) are subject to the Lucas critique (see the Gaming the
System discussion above).

                                                               17
ramifications of this transformation are not yet fully apparent, and as we discussed above, there

are both advantages and disadvantages of this transformation. In this section, we describe the

evolution of soft information since its theoretical origins, the application of the concept of

information type in the traditional banking literature, and its implications for the organizational

design of lending by financial intermediaries.

       A)      Beginnings: Theoretical Literature.

       The finance literature has been exploring the distinction between soft and hard information

for several decades now and our understanding has evolved since the early years. The distinction

was not always explicitly stated, and even when it has been, the definition was not complete,

formally treated, or consistent across applications.

       One origin of soft and hard information traces back to the theoretical financial

intermediation literature and distinction it drew between the role of banks (or other private lenders)

versus the public bond markets. A key distinction was the superior ability of banks to collect and

process information (Diamond 1984; Diamond 1991; Ramakrishnan and Thakor 1984; Allen,

Carletti, and Gu 2015). This explained why many opaque firms relied exclusively on banks. The

public debt markets, however, with the help of rating agencies, have the same job description: to

evaluate the credit quality of firms (Ederington and Goh 1998). The difference is the type of

information each specializes in collecting and processing.

       The public bond markets and the rating agencies collect financial disclosures, accounting

reports, and default histories. These are sources of hard information. They can all be reduced to a

series of numbers. Banks, on the other hand, especially as described by the lending relationship

literature, collect information that is neither initially available in hard numbers (the ability of the

managers, their honesty, the way they react under pressure), nor easily or accurately reducible to



                                                       18
a numerical score. Even if reduced to a numerical score, the interpretation of the information may

be judgmental and include a discretionary component (Cole, Goldberg, and White 2004; Hertzberg,

Liberti, and Paravisini 2010). Once the relationship is established, even then this information is

not hard. The firm is still unable to communicate this information to the broader lending markets

and thus negotiate a lower loan rate from its bank (Petersen and Rajan 1994).

        Originally, finance scholars borrowed the concept of soft information from organizational

economics and the theoretical literature on decisions making in organizations. One feature of those

initial models was that interests of parties were imperfectly aligned. This misalignment created

incentives for individuals to distort the collection and transmission of information that influenced

decisions to their advantage (Milgrom and Roberts 1988).22 The fact that information needs to be

transmitted to a superior that ultimately has final authority in the decision-making process, in our

case a loan officer that transmits soft information to their supervisors, led the traditional banking

literature to analyze the role of organizational form in lending.

        B)       The Role of Organizational Form in Lending.

        In many industries, both large and small firms coexist. One might think that a dominant

production technology would lead to a uniform firm size. However, if the information collection,

processing, and communication is fundamentally important to the production process (e.g.,

banking, drug research, or film production, Goetzmann, Ravid, and Sverdlove 2013), then firms

may specialize in different sectors of the market depending upon the type of information (hard or

soft) that is used in their production process. Some firms may specialize in production processes


22
   There are a variety of possible costs embedded in the transmission of information in an organization. Theories of
costly communication, where soft information may be more costly to communicate across hierarchies (Becker and
Murphy 1992; Radner 1993; and Bolton and Dewatripont 1994); theories of loss of incentives to collect, process and
use soft information as in Aghion and Tirole (1997) due to the anticipation of being overruled by one’s superior, and
strategic manipulation of information as in Crawford and Sobel (1982) and Dessein (2002). In these theories, those
who send the information will make it noisier and less verifiable if their preferences are not aligned with those who
are receiving it and, ultimately, have the final authority to make the decision.

                                                             19
based on soft information, and others in a production process based on hard information. Stein

(2002) argues that larger, more hierarchical firms, where the decision maker is further from the

information collector, are more likely to use production technologies that rely on hard information

(Brickley, Linck, and Smith 2003). These organizational diseconomies suggest that large banks

are expected to be less efficient at making relationship loans—that is, loans that depend upon soft

information. Information in a large bank is potentially collected by one individual or group, and a

decision is made by another. These decisions require information that can efficiently be transmitted

across physical or organizational distances. The information must also have a uniform

interpretation that does not depend upon the context under which it was collected. Large banks are

more likely to have multiple layers of management. They are hierarchical or centralized opposed

to flat or decentralized organizations. Thus, the oversight of loans in this context implies that larger

banks rely relatively more on hard information (Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan and Stein 2005;

Qian, Strahan, and Yang 2015; Liberti 2017).

       The literature on organizational form in financial institutions has exploited the distinction

between hard and soft information to help explain the scope of the firm, but these ideas appear in

the literature much earlier. As noted in Section II-A-3, a key feature that made scholars interested

in exploring issues of soft information in the traditional banking is that the process of collection

and decision-making are separated, thus transmission is key. Since Coase (1937), the idea of

allocating control and decision-making within organizations has been a core principal of the theory

of the firm. The allocation of control shapes the incentives of agents working in the organizations.

In seminal papers, Grossman and Hart (1986), Hart and Moore (1990), and Hart (1995) define

allocation of control from the ownership of a tangible asset. In the case of financial institutions (or

other firms whose production process depends upon intellectual property or information that is not



                                                      20
easy to transmit), the critical resource or asset is intangible in nature: the access to information,

especially soft information that needs to be communicated to the decision maker.23

         As financial institutions have become larger, more globalized, and more complex they face

a tradeoff between benefits arising from economies of scale and costs of inferior organizational

designs. This has led to a debate in the banking literature over whether a decentralized

organizational structure is better or worse than a centralized one in terms of providing the right

incentives to loan officers to collect, process, transmit, and use soft information. The discussion

has centered on how the informational distance between the decision maker and the loan officers

shapes the nature of information acquisition and, therefore, the types of activities performed inside

or outside the financial institution. As innovations in communication technology have reduced the

cost of accessing information at a distance, this has also changed the competitive landscape of

banking (see also the discussion of Fintech in Section V-C). For example, Liberti, Seru and Vig

(2017) examine the introduction of a credit registry in Argentina. They find that it led to an

improvement in the allocation of credit to borrowers for whom there was now more public hard

information available, but it also changed the internal organization of the bank. We next turn to

the empirical literature that has explored these issues.

         C)       From Geographical to Hierarchical Distance.

         Based on the theoretical predictions on the challenge of transmitting some types of

information (i.e., soft information), the empirical literature has attempted to document the

importance of distance. An important branch of the traditional banking literature shows that

geographical distance affects lending decisions (Petersen and Rajan 2002; Degryse and Ongena


23
   Rajan and Zingales (1998) argue that ownership is not the only way to allocate power in an organization. Another
and in some cases a better way is through access. Access is the ability to work with or use a critical resource, not
necessarily a physical resource that can be owned. In financial institutions (and increasingly in other firms), this asset
is often information.

                                                                21
2005; Mian 2006; DeYoung, Glennon, and Nigro 2008; Agarwal and Hauswald 2010). 24 The

literature has interpreted this finding largely in terms of the difficulty of transmitting soft

information. Despite its prominence, this interpretation is largely based on the observed correlation

between loan characteristics and distance.

         A classic example of a first generation paper using geographic distance is Berger, Miller,

Petersen, Rajan, and Stein (2005). Consistent with Stein (2002), they find that larger banks are

more likely to lend to more distant customers (a greater physical distance between a firm and its

bank) and communicate with borrowers more impersonally (by mail or phone opposed to face to

face). They also find that relationships between a firm and its banks are less durable and less

exclusive when the banks are larger. Most importantly, they find that firms that are forced to

choose a larger bank than they would prefer a small bank (i.e., informationally opaque firms) are

credit rationed. When informationally opaque firms have the choice of which size bank to borrow

from, they choose to borrow from smaller banks. The correct matching alleviates much of the

credit rationing.

         Second generation papers focused on the organizational structure of financial

intermediaries. The lower costs of producing hard information can depend on more than just the

nature of the information. It may also depend upon the organizational design of financial

institutions. Lenders who are larger in size and hierarchically organized benefit from economies



24
   Although these papers are on geographical distance, they are different in nature. Petersen and Rajan (2002)
document that distance between lenders and borrowers increased due to improvements in information technology.
Degryse and Ongena (2005) study the relationship the competitiveness of the lending market and the distance between
the borrower, their lender, and other potentially competitors (banks). Mian (2006) suggests that greater distance not
only decreases the incentives of a loan officer to collect soft information, but also makes it more costly to produce and
communicate soft information. DeYoung, Glennon, and Nigro (2008) document the relationship between the use of
hard information using credit scoring technologies and increases in borrower-lender distances. Finally, Agarwal and
Hauswald (2010) study the effects of distance on the acquisition and use of private information in informationally
opaque credit markets. They show that borrower proximity facilitates the collection of soft information, which is
reflected in the bank’s internal credit assessment.

                                                               22
of scale in using hard information but can find it more costly to transmit soft information. This

will cause them to place a greater reliance on hard information. Nevertheless, large banks may try

and mimic the organizational structure of small banks in order be to more efficient in collecting

soft information and, therefore, improve their ability to compete against smaller banks. For

example, Liberti and Mian (2009) use hierarchical distance between loan officers and their

superiors to study the causal impact of hierarchical structures on the relative importance of hard

versus soft information in the credit approval decisions inside a large financial institution. The

authors find that greater hierarchical distance is associated with less reliance on soft information

and more on hard information. They also find that personal interaction between loan officers and

the superiors approving the loans helps mitigate the effects of hierarchical distance on information

use and minimizes the loss of soft information (see also Qian, Strahan, and Yang 2015).

       One natural question is why delegation of decision rights is a solution to the problem of

transmission of soft information. There are several potential explanations for this to be the case.

An incomplete list includes increase capacity in a limited resources environment, expertise,

communication costs, and ex-ante incentives, among others. Assigning a task to another person

adds capacity to carry out the task relying on the comparative advantage of that specific individual.

A loan officer collecting and processing soft information is a time-consuming activity, and given

the limited resources of her superior, she may decide to delegate certain tasks. There may be

efficiency gains from using a loan officer with the ability and skill set to collect soft information

(Geanakoplos and Milgrom 1991).

       Delegation of decisions may also arise because of the difficulties of communicating

specific information to the superior making communication costs high as in Jensen and Meckling

(1992). A key tradeoff in the organizational design of lending occurs between efficient



                                                     23
communication and the cost of collecting soft information. Garicano (2000) explores the

acquisition of knowledge by the creation of knowledge-based hierarchies in a more general setting.

In these hierarchies, certain individuals solve the easiest problems and more difficult problems are

solved by specialized supervisors. In our banking setting, loan officers may have the easier task of

collecting soft information while supervisors use the information. There is another strand of

literature that focuses on the ex-ante incentives (Aghion and Tirole 1997, Crawford and Sobel

1982, Dessein 2002). For example, Aghion and Tirole (1997) and Stein (2002) argue that large

hierarchical organizational structures inhibit the ex-ante incentives to collect and use soft

information. This decrease in incentives occurs because those in charge of collecting soft

information cannot act on it, and instead have to send the information to their superiors. The nature

of soft information means it may be overruled or ignored, thus dampening the incentives to collect

soft information. Liberti (2017) provides support for the loan officers’ incentives view by showing

that loan officers who receive relatively more authority put more effort into collecting and using

soft information.

         D)       Implications of Relying on Soft Information

         Consolidation of financial institutions may have a negative impact on small business

lending due to the potential loss of soft information and the incentives to collect it going forward.25

Small banks are superior at relationship lending using soft information because of their fewer

layers of management making it easier to communicate and use such information. Large banks can



25
   Starting in the early eighties the number of banks in the US has declined by over fifty percent, with most of the fall
occurring in the first decade (Petersen and Rajan 2002, Figure 4; Berger and Bouwman 2016, Figure 8.1). The decline
in the total number of banks is completely driven by the decline of small banks defined by those with gross total assets
less than $1B. The number of large banks has grown. The decline in small banks is driven in part by the technology
and the shift to hard information, but also by deregulation (Strahan and Kroszner 1999). The growing reliance on hard
information and automated decision-making, and the associated cost savings, created pressure to reduce regulations
on bank expansion. In turn, as regulatory restrictions diminished, this raised the value of capturing cost savings by
shifting to production processes which rely on hard information.

                                                               24
simulate the managerial environments of small banks, in order to minimize the negative impact of

losing information (Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and Stein 2005). The results in Liberti (2017)

also highlight how a large bank may be able to replicate the organizational structure of a small

bank by delegating decision-making authority to the lower layers of the organizations.

       Along these lines, Agarwal and Hauswald (2016) provide direct evidence that the findings

on distance and loan characteristics in the existing literature are really due to the difficulty of

transmitting soft information. In other words, they provide evidence that a bank endogenously

responds to information transmission problems by effectively delegating more authority to loan

officers. Skrastins and Vig (2018) also find evidence that increasing the hierarchical structure of a

branch decreases the ability of the loan officers to produce soft information, leading to an increased

standardization of the information collected for each loan.

       The empirical literature has found that firms’ access to capital depends upon how

informationally transparent the firms are or how much hard information the financial markets have

about the firms. We expect small firms to face greater credit rationing because of the limited hard

information available about them. This is why they are more reliant on banks that are better at

extracting and using soft information. However, when we look only at small firms, we still find

that a firm’s access to credit is a function of how much information is available to the financial

markets not just the bank. Firms that are more informationally transparent, for example if they

maintain formalized records, find that they have a higher probability of their loans being approved

(Petersen and Rajan 2002).

       For publicly traded firms, the amount of hard information available about the firm is much

greater. However, even for publicly traded firms, the existence of information that is easy to access

and evaluate on their likelihood of default—such as a credit rating—appears to increase their



                                                     25
access to debt capital (Petersen and Faulkender 2006). Controlling for traditional determinants of

capital structure (e.g., taxes, asset tangibility, and growth opportunities), firms with a debt rating

have 35 percent more debt than otherwise identical firms.

V)      Applications of Soft and Hard Information beyond Traditional Banking.

        Although much of the initial research on the implications of information type focused on

the banking and lending market, the literature has expanded beyond that. In this section we discuss

three additional areas where researchers have applied these concepts: distance research outside of

banking, the financial crisis, and financial technology (Fintech).

        A)       Distance Research Outside of Banking.

        Based on the research in the banking, distance is related to information type. Hard

information can be transmitted across distance without loss of content; whereas soft information

cannot. This raises the question as to which financial markets must be geographically close and

which do not need to be. This analysis helps us understand what kind of information undergirds

each market. The finance literature has studied distance in a variety of other economic settings and

markets including: the public equity markets (Grinblatt and Keloharju 2001; Hong, Kubick, and

Stein 2005; Malloy 2005), the municipal bond market (Butler 2008), the venture capital market

(Lerner 1995), the real estate market (Garmaise and Moskowitz 2004; Granja, Matvos, and Seru

2017), the allocation capital between divisions within a firm (Landier, Nair, and Wulf 2009), and

the impact of the organization design of conglomerates on their productivity (Seru 2014).26 In part

due to credit ratings, the corporate bond market is national or international. Even though municipal

bonds (tax-exempt bonds issued by state and local government entities) are also rated, Butler (2008)


26
  Even in markets that we think are dominated by hard information and thus, where we would expect distance not to
be relevant, research has sometimes found a preference for local investments. Mutual fund managers tend to hold a
higher concentration in shares of local firms since access to soft information of local firms is cheaper (Coval and
Moskowitz 1999; Coval and Moskowitz 2001). The effect is strongest in small and highly levered firms.

                                                            26
finds that the underwriting market is highly local (80% of municipal bonds are underwritten by

investment banks with a local office). Unlike small business loans, the underwriters of municipal

bonds do not hold the securities and so do not have incentives to monitor borrowers post issuance.

The local underwriters have been able to credibly communicate to investors that their soft

information is valuable and certify the bond’s quality. Local underwriters are able to sell municipal

bonds for higher prices and these results are strongest when the ratings signal is weakest (i.e.,

bonds with low ratings and unrated bonds).27

         One of the most opaque financial sectors is the equity of new and private firms. There is

little to no hard information available about such investments, in part because they have no track

record and in part because they are often in emergent industries. Due to their “…detailed

knowledge of the firm they finance, (venture capitalists) can provide financing to young businesses

that otherwise would not receive external financing” (Lerner 1995). The venture capitalist acquires

soft information by serving on the firm’s boards, making frequent visits to the firm, and meeting

with customers and suppliers. Since this is costly in terms of time, distance matters. A venture

capitalist is twice as likely to sit on the board if their office is within five miles of the firm compared

to 500 miles (Lerner 1995).

         The discussions thus far has focused on the role of information type in explaining external

distances. Distances inside a firm may be relevant as well. Landier, Nair, and Wulf (2009) explore

how the distance between divisions and headquarters within the same conglomerate may have an

impact on corporate decision-making. Managers are more likely to lay off employees or divest

divisions that are more distant from headquarters. Although the authors argue this could be driven



27
   If the local underwriters have soft information that non-local underwriters do not have and they can thus sell the
bonds at higher prices, they should be able to extract larger fees. Oddly, they do not. Local underwriters charge lower
fees relative to non-local underwriting suggesting local competition is limiting their pricing power.

                                                              27
by a greater affinity for the people management interacts with most often, they also find the effect

is stronger in environments that rely on soft information.28 The problem with interpreting this

empirical result is the choice of locations is likely to be endogenous, making it difficult to establish

causality. Instead, Giroud (2013) has a clever way of solving the endogeneity problem. He studies

the impact on plant-level investment and productivity when the headquarters is either close or far

from the plants, arguing that travel time is a better proxy for monitoring than geographical distance,

especially when the inputs to the management’s decision are soft information.29 He exploits the

introduction of new airline routes as a source of exogenous variation to proximity and measures

the causal impact of distance on plant-level investment and productivity. This makes sense if the

information the managers need to acquire is soft and thus obtained only by visiting the plants more

frequently.

        B)       Financial Crisis: The Role of Information Type and Incentives.

        A reliance on hard information was an essential factor in enabling the growth of

securitization and the ensuing expansion of mortgage lending. If lenders have information that

they could not pass along (e.g., soft information) and they use this information to determine which

loans to sell, the securitization market can break down (Stiglitz and Weiss 1981; DeMarzo 2005).

The reliance on hard information in the mortgage market reduced transactions costs, expanded

access to capital, and diversify regional risk (Ranieri 1997; Demsetz and Strahan 1997; Allen and

Carletti 2006; Loutskina and Strahan 2011). The reliance on hard information also had a dark side




28
   They use the measure of distance between banks and borrowers from Petersen and Rajan (2002) to classify whether
industries are hard- or soft-information intensive. Industries where distance between borrowers and lenders is large
are classified as hard information environments.
29
   A plant may be located far away in terms of geographical distance, but monitoring may be easier when there are
direct flights between the cities where the headquarters and plants are located.

                                                            28
and the financial crisis reminded us of these costs. The growing academic literature has

documented the causes and implications of these problems.

       As securitization increased the distance between the originator and the ultimate investor

that bears the default risk increased, and the performance of credit models deteriorated. The interest

rate on loans became a worse predictor of default. Statistical models estimated in a low

securitization period broke down during the subsequent period of high securitization (Rajan, Seru,

and Vig 2015). The literature has documented a number of explanations for the declining accuracy.

First, the history upon which the models were built was short. It is a common theme that new

default models are built, often during times of calm in the credit markets, only to fail when the

calm passes (Frame, Gerardi, and Willen 2015). It is not just that the historical record was short.

When loans are securitized using only information that can be passed on to investors (i.e., hard

information), there is little incentive for the lenders to collect soft information (Rajan, Seru, and

Vig 2010; Purnanandam 2011; Saengchote 2013; Furfine 2014).

       The problem is not just a loss of (soft) information. The historical data is not useful if the

behavior of market participants changes in response to the model’s introduction (Lucas 1976). An

example is the evolving distribution of FICO scores among loan applicants. The underlying

distribution of FICO scores in the population is continuous. However, as securitization grew, the

number of low documentation loans just above the 620 cutoff jumps relative to the loans just below

620 (Keys, Mukherjee, Seru, and Vig 2010, see Figures I and II). FICO scores above 620 are much

easier to securitize and the authors document that they are more likely to be securitized. Loans

with a FICO score just above 620 should be of slightly higher quality than loans with FICO scores

just below 620, but these loans actually default at appreciably higher rates. This implies that

lenders respond to securitization (the sale of loans) by more carefully screening borrower’s credit



                                                     29
risk using soft information when they are more likely to hold the mortgage (Arentsen, Mauer,

Rosenlund, Zhang, and Zhao 2015). As we discussed with bond ratings (Section III-D), when the

decision rule is transparent, borrowers have an incentive to alter the numeric inputs to the credit

model. Borrowers “…whose income is more variable and easier to overstate are more likely to end

up in the 620+, low-documentation subprime loan pool” (Keys, Seru, and Vig, 2012). Ben-David

(2011) documents another example in the mortgage market. He shows that borrowers (and home

sellers) were able to inflate the stated value of the house and thus lower the reported LTV (loan-

to-value) ratio.

        Both hard and soft information are inputs into the regulation of financial institutions as

well. The ability of the regulators to see inside the credit institution will dictate the tools they have

to regulate financial institutions and eliminate inconsistencies of internal ratings across banks,

which is crucial under Basel II and III (Firestone and Rezende 2016; Plosser and Santos 2016).

Just as outside investors cannot observe and use soft information generated inside a lender,

regulators may have the same problem. This means regulators will need to pay special attention to

regulatory policies that depend excessively on default models based on hard information (Keys,

Mukherjee, Seru, and Vig 2009). These models ignore the strategic behavior of lenders when it

comes to reporting due to the potential loss of rents through the acquisition of private soft

information (Hauswald and Marquez 2006; Giannetti, Liberti, and Sturgess 2017).

        The lessons from the financial crisis suggest a number of avenues for exploring the benefits

and costs of hard relative to soft information. An obvious lesson is that models based on only hard

information are potentially subject to manipulation by market participants when the models are

transparent and the benefits of small changes in the inputs are sufficiently inexpensive and valuable.

The challenge is seeing this problem the next time. Exploring these issues may help us understand



                                                       30
what kinds of loans (or other financial securities or decisions) and what kind of market

environments best restrict this behavior. It also raises the question of when and how experience or

memory can help or hurt based on the incentives it creates (Chernenko, Hanson, and Sunderam

2016; Diamond, Hu and Rajan 2018)

       C)      New Financial Markets: FinTech.

       The number of financial firms and markets which are labeled as FinTech has increased

significantly. The financial problems which these new firms and markets are trying to solve are

not new (e.g., evaluating credit quality, allocating investor’s assets, raising equity capital for new

firms, and increasing the efficiency of payments, among others), but the application of new

technology allows for potentially new solutions as well as old problems. Since many of these

business models depend upon substituting numerical data and automated decisions based on hard

information for decisions made by individuals, they are often built on the concept of substituting

hard information for soft. Thus the ideas we discussed above are relevant in understanding why

these new solutions may work and the challenges they will face.

               1)      Numbers versus text revisited.

       Some of the logic which underlies FinTech can be traced to a set of academic papers which

expanded the data used by academics. A typical firm’s 10K filing can run into hundreds of pages.

Its financial statements (e.g., its income statement and balance sheet) take up half a dozen pages

at most. However, a large fraction of the vast studies that try to explain the changes in equity values

with firm data relied only on these accounting numbers and macroeconomic data. This changed

when academics started including textual information in regressions by coding the text into

numerical scores.




                                                      31
         A very early attempt was Das and Chen (2007). They examined the effect of message board

postings on the stock prices of Amazon and Yahoo. Although the algorithm was crude, it showed

a potential way to incorporating the vast amount of textual data into empirical research. With the

digital availability of text and gains in automated methods of analyzing text, there has been an

increase in this kind of research. The next iteration, and arguable the paper that kicked off the

revolution, was Tetlock (2007) who “…quantitatively measure(d) the interactions between media

and the stock market using daily content from a Wall Street Journal column.” As the datasets have

grown and finance researchers have become more adept at coding the text into numbers in

meaningful ways, the literature has grown significantly (Li 2008; Tetlock 2010; Da, Engelberg,

and Gao 2011; Dougal, Engelberg, Garcia, and Parsons 2012; Huang, Zang, and Zheng 2014;

Hoberg and Phillips 2016; Gentzkow, Kelley, and Taddy 2017; Gianni, Irvine and Shu 2017). The

literature has expanded our understanding of how information reported in the financial disclosures

and the media (news stories, opinion columns, internet searches and social media) is impounded

into stock prices and financial decisions. In each of these papers, the text is condensed into

numerical indexes, which capture relevant information (given the empirical results) but likely

capture only a portion of what humans may capture. 30 This is a fundamental challenge of

hardening soft information. This extraction may undoubtedly lead to a loss of information.31 Since


30
   The literature began by simply counting positive and negative words, which proved to be more complicated than
one would have initially guessed. The language of finance is not as simple as we think (Longhran and McDonald
2011). For example, the sentence “The Dell Company has 100 million shares outstanding” would have been classified
as an extremely positive sentence by the early dictionaries, since “company”, “share”, and “outstanding” are coded as
positive words (Engelberg 2008). Hoberg and Phillips (2010) are similar in method but are interested in a very different
question. They use text-based analysis of firm’s 10-K to measure how similar firms involved in mergers are and thus
predict the success of the mergers. Mayew and Venkatachalam (2012) took this idea one step further and examine the
information embedded in the voice tone of managers during earning calls.
31
   Loss of information is not only due to the effect of hardening the information. A change in the compensation
structure of agents may also affect the use of information. In a controlled experiment, Agarwal and Ben-David (2018)
study the impact that changing the incentive structure of loan officers to prospect new applications has on the volume
of approved loans and default rates. They find that after the change, loan officers start relying more on favorable hard
information and ignoring unfavorable soft information. The results highlight how incentives dictate not just what
information is collected but what role it plays in the decision. Another form of loss of information is due to the

                                                               32
the nature of information is not an exogenously fixed quantity, using text analysis or coding soft

information into numeric scores, may change or degrade the information. Whether the ability to

harden soft information is useful in predicting default models or explaining stock returns, for

example, is an empirical question.

         For example, in Appendix A, we show the assessment criteria of subjective information

measures from an international bank with operations around the globe. This rating is subjective in

nature since the criteria are completed by loan officers for each of their clients. This soft rating is

part of a final credit rating composed of this soft input plus a hard information score. It is unclear

whether this information enhances the information environment of the international bank even

compared with a bank’s internal rating. Is this information a substitute or a complement of the

bank hard information?

                  2)       FinTech lending.

         The use of technology (hard information, automated data collection, and automated

decision-making) is not new in lending (Einav, Jenkins, and Levin, 2013), but a number of new

lending models have arisen under the label FinTech. Peer-to-peer lending (P2P) is one example.

In its earliest incarnation it involved individuals lending to other individuals through online

platforms. The electronic interface combined with borrowers and lenders who often had no prior

relationship, suggested that credit decisions would depend solely on hard information. Like the

research on equity markets discussed in the prior section, lenders expanded the information upon

which their lending decisions were made beyond the traditional credit metrics.




portability of soft information. For example, Drexler and Schoar (2016) show that when loan officers leave they
generate a cost to the bank since it impacts the borrower-lender relationship. As the departing loan officers has no
incentives to voluntarily transfer the soft information, borrowers are less likely to receive new loans from the bank in
their absence.


                                                               33
       Several papers have examined the expanded information used by P2P lenders and what

value it has. After controlling for credit score, credit history, income, employment status, and

homeownership, personal characteristics, such a physical attractiveness, increase the likelihood of

getting a loan and reduce the interest rate (Ravina 2018). Borrower narratives which claim the

borrower is trustworthy and successful increase the probability of the loan being funded as well as

lowering the interest rate (Herzenstein, Sonenshein and Dholakia, 2011). This is despite the fact

that these factors (physical appearance and claims of trustworthiness) are not correlated with lower

probabilities of default. Other researchers present a more positive picture of P2P lender’s abilities.

Iyer, Khwaja, Luttmer, and Shue (2015) find the interest rate set by the market is a better predictor

of default, then the borrower’s credit score. Lenders are able to use additional information such as

the borrower’s appearance (picture) or their description of the reasons for borrowing. Duarte,

Siegel, and Young (2012) find that borrowers who based on their pictures are perceived to be more

trustworthy are more likely to get funded and at a lower interest rate, but unlike the prior work

they have lower default rates.

       Not all participants in online lending platforms are strangers. In cases where participants

are connected off line, these relationships may influence credit outcomes. As with relationship

lending, these connection can either provide or signal information, as well as create social pressure

to repay loans (Uzzi 1999; Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales 2013). Having more friends on the

lending platform increase the probability a loan is funded, lowers the interest rate, and is associated

with lower default rates (Lin, Prabhala, and Viswanathan, 2013). When a borrower’s friend

defaults, the borrower is more likely to default (Lu, Gu, Ye, and Sheng 2012). Groups of lenders

experience lower default rates when lending to an individual personally connected to a group

member (Everett 2015). Connections or friendships should matter, but only if they are a credible



                                                      34
and sufficiently costly signal. Returns on loans are higher if an investor who is a friend endorses

the loan and bids on it, but returns are lower if friends endorses but does not bid on the loan

(Freedman and Jin 2011). The importance of context is one of the distinctions between hard and

soft information that we discussed in the first section. Knowing how good a friend you consider

this person to be is open to interpretation; understanding you invested your money in the project

is not.

          These results describe a market that combines characteristics of both relationship and arms-

length lending but intermediated through an online platform. It is also a market that is evolving

from individuals lending to individuals to an increased reliance on institutional funding of the

loans. Eighty percent of the capital on the two major US platforms is now provided by institutional

investors (e.g., pension funds and hedge funds) (Ford 2014; Morse 2015), who are arguably more

sophisticated (Vallee and Zeng 2018). How the market develops will determine the potential cost

reductions and what information can be credibly communicated. What is clear is the set of data

upon which lenders make credit decisions has expanded. There are a few possible directions in

which these market may evolve. They can depend upon social connections and soft information,

but at the cost of limiting the size of the market and the cost savings of scale and automation. The

long-term predictability of some of the expanded source of information is not clear. As we

discussed in Sections III-D and V-B, borrowers have an incentive to alter the inputs to the credit

decision when the benefits exceed the costs. These results raise the question of why borrowers do

not learn how to alter their pictures, the search engine they use, and the narrative of why they need

to borrow to generate more favorable terms (Duarte, Siegel, and Lang, 2012; Morse 2015; Berg,

Burg, Gombovic, and Puri 2018). This may happen in which case these disruptive technologies

will be disrupted by a familiar problem (Uzzi 2016).



                                                      35
       Alternatively, the market can evolve into using only hard information, numbers which are

verifiable and whose interpretation does not depend upon the context not encoded in the data. This

is the direction taken by the FinTech mortgage lenders. By replacing soft information completely

with hard information, these lenders have removed data collection or real time decision made by

humans. The advantages of hard information are apparent in this business model. The loan

processing is faster and less expensive due to the automation. This may explain the growth in their

market share from 2% in 2010 to 8% in 2016 (Fuster, Plosser, Schnabl, and Vickery 2018).

Interestingly, defaults are lower than would be predicted from observable credit metrics (FICO

scores and loan-to-value ratios), because lenders can more accurately compare submitted

financials to databases and thus prevent fraud and mistakes (Buchak, Matvos, Piskorski, Seru,

2017; Fuster, Plosser, Schnabl, and Vickery 2018).

               3)     FinTech in equity markets.

       The next two applications of new technology to finance are in their infancy and both

depend upon the ability to replace transactions that depend upon soft information and relationships

with hard information and more impersonal automation: raising equity and investing one’s wealth.

Public equities are traded among strangers and the investment decisions are based heavily on hard

information. The question is whether an analogous market can be developed for the private equity

of startups. Equity is more opaque than debt, and the equity of startups even more so. Since there

is little hard information (or history) available on these firms most investors rely on personal

connections, face to face meetings, and thus soft information. Traditional sources of capital to

these firms, venture capitalist and angel investors are therefore geographically close and often

intimately involved with the firms before and after funding (Lerner 1995; Sohl 2010; Wong 2002).




                                                     36
         Although crowdfunding has drawn a lot of interest and raised a significant amount of

capital, its future is unclear.32 Only a small fraction of the capital raised is in the form of traditional

equity (5%), an exchange of capital for a stake in the future earnings and cash flows of the firm.

Instead, most of the capital is raised in exchange for a reward or as patronage (Mollick 2014).33

To the extent crowdfunding draws in small, possibly unsophisticated, investors the opportunity for

fraud is nontrivial. 34 The hope is to develop a set of hard information which can capture the

economic viability of the potential investments. Given the difficulties we have discussed above in

debt markets, which are informationally less sensitive securities, this seems problematic.35 The

efficient market hypothesis argues that an uniformed investors can purchase all public equities and

earn the market return. This only works because there are finite set of stocks, which have been

vetted by professionals (through the IPO process) and informed investors can buy or sell the stocks

and thus push their prices toward the correct value. The logic is different with private firms. There

is little to no filtering or vetting of the value of the private firms in this market. Since there is

potentially an infinite number of bad investments, market efficiency provides little protection. This

raises the question of what role is there for regulation versus a market solution (Agarwal, Gupta,

and Israelsen 2016). We already see the emergence of intermediaries that can potentially take on

the task of collecting and processing the soft information necessary to evaluate such investments

(Catalini and Hui 2018). It is an open research question whether and how the incentive problems

documented in the lending market will reoccur in this market.


32
   Mollick (2014) defines crowdfunding as “…the efforts by entrepreneurial individuals and groups… to fund their
ventures by drawing on relatively small contributions from a relatively large number of individuals using the internet,
without standard financial intermediaries.”
33
   Participants contribute capital in exchange for a product or so that they may participate in supporting an event or
creative endeavor. The first is a form of trade credit (pre-paying for a product) and in most examples is more akin to
market research then equity funding, since the existence and quality of the product are uncertain.
34
   “...crowdfunding could become an efficient, online means for defrauding the investing public." (Newman 2011).
35
   Investors “…rely on highly visible (but imperfect) proxies for quality such as accumulated capital, formal education,
affiliation with top accelerator programs, advisors, etc.” (Catalini and Hui 2018).

                                                               37
       Another question that deserves attention is how the automation and the elimination of

subjective decision-making in choosing the “right” investment by crowdfunding investors affects

other market participants. The market for small business lending is partially split into those lenders

that focus on soft versus hard information. If equity crowd-funding continues to grow, this may

affect the strategy or returns of other angel investors and venture capitalists, who must compete

with new more automated selection methods in the early stages and choose how to select and invest

among the firms that successfully navigate this process.

               4)      Robo advising.

       When personal investing expanded beyond the wealthy, many retail investors relied on

brokers for advice and information. This model was similar to the relationship lending model of

banking, relying on soft information and long-term relationships. The rise of mutual funds and

discount brokers not only brought in an expanded set of investors but also provided direct access

to investing not directly intermediated by brokers (Nocera 2013). Fintech is beginning to make

inroads into the retail investment advising business, changing the information available to

investors, how it is delivered, and how it is converted into investing decisions. Consistent with the

themes of this paper, the information is hard or a hardened version of soft information. This allows

for automation of the investment process with associated ability to scale the platforms, reduce

costs, lose information, and create perverse incentives.

       The Fintech data aggregators have the potential to let investors quickly and cheaply sift

through a broader wealth of data on the web. Investors that visit a Fintech (aggregator) web site,

however, are significantly less likely to visit the original content site (Grennan and Michaely 2018).

Since the recommendations are often a concentrated extract of the original information, some

information is lost (see Section III-C). Investors actually prefer recommendations opposed to the



                                                     38
underlying data and reasoning (Grennan and Michaely 2018). There is another potential cost.

Collecting and processing soft information is costly for the analysts (Bradshaw, Wang, and Zhou,

2017). As we saw with lending, if investors are relying on the recommendations extracted by

finance blogs, and thus don’t value the original content, the analysts who produce the underlying

information (data and reasoning) may have less incentive to invest in and process soft information

and this can lead to less accurate and more biased forecasts (Grennan and Michaely 2018).

         Robo-advising takes the next step and provides investment advice with no direct human

interaction. Thus, by construction, it relies on hard information and automated decision rules. The

information upon which retail investment decisions historically are based is often the hard

information of financial reports, past returns, coupled with their reading of analysts’ reports, and

the advice of brokers who may know them well. When it comes to retail investing, information

about the investments (e.g., stocks) is important but so is information about the investors. What is

their risk tolerance, level of finance knowledge, and susceptibility to behavioral biases? Investment

advising, including robo-advising, needs to address both.36 Empirical examinations of the effect

of robo-advising finds that it can increases diversification of investors, but only for the least

diversified investors. It also reduces the “…pervasive behavioral biases such as the disposition

effect (being more likely to realize gains than losses) and trend chasing…” although investors

appear to trade more often when using these platforms (D'Acunto, Prabhala, and Rossi 2017). The

reduction in behavioral biases could improve performance compared to human brokers who are

known to exhibit these behavioral biases (Linnainmaa. Melzer and Previtero 2018).37


36
   The evidence that human brokers factor their client’s characteristics into the investment decision is not reassuring.
A retail investors asset allocation depends significantly more on who their broker is (e.g., broker fixed effects) than
the investors own characteristics (e.g., risk tolerance, age, financial knowledge, investment horizon, and wealth, see
Foerster, S., J. Linnainmaa, B. Melzer, and A. Previtero. 2017.).
37
   Since the algorithms are written by humans, there is also the possibility that the algorithms may embody the same
behavioral biases that human advisors have (O’Neil 2016, D'Acunto, Prabhala, and Rossi 2017) as well as the biases
of those who design the algorithms or which may be inherent in the data (O’Neil 2016).

                                                               39
VI)     Concluding Remarks.

       Production and processing of information lies at the heart of the theory of the firm as well

as the study of financial markets and institutions. Information is the raw material of all financial

decisions. In this paper, we defined the characteristics of what we call soft and hard information

with the objective of creating a guide to researchers. The objective is not to define an absolute

classification of information into one of two categories, hard and soft, but instead to describe the

fundamental characteristics of what we, and the literature, means by soft and hard information and

thus frame the discussion of information type. Not only is the classification not discrete, but soft

information can, at least partially, be transformed into hard information (the hardening of

information). As financial institutions and markets are designed or have evolved, they use hard or

soft information in their production processes. As with all of economics, this choice will be driven

by the relative advantages of soft versus hard information. The list of the relative benefits and our

understanding of them has expanded since we first considered these issues, and may become more

elaborate as researchers continue to explore the role each plays in financial decisions.

       The terms soft and hard information arose initially in the banking literature (e.g. the lending

relationship literature), although the ideas trace back to work on the theory of the firm and the

contracting and organizational economics literature. Implicit in this discussion was that

information was transmitted from one party (the data collector or agent) to another party (the

decision maker or principal). This transmission was costly and imperfect for a number of reasons.

The literature on information type tried to define these characteristics and measure their impact on

the organization of financial institutions and the structure of markets. As technology allowed

greater and cheaper transmission of hard information, markets became geographically more




                                                     40
disperse and some institutions became more hierarchical (relying on hard information) and others

less so.

           Although banking was initially the core of research on soft and hard information its

applications and implications have extended far beyond banking. Researchers have applied these

concepts to a variety of markets including: public and private equity, real estate, municipal bonds,

and the allocation of capital within the firm. The value is both in explaining how the use of different

types of information influences the design and outcome of these markets. It also helps us

understand how they will continue to evolve in the future. This is why we used these concepts to

examine the research on financial crisis and the emergence of FinTech. These are two areas in

which we expect to see future research. Financial crises are a reoccurring feature of financial

markets. Although there are a variety of reasons for each unique crisis, the relative costs of using

soft versus hard information and the incentive problems this choice can create seems to be a

reoccurring factor. We think the same may be true of what is now called Fintech.

           Technology and the growth of online data, has motivated the drive to covert data in to

quantitative indexes. The growth of numeric data combined with a reduction in the cost of

computing have also driven a growth in automated decision-making. This hardening of

information is important in finance, but its application can be seen in contexts far from finance,

such as the assessment of teaching quality, college rankings, policing and sentencing, and

screening employment applications (O’Neil 2016).

           We can also see the implications of information type, not just in our field of study finance,

but also in what for many of us is a part of our employment responsibilities: teaching. Some

elements of teaching have not changed for a millennium. Professor Peter Norvig and Sebastian

Thurn taught one of the early MOOCS on artificial intelligence in the fall of 2011. In commenting



                                                        41
on what they learned from the experiment, Professor Norvig describes the classroom experience.

It often involves a professor lecturing on a specified body of knowledge and the students taking

notes. Now consider the material and methods we teach as viewed through the lens of hard and

soft information. Some of what we teach is mechanics (e.g., how to amortize a loan, how to

estimate a CAPM regression, how to calculate present values). Some of what we teach is intuition,

theory, understanding empirical results, or nuance. The first set of material has the flavor of hard

information; the second soft information. In financial institutions, the decisions that depend on

hard information have been automated. Expensive labor has been replaced with cheaper capital.

The decisions that depend upon soft information have not been automated. Will what happened to

lending, happen to teaching? To what extent will the teaching of mechanics be automated and

moved out of the classroom? As with financial decisions, this allows for the scare resource, human

time and thought, to be focused on a higher value use: the soft information of teaching.

       We expect that the literature on soft information may find more applications in other

markets and generalize to a variety of other settings. Exploring how large organizations adapt their

internal organization structure in order to mimic small organizations will deepen the understanding

of ways of organizing production and clarify how rent- or power-seeking activities generate

organizational inefficiencies. We leave this for future work.




                                                    42
References

Agarwal, S., and I. Ben-David. 2018. Loan prospecting and the loss of the soft information.
Journal of Financial Economics 129:608-628.

Agarwal, S., and R. Hauswald. 2016. Authority and information. Working Paper, National
University of Singapore.

Agarwal, S, and R. Hauswald. 2010. Distance and private information in lending. Review of
Financial Studies 23:2757–2788.

Agarwal, S., S. Gupta, and R. Israelsen. 2016. Public and private information: firm disclosure, sec
letters, and the jobs act. Working Paper, Georgetown University.

Aghion, P., and J. Tirole. 1997. Formal and real authority in organizations. Journal of Political
Economy 105:1–29.

Allen, F. and E. Carletti. 2006. Credit risk transfer and contagion. Journal of Monetary Economics
53: 89–111.

Allen, F., and E. Carletti. 2015. The roles of banks in financial systems. In The Oxford Handbook
of Banking Allen Berger, 292-311, eds. A. Berger, P. Molyneux, and J. Wilson. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Arentsen, E., D. Mauer, B. Rosenlund, H. Zhang, and F. Zhao. 2015. Subprime mortgage defaults
and credit swaps. Journal of Finance 70: 689–731.

Baker, George, Robert Gibbons, and Kevin Murphy, 2002, “Relational Contracts and the Theory
of the Firm” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 39–84.

Becker G., and K.M. Murphy. 1992. The division of labor, coordination costs, and knowledge,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 107:1137–1160.

Ben-David, I. 2011. “Financial constraints and inflated home prices during the real-estate boom.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3: 55–78.

Benmelech, E., and J. Dlugosz. 2009a. The credit rating crisis. NBER Macro Annual 2009: 161–
207.

Benmelech, E., and J. Dlugosz. 2009b. “The alchemy of CDO credit ratings. Journal of Monetary
Economics 56: 617–634.

Berg, T., V. Burg, A. Gombovic, and M. Puri. 2018. “On the rise of FinTechs – Credit scoring
using digital footprints. Working paper, NBER.




                                                    43
Berg, T., M. Puri, and J. Rocholl. 2016. Loan officer incentives, internal ratings, and default rates.
Working Paper, Duke University.

Berger, A. and G. F. Udell. 1995. Relationship lending and lines of credit in small firm finance.
Journal of Business 68: 351–381.

Berger, A. and G. F. Udell. 2006. A more complete conceptual framework for SME finance.
Journal of Banking and Finance 30:2945–2966.

Berger, A., N. Miller, M. Petersen, R. G. Rajan, and J. Stein. 2005. Does function follow
organizational form? Evidence from the lending practices of large and small banks. Journal of
Financial Economics 76:237–269.

Berger, A., W. Goulding, and T. Rice. 2014. Do small businesses still prefer community banks?
Journal of Banking and Finance 44:264–278.

Berger, A., and L. Black. 2011. Bank size, lending technologies, and small business finance.
Journal of Banking and Finance 35:724–735.

Berger, A. 2015. Small business lending by banks: lending technologies and the effect of banking
industry consolidation and technological change. In The Oxford Handbook of Banking eds. A.
Berger, P. Molyneux, and J. Wilson. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Berger, A., and C. Bouwman. 2016. Bank liquidity creation and financial crises Academic Press.

Berger, A., C. Bouwman and D. Kim. 2017. Small bank comparative advantages in alleviating
financial constraints and providing liquidity insurance over time. Review of Financial Studies 30:
3416–3454.

Bikhchandani, S., D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch. 1992. A theory of fads, fashion, custom, and
cultural change as informational cascades. Journal of Political Economy 100:992–1026.

Bradshaw, M., X. Wang, and D. Zhou. 2017. Soft information in the financial press and analysts’
recommendation revisions. Working Paper, Boston College.

Brickley, J. A., J. S. Linck, and C. W. Smith Jr. 2003. Boundaries of the firm: Evidence from the
banking industry. Journal of Financial Economics 70:351–383

Brown, M., M. Schaller, S. Westerfeld, and M. Heusler. 2012. Information or insurance? On the
role of loan officer discretion in credit assessment. Working Paper, University of St. Gallen.

Bolton, P., and M. Dewatripont. 1994. The firm as a communication network. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 109(4): 809–839.

Buchak, G., G. Matvos, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru. 2017. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and the rise
of shadow banks. Working Paper, NBER.

                                                     44
Butler, A. 2008. Distance still matters: Evidence from municipal bond underwriting. Review of
Financial Studies 21:763–784.

Carruthers, B., and B. Cohen. 2001. Predicting failure but failing to predict: A sociology of
knowledge of credit rating in post-bellum America. Working Paper, Northwestern University.

Carruthers, B., and B. Cohen. 2009. Credit, classification and cognition: Credit raters in 19th-
century America. Working Paper, Northwestern University.

Catalini, C. and X. Hui. 2018. Online syndicates and startup investment. Working Paper, NBER.

Cerqueiro, G., H. Degryse, and S. Ongena. 2011. Rule versus discretion in loan rate setting,
Journal of Financial Intermediation 20: 503–529.

Chernenko, S., S. Hanson, and A. Sunderam. 2016. Who neglects risk? Investor experience and
the credit boom, Journal of Financial Economics 122: 248–269.

Coase, R. 1937. The nature of the firm. Economica 4:386–405.

Cohen, B. 1998. Marketing trust: Credit reporting and credit rating in the 19th century. Working
Paper, Northwestern University.

Cole, R., L. Goldberg, and L. White. 2004. Cookie cutter vs. character: the micro structure of small
business lending by large and small banks. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39:227–
251.

Coval, J., and T. J. Moskowitz. 1999. Home bias at home: local equity preference in domestic
portfolios. Journal of Finance 54:2045–2074.

Coval, J., and T. J. Moskowitz. 2001. The geography of investment: informed trading and asset
prices. Journal of Political Economy 109:811–841.

Crane, D., and R. Eccles. 1988. Doing deals: investment banks at work. Boston, MA: Harvard
Business School Press.

Crawford, V., and J. Sobel. 1982. Strategic information transmission. Econometrica 50:1431–
1451.

Da, Z., J. Engelberg, and P. Gao. 2011. In search of attention. Journal of Finance 66: 1461–1499.

D'Acunto, F., N. Prabhala, and A. Rossi. 2017. The promises and pitfalls of robo-advising.
Working paper, University of Maryland.

Das, S., and M. Chen. 2007. Yahoo! for Amazon: sentiment extraction from small talk on the web.
Management Science 53:1375–1388.

                                                    45
Degryse, H., and S. Ongena. 2005. Distance, lending relationships, and competition. Journal of
Finance 60:231–266.

Degryse, H., J. M. Liberti, T. Mosk, and S. Ongena. 2013. Is Loan Officer Discretion Advised
When Viewing Soft Information? Working Paper, Northwestern University.

DeMarzo, P. 2005. The pooling and tranching of securities: a model of informed intermediation.
Review of Financial Studies 18:1–35.

Demsetz, R., and P. Strahan. 1997. Diversification, size, and risk at bank holding companies.
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29: 300–313.

DeYoung, R., D. Glennon, and P. Nigro. 2008. Borrower-lender distance, credit scoring, and loan
performance: evidence from informational-opaque small business borrowers. Journal of Financial
Intermediation 17:113–143.

DeYoung, R., A. Gron, G. Torna, and A. Winton. 2015. Risk overhang and loan portfolio decisions:
small business loan supply before and during the financial crisis. Journal of Finance 70: 2451-
2488.

Dessein, W. 2002. Authority and communication in organizations. Review of Economic Studies
69:811–838.

Diamond, D. 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. Review of Economic
Studies 51:393–414.

Diamond, D. 1991. Monitoring and reputation: the choice between bank loans and directly placed
debt. Journal of Political Economy 99:689–721.

Diamond, D., Y. Hu and R. G. Rajan. 2018. Pledgeability, industry liquidity, and financing cycles.
Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Dougal, C., J. Engelberg, D. García, and C. Parsons. 2012. Journalists and the stock market. Review
of Financial Studies 25:639–679.

Drexler, A., and A. Schoar. 2016. Do relationships matter? Evidence from loan officer turnover.
Management Science forthcoming.

Duarte, J., S. Siegel, and L. Young. 2012. Trust and credit: the role of appearance in peer-to-peer
lending. Review of Financial Studies 25: 2455–2484.

Ederington, L. and J. Goh. 1998. Bond rating agencies and stock analysts: who knows what when?
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 33: 569-585.




                                                    46
Einav, L., M. Jenkins, and J. Levin. 2013. The impact of credit scoring on consumer lending.
RAND Journal of Economics 44: 249–274.

Everett, C. 2015. Group membership, relationship banking and loan default risk: the case of online
social lending, Working paper, Pepperdine University.

Faulkender, M. and M. Petersen. 2006. Does the source of capital affect capital structure? Review
of Financial Studies 19:45–79.

Firestone, S., and M. Rezende. 2016. Are banks’ internal risk parameters consistent? Evidence
from syndicated loans. Journal of Financial Services Research 50:211–242.

Ford, J. 2014. Wall Street’s siren song lures P2P lenders into treacherous seas. Financial Times,
October 5.

Foerster, S., J. Linnainmaa, B. Melzer, and A. Previtero. 2017. Retail financial advice: does one
size fit all? Journal of Finance 72:1441–1482.

Frame, S., A. Srinivasan, L. Woosley. 2001. The effect of credit scoring on small-business lending.
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 8:813–825.

Frame, S., K. Gerardi, and P. Willen. 2015. The failure of supervisory stress testing: Fannie Mae,
Freddie Mac, and OFHEO. Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

Freedman, S., and G. Jin. 2011. Learning by doing with asymmetric information: evidence from
Prosper.com, Working Paper, NBER.

Friedman, M. 1990. Free to Choose. New York: Harcourt, Inc.

Furfine, C. 2014. Complexity and loan performance: evidence from the securitization of
commercial mortgages. Review of Corporate Finance Studies 2: 154-187.

Fuster, A., M. Plosser, P. Schnabl, J. Vickery. 2018. The role of technology in mortgage lending.
Working Paper, NBER.

Garicano, L. 2000. Hierarchies and the organization of knowledge in production. Journal of
Political Economy 108:874–904.

Garmaise, M., and T. Moskowitz. 2004. Confronting information asymmetries: evidence from real
estate markets. Review of Financial Studies, 17:405-37.

Geanakoplos, M., and P. Milgrom. 1991. A theory of hierarchies based on limited managerial
attention. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 5:205–225.

Gentzkow, M., B. Kelley, and M. Taddy. 2017. Text as data. Journal of Economic Literature
forthcoming.

                                                    47
Giannetti, M., J. Liberti, and J. Sturgess. 2017. Information sharing and rating manipulation.
Review of Financial Studies 30: 3269–3304.

Giannini, R., P. Irvine, and T. Shu. 2017. Nonlocal disadvantage: an examination of social media
sentiment. The Review of Asset Pricing Studies forthcoming.

Giroud, X. 2013. Proximity and investment: evidence for plant-level data. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 128:861–915.

Goetzmann, W., S.A. Ravid, and R. Sverdlove. 2013. The pricing of soft and hard information:
economic lessons from screenplay sales. Journal of Cultural Economics 37: 271–307.

Granja, J., G. Matvos, and A. Seru. 2017. Selling failed banks. Journal of Finance 72:1723–1784.

Grennan, J. and R. Michaely. 2018. Fintechs and the market for financial analysis. Working Paper,
Duke University.

Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju. 2001. Distance, language, and culture bias: the role of investor
sophistication. Journal of Finance 56:1053–1073.

Gropp, R., C. Gruendl, and A. Guettler. 2012. Does discretion in lending increase bank risk?
Borrower self-selection and loan officer capture effects. Working Paper, EBS Business School.

Grossman, S., and O. D. Hart. 1986. The costs and benefits of ownership: a theory of vertical and
lateral integration. Journal of Political Economy 94:691–719.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales. 2013. The determinants of attitudes towards strategic
defaults in mortgages. Journal of Finance 68:1473–1515.

Hart, O. 1995. Firms, contracts, and financial structure. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Hart, O., and John Moore. 1990. Property rights and the nature of the firm. Journal of Political
Economy 98:1119–1158.

Hauswald, R., and R. Marquez. 2006. Competition and strategic information acquisition in credit
markets. Review of Financial Studies 19:967–1000.

Hertzberg, A., J. Liberti, and D. Paravisini. 2010. Information and incentives inside the firm:
evidence from loan officer rotation. Journal of Finance 65:795–828.

Herzenstein, M., S. Sonenshein, and U. Dholakia. 2011. Tell me a good story and I may lend you
my money: the role of narratives in peer-to-peer lending decisions. Journal of Marketing Research
48:138–149.




                                                  48
Hoberg, G., and G. Phillips. 2016. Text-based network industries and endogenous product
differentiation. Journal of Political Economy 124: 1423–1465.

Hong, H., J. Kubick, and J. Stein. 2005. Thy neighbor's portfolio: word‐of-mouth effects in the
holdings and trades of money managers. Journal of Finance 60: 2801–2824.

Hu, L., X. Huang, and A. Simonov. 2017. Credit score doctor. Working Paper, Michigan State
University.

Huang, A., A. Zang, and R. Zheng. 2014. Evidence on the information content of text in analyst
reports. The Accounting Review 89:2151–2180.

Ijiri, Y. 1975. Theory of accounting measurement. Sarasota, FL: American Accounting
Association.

Iyer, R., A. Khwaja, E. Luttmer, and K. Shue. 2015. Screening peers softly: inferring the quality
of small borrowers. Management Science 62:1554–1577.

Jensen, M.C., and W. H. Meckling. 1995. Specific and general knowledge and organizational
structure. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 8:4–18.

Jensen, M.C. 2003. Paying people to lie: the truth about the budgeting process. European Financial
Management 9:379–406.

Karolyi, S. 2017. Personal lending relationships. Journal of Finance 73: 5-49.

Keys, B., T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig. 2009. Financial regulation and securitization:
evidence from subprime loans. Journal of Monetary Economics 56:700–720.

Keys, B., T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig. 2010. Did securitization lead to lax screening?
Evidence from subprime loans. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125:307–362.

Keys, B., A. Seru, and V. Vig. 2012. Lender screening and role of securitization: evidence from
prime and subprime mortgage markets. Review of Financial Studies 25:2071–2108.

Kimball, A. and R. Cantor. 2008. Should Moody’s consider differentiating structured finance and
corporate ratings? Moody’s Global Credit Policy Group.

Kroszner. K., and P. Strahan. 1999. What drives deregulation? Economics and politics of the
relaxation of bank branching restrictions. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114:1437-67.

Landier, A., V. B. Nair, and J. Wulf. 2009. Trade-offs in staying close: corporate decision making
and geographic dispersion. Review of Financial Studies 22:1119–1148.

Lerner, J. 1995. Venture capitals and the oversight of private firms. Journal of Finance 50:301–
318.

                                                   49
Li, F. 2008. Annual report readability, current earnings, and earnings persistence. Journal of
Accounting and Economics 45:221-247.

Liberti, J. 2017. Initiative, Incentives and Soft Information. Management Science forthcoming.

Liberti, J., and A. Mian. 2009. Estimating the effect of hierarchies on information use. Review of
Financial Studies 22:4057–4090.

Liberti, J., A. Seru, and V. Vig. 2017. Information, credit and organization. Working Paper,
Stanford University.

Lin, M., N. Prabhala, S. Viswanathan. 2013. Judging borrowers by the company they keep:
friendship networks and information asymmetry in online peer-to-peer lending. Management
Science 59:17–35.

Linnainmaa, J., B. Melzer, and A. Previtero. 2018. The misguided beliefs of financial advisors.
Journal of Finance forthcoming.

Longhran, T. and B. McDonald. 2011. When is a liability not a Liability? Textual analysis,
dictionaries, and 10-Ks. Journal of Finance 66: 35–65.

Loutskina, E., and P. E. Strahan. 2011. Informed and uninformed investment in housing: the
downside of diversification. Review of Financial Studies 24:1447–1480.

Lu, Y., B. Gu, Q. Ye, and Z. Sheng. 2012. Social influence and defaults in peer-to-peer lending
networks. International Conference on Information Systems ICIS 2012:1797–1813.

Lucas, R. 1976. Econometric policy evaluation: a critique. In The Phillips Curve and Labor
Markets, Carnegie-Rochester Conferences on Public Policy eds. K. Bruner and A. A. H. Meltzer.
Amsterdam: North Holland Press.

MacKinlay, C. 1997. Event studies in economics and finance. Journal of Economic Literature 35:
13–39.

Malloy, C. 2005. The geography of equity analysis. Journal of Finance 60: 719–755.

Mayer, C., K. Pence and S. Sherlund. 2009. The rise in mortgage defaults. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 23: 27–50.

Mayew, W., and M. Venkatachalam. 2012. The power of voice: managerial affective states and
future firm performance. Journal of Finance 67:1–43.

Mian, A. 2006. Distance constraints: the limits of foreign lending in poor economies. Journal of
Finance 61:1465–1505.



                                                   50
Milgrom, P., and J. Roberts. 1988. An economic approach to influence activities in organizations.
American Journal of Sociology 94:154–179.

Morris, S., and H. S. Shin. 2002. Social value of public information. American Economic Review
92:1521–1534.

Mollick, E. 2014. The dynamics of crowdfunding: An exploratory study. Journal of Business
Venturing 29:1–16.

Morrison, A. and W. Wilhelm. 2007. Investment banking: past, present and future. Journal of
Applied Corporate Finance 19:8–20.

Morse, A. 2015. Peer-to-peer crowdfunding: information and the potential for disruption in
consumer lending. Working Paper, NBER.

Newman, C. 2011. Is crowdfunding the next big thing or an invitation to digital fraud? Wired
Magazine December 12.

Nocera, J. 2013. A piece of the action: how the middle class joined the money class. Simon &
Schuster, Reissue Edition.

O’Neil, C., 2016. Weapons of math destruction: how big data increases inequality and threatens
democracy. Broadway Books.

Paravisini, D., and A. Schoar. 2015. The incentive effects of scores: randomized evidence from
credit committees. Working Paper, London School of Economics.

Plosser, M., and J. Santos. 2016. Bank monitoring. Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York.

Petersen, M., and R. G. Rajan. 1994. The benefits of firm-creditor relationships: evidence from
small-business data. Journal of Finance 49:3–37.

Petersen, M., and R. G. Rajan. 2002. Does distance still matter? The information revolution in
small business lending. Journal of Finance 57:2533–2570.

Puri, M., J. Rocholl, and S. Steffen. 2011. Rules versus discretion in bank lending decisions.
Working Paper, Duke University.

Purnanandam, A. 2011. Originate-to-distribute model and the subprime mortgage crisis. Review
of Financial Studies 24:1881–1915.

Qian, J., P. E. Strahan, and Z. Yang. 2015. The impact of incentives and communication costs on
information production and use: evidence from bank lending. Journal of Finance 70:1457–1493.



                                                  51
Radner, R. 1993. The organization of decentralized information processing. Econometrica
61:1109–1146.

Rajan, R.G. 1992. Insiders and outsiders: the choice between informed and arm’s-length debt.
Journal of. Finance 47:1367–1400.

Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales. 1998. Power in a theory of the firm. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113:387–432.

Rajan, U., A. Seru, and V. Vig. 2010, Statistical default models and incentives. American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 100:506–510.

Rajan, U., A. Seru, and V. Vig. 2015. The failure of models that predict failure: distance, incentives
and defaults. Journal of Financial Economics 155:237–260.

Ramakrishnan, R. T. S., and A. Thakor. 1984. Information reliability and a theory of financial
intermediation. Review of Economic Studies 51:415–432.

Ranieri, L. 1997. The origins of securitization, sources of growth, and future potential In A Primer
on Securitization eds. L. Kendall and M. Fishman (31-43). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Ravina, E. 2018. Love & loans: the effect of beauty and personal characteristics in credit markets.
Working Paper, Northwestern University.

Roll, R. 1984. Orange juice and weather. American Economic Review 74:861–880.

Roll, R. 1988. R2. Journal of Finance 42: 541–566.

Saengchote, K. 2013. Soft information in the subprime mortgage market. Working Paper,
Chulalongkorn University.

Schwert, M. 2017. Bank capital and lending relationships. Journal of Finance 72: 787–830.

Seru, A. 2014. Firm boundaries matter: evidence from conglomerates and R&D activity. Journal
of Financial Economics 111:381–405.

Skrastins, J., and V. Vig. 2018. How organizational hierarchy affects information production?
Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.

Sohl, J. 2010. The early-stage equity market in the USA. Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 1:101–120.

South, A., and Z. Gurwitz. 2015. Default, transition, and recovery. 2014 Annual Global Structured
Finance Default Study and Ratings Transitions. Standard and Poor’s Ratings Services, June 22.




                                                     52
Stiglitz, J., and A. Weiss. 1981. Credit rationing in markets with imperfect information. American
Economic Review 71:393–410.

Stein, J. 2002. Information production and capital allocation: decentralized versus hierarchical
firms, Journal of Finance 57:1891–1921.

Tetlock, P. 2007. Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market.
Journal of Finance 62:1139–1168.

Tetlock, P. 2010. Does public information news resolve asymmetric information? Review of
Financial Studies 23:3520–3557.

Uzzi, B. 1999. Embeddedness in the making of financial capital: how social relations and networks
benefit firms seeking financing. American Sociological Review 64:481–505.

Uzzi, B., and R. Lancaster. 2003. Relational embeddedness and learning: the case of bank loan
managers and their clients. Management Science 49:383–399.

Uzzi, B. 2016. Banks may soon use our Facebook friends to assess our creditworthiness. Should
we worry? Kellogg Insight, June 6.

Vallee, B., and Y. Zeng. 2018. Marketplace lending: a new banking paradigm? Working Paper,
Harvard Business School.

Vazza, D., and N. Kraemer. 2016. Default, transition, and recovery. 2015 Annual Global
Corporate Default Study and Ratings Transitions. S&P Global Ratings, May 2.

Wong, A. 2002. Angel Finance: The Other Venture Capital, Working Paper, University of Chicago.




                                                   53
Exhibit A: Assessment Criteria of Subjective Information Measures
     BUSINESS RISK ASSESSMENT

   1 Industry                                     RR1-RR2                RR3                    RR4                      RR5                      RR6                     RR7

     Trend in Output                      Very Strong Growth        Strong Growth              Growth                   Stable            Uncertain / Declining        Declining


     Trend in Earnings                    Very Strong Growth        Strong Growth              Growth                   Stable            Uncertain / Declining        Declining


     Cyclicality (Fluctuations)                  Very Stable         Very Limited               Small                  Moderate                  Large                 Large &
                                                                                                                                                                     Unpredictable


     External Risks                               No Risks         Few Risks, Non        Few Critical Risks      Variuos Critical Risks    Numerous Critical       Widespread Risks
                                                                      Cyclical                                                                 Risks



   2 Competitive Position                         RR1-RR2                RR3                    RR4                      RR5                      RR6                     RR7

     Market Position                       Over 50% / Clearly    Over 20% / Dominant     Over 10% / Major          Over 5% / Known          2 to 3% / Minos         Below 2% / Minor
                                               Dominant                                  Player or Strong        Player or Established           Player             Player; Declining
                                                                                               Niche                     Niche                                           Share


     Product Line Diversity               Over 3 Growing Lines       Over 3 Lines        At least 2 Growing        At least 2 Stable       Only 1 Stable Line     Only 1 Declining Line
                                                                                                Lines                    Lines


     Operating Cost Advantage                   Global Leader    Achieves Low Global     Has Lowest Local             Some Cost           No Cost Advantages      High Cost Producer
                                                                        Costs                 Costs                   Advantages


     Technology Advantage                   Global Leader in       Global Player in        Leader in Local           Mostly New;          Technology Follower        Predominantly
                                              Many Areas            Some Areas                Market                Upgrading Old                                      Outdated


     Key Success Factors                  Global Capabilities in Global Capabilities in Strong Locally in All      Strong Locally in        Strong in Some;              None
                                              All Factors           Most Factors              Factors               Some Factors            Weak in Others



   3 M anagement                                  RR1-RR2                RR3                    RR4                      RR5                      RR6                     RR7
     Professionalism                       At all Levels With       At all Levels in    At all Key Posi- tions       At Most Key             At Some Key            In Few Positions
                                          Extensive Experience      Operations &           in Operations &         Positions & Most            Positions
                                                                     Management              Management                  Levels


     Systems and Controls                 Meets Highest Global Meets Highest Local       Very Reliable and            Acceptable               Unreliable            Largely Absent
                                               Standards           Standards                  Strong


     Financial Disclosure                 Meets Highest Global    Always Timely and      Usually Timely and          Satisfactory         Delayed, Inaccu-rate         Unreliable
                                               Standards              Accurate               Accurate                 Reporting              or Incomplete


     Ability to Act Decisively             Proven to be Very     Proven to be Strong    Good, but Untested        Good, but Untested             Weak                  Hopeless
                                                Strong


     Risk Management                              RR1-RR2                RR3                    RR4                      RR5                      RR6                     RR7
     Policies
     Leverage Policy                             Extremely        Very Conservative        Low Tolerance           Some Tolerance            High Tolerance        Unlimited Appetite
                                                Conservative


     Liquidity Policy                      Extremely Conser-     Conservative Cushion Some Cushion &               Maintains Some             Low Liquidity            No Policy
                                             vative Cushion      & Contingency Plan Sound Contingency                 Cushion                  Acceptable
                                                                                          Plan


     Hedging Policy                            All Risks          Most Risks                Most Risks             Risks Understood         Risks Understood   No Hedging Policy /
                                          Understood; No Open Understood; No Open         Understood; Few           but Not Always        but Most Not Covered Speculative Policy
                                               Positions           Positions               Open Positions               Covered




   4 Access to Capital                            RR1-RR2               RR3                     RR4                      RR5                      RR6                    RR7
     Capital Markets                            Wide Access;        Wide Access;        Primarily Domestic;      Primarily Domes-tic       Limited Largely to     No access to Capital
                                                 Domestic &          Domestic &         Some International         Banking; Some           Domestic Banking            markets
                                                International       International                                  Capital Markets


     Banks                                   Established Re-        Established Re-     At Least One Bank        At Least One Bank         No Bank Strongly       Bank Cutting Lines;
                                           lationships; Strong    lationships; Strong   Strongly Committed       Strongly Committed       Committed or Some        Some Locked-in
                                              Commitments            Commitments                                                          Banks Getting Out




Overall Business Rating
(Do not use +/- in the final Business Rating)




                                                                                          54
