NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOSS ATTITUDES IN THE U.S. POPULATION:
EVIDENCE FROM DYNAMICALLY OPTIMIZED SEQUENTIAL EXPERIMENTATION (DOSE)
Jonathan Chapman
Erik Snowberg
Stephanie Wang
Colin Camerer
Working Paper 25072
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25072

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

Thanks to John Beshears, Mark Dean, Kate Johnson, Ian Krajbich, Andreas Krause, Pietro
Ortoleva, Deb Ray, Antonio Rangel, Hans-Martin von Gaudecker, Peter Wakker, Nathaniel
Wilcox, and the participants of seminars and conferences for their useful comments and
suggestions. Judah Okwuobi and Michelle Filiba provided excellent research assistance. Camerer
and Snowberg gratefully acknowledge the financial support of NSF Grant SMA-1329195. This
paper subsumes the earlier, largely methodological, working paper, “Dynamically Optimized
Sequential Experimentation (DOSE) for Estimating Economic Preference Parameters,” (2010).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jonathan Chapman, Erik Snowberg, Stephanie Wang, and Colin Camerer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Loss Attitudes in the U.S. Population: Evidence from Dynamically Optimized Sequential
Experimentation (DOSE)
Jonathan Chapman, Erik Snowberg, Stephanie Wang, and Colin Camerer
NBER Working Paper No. 25072
September 2018
JEL No. C81,C9,D03,D81,D9
ABSTRACT
We introduce DOSE - Dynamically Optimized Sequential Experimentation - and use it to
estimate individual-level loss aversion in a representative sample of the U.S. population
(N=2,000). DOSE elicitations are more accurate, more stable across time, and faster to administer
than standard methods. We find that around 50% of the U.S. population is loss tolerant. This is
counter to earlier findings, which mostly come from lab/student samples, that a strong majority of
participants are loss averse. Loss attitudes are correlated with cognitive ability: loss aversion is
more prevalent in people with high cognitive ability, and loss tolerance is more common in those
with low cognitive ability. We also use DOSE to document facts about risk and time preferences,
indicating a high potential for DOSE in future research.

Jonathan Chapman
Division of Social Science
New York University Abu Dhabi
Abu Dhabi
UAE
jchapman@nyu.edu
Erik Snowberg
Division of Humanities and Social Sciences
MC 228-77
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
and NBER
snowberg@caltech.edu

Stephanie Wang
University of Pittsburgh
Department of Economics
4906 Wesley W. Posvar Hall
230 South Bouquet Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
swwang@pitt.edu
Colin Camerer
Department of Economics
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
camerer@hss.caltech.edu

Screenshots and Design Documents is available at http://www.its.caltech.edu/~snowberg/wep.html
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25072/

1

Introduction

An important hypothesis in behavioral economics is that people treat losses and gains differently, resulting in most being loss averse: even if they are risk neutral, they tend to shy
away from positive expected value gambles with negative payoffs (losses). Loss aversion is
used as an explanation for a number of important economic phenomena,1 and is an essential ingredient in theories of reference-dependent preferences (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979;
Kőszegi and Rabin, 2006; O’Donoghue and Sprenger, 2018).
Yet, most evidence of loss aversion comes from economics and psychology labs, usually with university student participants who may have different preferences (Snowberg
and Yariv, 2018; Walasek et al., in progress). The hypothesis of differential responses to
gains and losses would thus benefit from individual-level assessments in a representative
sample. However, as we detail below, current methodologies make such an assessment difficult. To overcome these difficulties, we introduce DOSE—Dynamically Optimized Sequential
Experimentation—which estimates preference parameters precisely and quickly by selecting
a personalized sequence of simple choices for each participant.
Using DOSE, we find that around 50% of people in the U.S. are loss tolerant: even if
they are risk neutral, they embrace gambles with negative expected values. Loss aversion
is more prevalent in people with high cognitive ability, and loss tolerance is more common
in those with low cognitive ability. Moreover, we find that risk aversion over gains and loss
attitudes are equally stable (and more stable than previously appreciated), suggesting that
both are equally important in understanding risk preferences.
It is important to emphasize that, although surprising, the prevalence of loss tolerance
is not evidence against the hypothesis of gain-loss differences. Rather, it is evidence of
substantial heterogeneity in the asymmetry, with potentially important consequences. In
1

Examples include the equity premium puzzle (Mehra and Prescott, 1985; Benartzi and Thaler, 1995),
asymmetric consumer price elasticities (Hardie et al., 1993), downward sloping labor supply (Dunn, 1996;
Camerer et al., 1997; Goette et al., 2004), tax avoidance (Rees-Jones, 2017), opposition to free trade (Tovar,
2009), performance in athletic contests (Pope and Simonsohn, 2011; Allen et al., 2016), and more.

1

particular, loss aversion can, in theory, reduce the propensity to use financial products that
exploit common characteristics like overoptimism and skew-love (Kahneman and Lovallo,
1993; Åstebro et al., 2015). Loss tolerance, on the other hand, makes people more susceptible to exploitation of these characteristics. Moreover, our evidence suggests that loss
tolerance is particularly prevalent in precisely the people who might benefit from additional
reservations about problematic financial products: those with low income, education, and
cognitive ability, and the aged (Kornotis and Kumar, 2010; Chang, 2016).
A new technique is needed to measure loss aversion (and other preferences) in representative populations. In the three studies that elicit loss aversion in a representative population,
two lose more than 70% of participants due to non-response and inconsistent choice (Booij
and Van de Kuilen, 2009; Booij et al., 2010). A third only recovers population distributions
of loss aversion, and is very sensitive to estimation choices. Depending on those choices, it
produces population estimates that vary from a large majority being extremely loss averse, to
almost everyone being loss tolerant (appendix of von Gaudecker et al., 2011). Individual-level
estimates are necessary to study the correlates of heterogeneity of preferences (Harrison et
al., 2002), or to calibrate personalized contracts (Andreoni et al., 2016). Moreover, standard
techniques for measuring other economic preferences produce unstable estimates (Meier and
Sprenger, 2015), and may unintentionally introduce reference points (Sprenger, 2015). DOSE
produces accurate (Section 3.2), stable (Section 4.4), and fast (Section 5.2) individual-level
estimates of preference parameters that are robust to alternative specifications (Section 5.1).
Using DOSE to study risk and time preferences produces similar—often less noisy—results
to prior studies using standard elicitation techniques (Section 4.2 and Appendix B).
DOSE takes the challenges of eliciting loss aversion—the need for multiple choices, and
usually a parametric model—and designs around them.2 DOSE uses the parametric struc2

Estimating an individual index of loss aversion without a parametric structure attributes all differences
in the curvature of utility functions over gains and over losses to loss aversion. In principle, a non-parametric
approach allows a classification of people into loss averse/neutral/tolerant, but in practice many cannot be
classified. For example, using a non-parametric method, Abdellaoui et al. (2007) find that between 29% and
88% of participants cannot be classified, depending on which definition of loss aversion is used.

2

ture, and rapid computation of Bayesian updating, to dynamically select a personalized
sequence from a set of simple choices, as described in Section 2. That is, DOSE starts with
a prior over parameters and/or models and, based on that prior, selects a question that
will maximize information. DOSE then uses a participant’s choice to dynamically update
its priors about that participant, and selects the next question in the personalized sequence
based on the new distribution over parameters and/or models. The sequence continues this
way until either the participant has been asked pre-set number of questions, or the precision
of the estimates for that participant is greater than some pre-specified criterion.
We use DOSE to estimate loss aversion using an incentivized, representative survey of
the U.S. population (N = 2,000), also described in Section 2. This incentivized survey has
several useful features. It is comprehensive, using a wide range of elicitations to measure
different preferences. Moreover, it is repeated, meaning the same participants are asked the
same questions twice, six months apart. These features allow us to establish a number of
facts about loss aversion, as well as evaluate DOSE, in an important practical setting.
Before examining data from the incentivized survey, we first examine, in Section 3, simulations indicating that DOSE is more than twice as accurate as two standard methods for
eliciting loss and risk aversion: the multiple price list (MPL; see Andersen et al., 2006, for a
review), and the Lottery Menu (Eckel and Grossman, 2002). We show this in two sets of simulations. The first uses the choices from lab/student samples (N = 120; from Sokol-Hessner
et al. 2009 and Frydman et al. 2011) in 140 questions similar to those we use in DOSE. We
use DOSE to simulate question orderings for these participants, and show that with only 20
(personalized) questions, DOSE captures most of the information from all 140 choices. We
then use the distribution of parameters among the 120 laboratory participants to produce
10,000 simulated participants. By generating the choices of the simulated participants in
different types of elicitations, we show that DOSE produces estimates that are at least twice
as close to the true parameter values as these other methods.
There is a much higher level of loss tolerance in the U.S. population than indicated by

3

prior samples. The loss aversion parameter in Prospect Theory, λ, indicates loss aversion
when λ > 1, and loss tolerance when λ < 1. In Section 4 we find that 53% of the U.S.
population is loss tolerant. This is higher than 13–30% (weighted average 22%, N = 1,023)
in the eight studies we are aware of that investigate heterogeneity in loss aversion (all in lab
samples).3 Moreover, the median level of loss aversion in our study is 0.98, versus 1.5–2.5
in other samples. We show that this difference is not due to DOSE: among 439 lab/student
participants in prior studies using DOSE—drawing on the working paper version of this
manuscript (Wang et al., 2010)—10% are loss tolerant, with a median value of λ = 1.99.
Moreover, those with greater education and cognitive ability, and lower age, are more likely
to be loss averse in our representative sample.4 These attributes describe the student samples
usually used in studies of loss aversion. Indeed, in our data, 23% of those under 35 with a
college education (N = 101) were loss tolerant, with a median value of λ = 1.75. Altogether,
this suggests that the prevalence of findings of loss aversion, rather than loss tolerance, may
be the result of inadvertently selecting highly loss-averse samples.
An important feature of DOSE is that it dynamically estimates, and adjusts for, an individual’s level of choice consistency. This produces two more substantive results. First,
although we find a correlation between higher cognitive ability and less risk aversion using
DOSE, we do not find a statistically significant relationship with an MPL-based measure of
risk aversion. However, if we examine only those participants DOSE tells us make consistent
choices, we recover a similar relationship using the MPL measure, suggesting that choice
inconsistency and resultant measurement error may lead to the mixed results on the relationship between cognitive ability and risk aversion (Dohmen et al., 2018). Second, we show
that DOSE estimates of risk and time preferences are more stable across time than MPL3

These studies are Schmidt and Traub (2002); Brooks and Zank (2005); Abdellaoui et al. (2007, 2008);
Sokol-Hessner et al. (2009); Abdellaoui et al. (2011); Sprenger (2015); Goette et al. (2018). The figure for
Sprenger (2015) is reported in Goette et al. (2018), Footnote 8.
4
Most studies of the relationship between cognitive ability and risk preferences have focused on lotteries
over gains (see Andersson et al., 2016b, Table E1 for a summary). The few studies with questions involving
losses have found that lower cognitive ability is associated with fewer expected value maximizing choices
on those lotteries—consistent with our results—although differences in design and data reporting make it
difficult to ascertain the degree of agreement.

4

based measures. DOSE estimates are equally stable regardless of choice consistency, while
MPL-based estimates are less stable for less consistent participants, suggesting measurement
error in current methodologies is responsible for low levels of estimated preference stability
(Gillen et al., Forthcoming). Additionally, loss aversion is nearly as stable as risk aversion,
indicating that both are similarly important in describing a participant’s risk preferences.
Our results from DOSE are robust to a number of factors, such as misspecification and
removing participants most likely to not be paying attention, as shown in Section 5. Allowing
for different specifications of the utility function still results in much lower estimates of loss
aversion, and much higher estimates of loss tolerance, than prior studies on student/lab
populations. Moreover, we show that DOSE is equally fast to complete for people of all
cognitive ability levels. In contrast, MPLs take longer for everyone, but especially for those
with lower cognitive abilities. Removing participants that may be “rushing through” DOSE,
or our entire study, has minimal effects on the distribution of DOSE-estimated parameters.
Additional robustness checks are conducted in Appendices D, E, F, and G.
The paper concludes with a discussion, in Section 6, of the potential for DOSE to be
used more widely, and of research settings in which the procedure is likely to be particularly
valuable. Of particular interest are further questions about loss aversion that were not
covered by our design. We finish with a description of how our results fit with the broader
work in psychology and neuroscience on the processes underlying the gain-loss hypothesis.

1.1

Related Literature

Our work is related to three broad literatures: optimal experimental design, measuring
economic preferences and their correlates in broad populations, and loss aversion. We review
these literatures here: relationships between specific factual findings in this paper and others
are included when we discuss those specific findings, and in Appendix B.
There is a large literature on optimal experimental design in computer science and statis-

5

tics, but there is surprisingly little development of applications for economics.5 Those few
studies that exist focus on static, rather than dynamic, experiments (El-Gamal et al., 1993;
El-Gamal and Palfrey, 1996). DOSE extends these ideas by implementing a dynamic design,
in which questions are selected sequentially based on a participant’s answers. This allows
for the identification of models and parameters at the individual level, in contrast to prior
designs which could only discriminate between models, or measure the distribution parameters, at a population level. Taking advantage of recent advances in computing power, we
are also able to account for a much larger range of parameters in designing an experiment.
Two papers have examined dynamic experimental procedures, drawing on an earlier
working paper version of this manuscript (Wang et al., 2010). Toubia et al. (2013) use
a very similar method to study risk and time preferences. Imai and Camerer (2018) use
DOSE to evaluate time preferences, but focus on model selection.6 The latter paper uses a
different information criterion—EC 2 rather than the Kullback-Leibler divergence we use—
and a different model of inconsistencies in decision-making. The Kullback-Leibler criterion
is particularly well suited to efficient parameter estimation (Ryan et al., 2016) but may not
be as efficient in model selection. Thus, the main contribution of that paper is to illustrate
how the novel criterion EC 2 is used, and apply it to distinguish different models of time
preferences (in participants recruited from MTurk) more rapidly and precisely than earlier
research. In contrast, the primary contributions here are to establish general performance
characteristics of the DOSE method, compare them to extant methods, and document new
facts about loss aversion in a representative population.
5

The idea of optimal experimental design appears to originate most clearly in Peirce (1879), who described
an “economic” theory of experimentation and applied it to the study of gravity. The idea of dynamic
designs begins with Wald (1950). Chaloner and Verdinelli (1995) provides a useful review of applications
in statistics. Although little used in economics, optimal designs have been used in many applied fields
including in neurophysiology (Lewi et al., 2009), psychophysics (Kujala and Lukka, 2006; Lesmes et al.,
2006), marketing (Toubia et al., 2004; Abernethy et al., 2008), and medicine (Müller et al., 2007). See also
Aigner (1979) for an early survey in economics, and Moffatt (2007) for a discussion of potential applications
of optimal design to parameter estimation, including the elicitation of risk preferences.
6
Cavagnaro et al. (2010, 2013a,b, 2016) independently develop an adaptive framework for model discrimination. Their implementations use many more questions than DOSE—for example, 80 in Cavagnaro et al.
(2016), 101 in Cavagnaro et al. (2013a)—making it difficult to use with a representative sample.

6

Our paper also contributes to the recent literature studying the correlates of economic
preferences in broad populations. Many of these studies focus on the role of cognitive ability
in economic preferences, generally concluding that higher cognitive ability is associated with
greater normative rationality (Frederick, 2005; Burks et al., 2009; Oechssler et al., 2009;
Dohmen et al., 2010; Benjamin et al., 2013). We add to this literature in two ways. First, we
examine the relationship between loss aversion and cognitive ability, and find that both low
and high cognitive ability people tend to depart from normative rationality, but in different
ways. Second, we show that the mixed results on the relationship between risk aversion and
cognitive ability (Dohmen et al., 2018) are likely due to measurement error and imprecision
in the elicitation techniques used in prior studies.
Finally, our paper relates to a larger literature interested in understanding loss aversion.
Most studies focus on lab/student populations.7 von Gaudecker et al. (2011) is the most
similar to our work. As noted above, they focus on population distributions, and their estimates are sensitive to estimation choices. Depending on those choices, they report estimates
of the median λ ranging from 0.12 to 4.47 (in their appendix).8 As we show in Section 5.1
and Appendix F, our results are relatively stable with respect to different specifications. It
is worth noting, however, that their results are not inconsistent with ours: the shape of the
loss aversion distribution we find (in Figure 4) is very similar to theirs. Moreover, some of
their specifications produce results much closer to ours than the prior literature.

2

The DOSE Procedure

This section introduces the DOSE procedure and our incentivized survey. We start with an
abstract overview of DOSE, focusing on the choices experimenters can make to tune it to
7

See Table 1 of Booij et al. (2010) and Table S4 of Sokol-Hessner et al. (2009) for estimates from lab
studies. We are aware of four field studies that measure loss aversion in non-representative populations, but
only report first moments. These studies feature samples of customers at a car manufacturer (Gächter et al.,
2007), Vietnamese villagers (Tanaka et al., 2010), Mechanical Turk workers (Toubia et al., 2013), and U.S.
mortgage holders (Atlas et al., 2017). Reported first moments of loss aversion are similar to lab studies.
8
Their estimation strategy also does not allow them to use the S-shaped utility function suggested by
Prospect Theory (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979).

7

their application, before describing the specific design choices we made to estimate risk and
time preferences in a representative sample of the U.S. population.

2.1

DOSE in the Abstract

DOSE asks each participant a personalized set of questions. Questions are selected sequentially, using a participant’s previous answers to identify the most informative question at that
point in time. When selecting each successive question, DOSE accounts for the possibility
that the participant may have made mistakes in his or her previous choices. Altogether this
leads to accurate parameter estimates after only a few questions.
The procedure starts with a prior over a set of parameter values, and then optimally
(according to some pre-defined criterion) selects questions to pinpoint a participant’s preferences. The experimenter can choose a different prior, based on observables, for each participant. DOSE selects the optimal question given the prior and the optimality criterion. After
a participant answers the first question, DOSE updates beliefs using Bayes’s law, optimally
selects the next question, and so on. The process continues for as many questions as the
experimenter wants, or until posterior beliefs are more precise than some pre-set criterion.
DOSE can elicit more accurate parameter estimates than other common dynamic experimental designs because it allows for the possibility that participants make mistakes, as we
illustrate by comparing DOSE with a simple partitioning method, in Figure 1. Partitioning
techniques include the iterative MPL (see, for example, Andersen et al., 2006; von Gaudecker
et al., 2011) and the staircase method (Falk et al., 2018).9 In the example in Figure 1, both
methods start with a uniform prior and offer participants a binary choice. In the first round,
each participant faces the same question (Q1 or q1 ). Beliefs are then updated depending on
the answer they provide, and the next question is picked optimally given the new beliefs.
The key difference between the two procedures is that a partitioning method successively
9

The iterative MPL presents participants with an initial MPL, and then offers them a refined set of options
in another MPL. For example, if the choice on the first MPL implied a participant’s certainty equivalent for
a lottery lay between $X and $Y, the next MPL would have options in [$X,$Y].

8

eliminates ranges of parameter values after each question. DOSE, in contrast, allows for the
possibility that any choice may have been a mistake, and hence places a positive probability
on all parameter values regardless of previous answers.
In a partitioning method, a single incorrect choice causes considerable inaccuracy. Consider a participant with true parameter θ0 , displayed in the bottom panel of Figure 1. This
participant should choose B in both questions of a partition method. If, however, he or
she incorrectly chooses A in the first question, his or her estimated parameter value is constrained to be less than the median value—regardless of the number of rounds of questions.
Errors early in the procedure thus lead to considerable measurement error. Any error makes
it particularly hard to identify parameter values at the extremes of the distribution.
DOSE, in contrast, can elicit accurate parameter values even after a participant makes a
mistake. Even after an initial incorrect choice of a, the posterior distribution places a positive
probability on the true parameter value θ0 . As a result, with enough correct answers in future
rounds, an accurate parameter estimate will still be obtained. Further, the procedure keeps
track of the extent of inconsistent choice, which, as we demonstrate empirically in Section
4.3, provides a valuable measure of participant behavior.
The precise way in which DOSE selects questions, or accounts for possible mistakes,
can easily be adapted to meet the needs of a particular research question. Researchers can
modify the optimality criterion used to pick the personalized question sequence, and can
choose any parametric model to capture the way in which participants make mistakes. We
explain the design choices we use in this paper in the following subsection.

2.2

DOSE Procedure to Estimate Risk and Loss Aversion

DOSE can be customized for particular research questions. The main objects of choice for
a researcher are the parametric specification(s), the prior distribution over parameters or
models, the set of choices to present to participants, how parameters map to choices—that
is, the structure of possible mistakes—and the information criterion used to select the next
9

10

After 2nd
Question

After 1st
Question

Prior

A

Q2
B

A

Q1
B

A

Q2
B

Partitioning
(optimal with complete consistency)

a

q2

b

a

q1
b

a

q2

b

DOSE
(optimal allowing for inconsistency)

Figure 1: DOSE improves estimate accuracy by allowing for choice inconsistency.

question based on current beliefs. This subsection details the choices we made to elicit loss
aversion from a representative population.

2.2.1

Utility Function and Priors over Parameters

We elicit risk and loss aversion using a Prospect Theory utility function with power utility
(Kahneman and Tversky, 1979). This utility function assumes that participants value payments relative to a reference point, which we assume is zero. The standard S-shaped utility
function in Prospect Theory implies that, for common parameter values, participants are
risk averse over positive payments (gains), and risk loving over negative payments (losses).
A kink in the utility function at zero represents loss aversion. Formally:

v(x, ρi , λi ) =




xρ i

for x ≥ 0



−λi (−x)ρi

for x < 0,

(1)

in which λi parameterizes loss aversion, ρi parameterizes risk aversion, and x ∈ R is a monetary outcome relative to the reference point. If λi > 1, then the participant is loss averse.
If λi < 1, then the participant is loss tolerant. An individual with ρi < 1 demonstrates risk
aversion over gains and risk love over losses. So that higher numbers indicate greater risk
aversion, we use the coefficient of relative risk aversion: 1 − ρi , in tables and figures.
The specification in (1) focuses on accurately estimating loss aversion with as few questions as possible. It does not allow for other common features of Prospect Theory: probability
weighting or differential curvature of the utility function over losses and gains. The lotteries
in our questions are further designed to minimize probability distortions, as all have 50/50
probabilities of two outcomes. Moreover, as most studies have found limited difference in
curvature across the two domains (see Booij et al., 2010, Table 1), we impose the same
utility curvature for both gains and losses.10 This improves the accuracy of the estimates
10

Assuming the same curvature across gains and losses also avoids an issue with power utility: different
curvatures mean that estimates of loss aversion depend on scaling (Köbberling and Wakker, 2005). Moreover, there will always be an amount x s.t. U (x) > U (−x) (Wakker, 2010). Our results are similar using

11

of λi as questions are not selected to separately identify the curvature in the loss and gain
domain. However, it is quite simple to allow for different curvatures even after conducting
the experiment—in Section 5.1 we show our results are robust to estimating this alternative
specification, and that the assumption of equal curvature is supported by the data.
Time discounting is modeled with a standard monthly discount factor and the power utility function in (1).11 Utility from the perspective of the survey date is given by u(xt , ρi , δi ) =
δit xρt i , where δi is a discount factor and ρi captures the curvature of the utility function from
(1), t is the time from the survey date in months, and xt is a payment at time t.
While researchers must choose a parametric specification and prior distribution for data
collection, an alternative prior or specification can be used to calculate parameter values ex
post. The experimenter’s initial choices are used only to generate the personalized question
sequence: once participant choices are recorded, any other prior distribution or parametric
specification can be used to derive new estimates from the data. We use a joint uniform prior
over preference parameters to both select questions and estimate parameters. The range of
the prior distribution is chosen to cover the individual estimates obtained in Section 3.1.12
As shown in Section 3.1 this results in near-optimal question selection.
Re-analyzing the choices obtained using questions selected by DOSE with a different prior
or parametric specification allows researchers to obtain accurate parameter estimates even
when the initial choices are misspecified, as shown in Sections 3.1 and 5.1. Despite initial
misspecification, the questions asked still home in on a participant’s preferences, even though
the question sequence is not optimal in the sense defined by the question selection criterion.
As a result, DOSE still provides a great deal of information about individual preferences,
and precise estimates can be recovered ex post even with some initial misspecification.
the exponential (CARA) utility function Köbberling and Wakker (2005) suggest to avoid these issues (see
Section 5.1).
11
The specification used for question selection in the time preference module also allowed for present bias.
In practice, however, we found very little evidence of present bias either in the DOSE module or the time
MPLs—possibly due to the fact that payment was, in general, not instantly convertible into consumption.
As such, the specification used to obtain estimates did not include a present bias parameter.
12
In particular, the prior ranges are λ ∈ [0, 4.6], ρ ∈ [0.2, 1.7], µ ∈ [0, 8], and δ ∈ [0.2, 1].

12

2.2.2

Mistakes and Choice Consistency

As described above, an important advantage of DOSE is that, when selecting the personalized
sequence of questions, it takes into account the possibility that participants make mistakes.
The process by which mistakes are made must be parametrically modeled for DOSE to
account for it. We model the mapping between utility and choices using the logit function,
which has been widely used in both economics and psychophysics due to its connection with
the random utility model.13 For any choice between options o1 and o2 with V (o1 ) > V (o2 ):

Prob[o1 ] =

1
1+

e−µi (V (o1 )−V (o2 ))

.

(2)

The logit function depends both on the utility difference between options o1 and o2 and
the choice consistency parameter µi ∈ R+ . The probability of making a mistake—that is,
not choosing the value-maxmizing option—is 1 − Prob[o1 ]. This is decreasing in the value
difference between o1 and o2 . This decrease is more rapid when µi is larger, so higher values
of this parameter represent greater consistency in choices.
The set of questions can be designed to reduce the likelihood of mistakes. Our options
were constructed to make expected value comparisons as simple as possible. All of our
questions include only two options, with only one of these being a non-degenerate lottery.
Each lottery has only two possible prizes. One of three payoffs (the sure payoff, and the two
lottery payoffs) is always zero. Choices are thus between either a lottery with a zero payoff
and some gain, versus some (possibly negative) sure amount; or between a lottery with a
gain and loss, versus a sure amount of zero. In the former case, the expected value can be
found by dividing by two. In the latter, one can ascertain if the expected value of the lottery
is greater or less than zero by comparing the size of the positive and negative payoffs.
We believe these questions are also unlikely to produce inadvertent reference points, as
13

Specifically, choice probabilities will be logit if the errors in the random utility model have an Extreme
Value Type I distribution. See McFadden (2001) for a broader discussion of the history of the logit specification and its properties. DOSE can easily be implemented with multi-answer question using a multinomial
logit or alternative probabilistic choice function.

13

MPLs have been shown to do (Sprenger, 2015; Chapman et al., 2017). However, this is
also a testable prediction: we can try to fit specifications with alternative reference points,
such as incorporating the endowment of points given at the beginning of the DOSE module.
As shown in Appendix F.2, this model produces a much worse fit: it only predicts 48% of
choices correctly, whereas our main specification predicts 88% correctly.

2.2.3

Information Criterion

In our implementation, DOSE selects each question to maximize the expected KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence between the prior and possible posteriors associated with each answer. That is, the question that is picked at each point is the one with the highest expected
information gain given the initial prior and previous answers. The KL criterion has been
used widely in the optimal design literature in statistics due to its conceptual simplicity
and grounding in information theory (see Ryan et al., 2016, for a discussion and examples).
Further, the information maximization approach leads to consistent and efficient parameter
estimates under weak modeling conditions (Paninski, 2005). However, DOSE is easily modified to incorporate alternative information criteria—for example, Imai and Camerer (2018)
use DOSE with the EC 2 criterion to discriminate between models of time preferences.
Formally, consider a finite set of possible parameter vectors θk for k = 1, ..., K, where each
θk = (ρk , λk , δk , µk ) is a combination of possible values of the parameters of interest.14 Each
θk has an associated probability pk of being the correct parameters. In the first question,
these probabilities are the priors chosen by the experimenter; they are then updated in each
round according to the participant’s answers. The expected Kullback-Leibler divergence
between the prior and the posterior when asking question Qj is:

KL(Qj ) =

XX
k≤K a∈A

log

l (a; Qj )
P k
j∈K pj lj (a; Qj )

!
pk lk (a; Qj )

(3)

14

We assume a finite space of parameters for computational ease. The KL divergence here is slightly
different from that in El-Gamal and Palfrey (1996). Their variant maximizes the distance between posteriors
(information) obtained under different models, whereas ours maximizes the information about parameters.

14

where a ∈ A are the possible answers to the question, and lk (a; Qj ) is the likelihood of answer
a given θk —in our implementation this is determined by the logit funciton in (2). DOSE
selects the question that maximizes KL(Q), the participant answers it, model posteriors are
updated, the question Qj that now maximizes KL(Q) is selected, and so on.15

2.3

DOSE in a Representative Survey

We now turn to the practical details of implementing DOSE in two waves of a large, representative, incentivized survey of the U.S. population. The survey includes two DOSE
modules—one relating to risk and one to time preferences—as well as other behavioral elicitations, and cognitive and sociodemographic questions.16

2.3.1

Survey Implementation

The two waves of the incentivized survey used the same questions and the same people, about
six months apart. The first wave of the survey collected responses from 2,000 U.S. adults
and was conducted online by YouGov between March 27 and April 3, 2015. A second wave
recontacted the same population and received 1,465 responses between September 21 and
November 23, 2015. We use data from the first wave for most analyses. Results are similar
when using the second wave data, as shown in Appendix D.3.
Participants in the survey were drawn from a panel of respondents maintained by YouGov.
YouGov continually recruits new people to the panel, especially from hard-to-reach and lowsocioeconomic-status groups. To generate a representative sample, it randomly draws people
from various Census Bureau products, and matches them on observables to members of
their panel. Differential response rates lead to the over- and under-representation of certain
populations and so YouGov provides sample weights to recover estimates that would be
15

We restricted the procedure to only consider questions that had not yet been asked of that participant.
In order to improve the estimate of µ, the procedure would eventually ask the same question multiple times.
16
For specific details of the implementation of these, and other, questions see Appendix C and Chapman
et al. (2017), or screenshots and design documents at hss.caltech.edu/∼snowberg/wep.html.

15

obtained from a fully representative sample. We use these weights throughout the paper.17
The behavioral measures in this paper were all incentivized: at the end of the survey,
two survey modules were selected for payment at random.18 All outcomes were expressed
in YouGov points, an internal YouGov currency used to pay panel members, which can be
converted to U.S. dollars using the approximate rate of $0.001 per point.19 To enhance the
credibility of these incentives, we took advantage of YouGov’s relationship with its panel,
and restricted the sample to those who had already been paid (in cash or prizes) for their
participation in surveys. The average payment to respondents (including the show-up fee)
was $9 (9,000 points), which is approximately three times the average for YouGov surveys.
For comparability, we convert points to dollars, using the exchange rate, in our analyses.

2.3.2

DOSE Modules

All respondents were asked two, ten-question, DOSE modules.

Risk Preferences: The first DOSE module elicited risk and loss aversion. Participants
were given 10,000 points and offered a sequence of ten binary choices between a 50:50 lottery
and a sure amount. Two types of lottery were used. The first had a 50% chance of 0 points,
and a 50% chance of winning a (varying) positive amount of points (of up to 10,000). The
17

The attrition rate of ≈25% is lower than most online surveys. This is due, in part, to YouGov’s panel
management, and in part to the large incentives we offered. According to Pew Research, YouGov’s sampling
and weighting procedure yields better representative samples than traditional probability sampling methods
with non-uniform response rates, including Pew’s own probability sample (Pew Research Center, 2016,
YouGov is Sample I).
18
We chose to pay two randomly selected questions to increase the stakes while making fewer participants
upset about their payoffs. Paying for two questions instead of one may theoretically induce some wealth
effects, but these are known to be negligible, especially in an experiment such as ours (Charness et al., 2016).
Paying for randomly selected questions is incentive compatible under Expected Utility, but not necessarily
under more general risk preferences, where it is known that no such mechanism may exist (Karni and Safra,
1987; Azrieli et al., 2018). An old and still growing literature suggests this theoretical concern may not be
empirically important (Beattie and Loomes, 1997; Cubitt et al., 1998; Hey and Lee, 2005; Kurata et al.,
2009), but there are some exceptions (Freeman et al., 2015). Dynamic designs are generally not incentive
compatible, however in practice this is of little concern—see Appendix A.
19
The conversion from points to awards can only be done at specific point values, which leads to a slightly
convex payoff schedule. This is of little concern here as these cash-out amounts are further apart than the
maximum payoff from the survey.

16

second had a 50% chance of winning an amount up to 10,000 points, and a 50% chance of a
loss of up to 10,000 points. In the latter case, the sure amount was always 0 points.

Time Preferences: The second module elicited discount factors and refined estimates of
the curvature of the utility function. Participants were offered a sequence of ten binary
choices between a lower amount of points at an earlier date (either the day of the survey,
or in the future) or a higher amount at a later date (up to 90 days in the future). The
maximum payment in each question was 10,000 points.

2.3.3

Additional Measures

The survey also contained more standard ways of eliciting risk and time preferences. These
serve as a useful comparison for DOSE.

Risk Aversion MPLs: Two MPLs asked participants to choose between a fixed 50/50
lottery and a series of ascending sure amounts. The row in which the participant first chose
the sure amount identified a range of possible certainty equivalents for the lottery—we use
the midpoint of this range. There were two MPLs of this type: the first had a 50/50 lottery
over 0 and 10,000 points, the second, a 50/50 lottery over 2,000 and 8,000 points.20

Time Preference MPLs: In addition to the DOSE module, the survey included two
MPLs to elicit time preferences. The first time MPL elicited the amount of points that the
participant valued the same as 6,000 points 45 days later. The second MPL elicited the
amount of points in 45 days that the participant valued the same as 6,000 points in 90 days.
This measure is used primarily in Section 4.4.

20

See Appendix D.1 for more details on these measures, and additional analyses using them.

17

3

Performance of DOSE versus Current Methods

We first demonstrate that DOSE works in simulated environments, before turning to our
results on loss aversion in a representative sample in the next section. We do so in two ways.
First, we simulate DOSE question selection using the choices of participants in two laboratory
experiments that used questions similar to those in our DOSE implementation. We show
that a 20-question DOSE procedure obtains parameter estimates that are close to (within
15% of) parameter estimates after 140 questions. Second, we use simulated participants to
show that, in the presence of mistakes or inconsistency, DOSE recovers estimates that are
at least twice as accurate as standard elicitations used to measure risk and loss aversion.

3.1

Simulating DOSE with Laboratory Data

The first simulation exercise demonstrates the benefits of DOSE’s personalized question
sequence. We use data from 120 student participants in two prior laboratory experiments.21
In each experiment, participants were asked the same set of 140 binary choices from the same
two types of questions described in the prior section. The order of these questions in the
experiments was somewhat random. In our simulation, we optimally order these question
for each participant using DOSE. After DOSE selects a question, we provide it with the
answer the participant gave in the experiment. The procedure then updates the probability
distribution over parameters, selects the next question, and so on. This allows us to compare,
question by question, the inaccuracy—the absolute distance from the true parameter value
as a percentage of the true value—of DOSE’s estimates with those elicited by a random
question ordering. As we do not have access to true parameter values, we substitute the
values one would obtain using the choices in all 140 questions.
A 20-question DOSE sequence provides a similar amount of information as about 50
21

90 participants come from Frydman et al. (2011) and 30 from Sokol-Hessner et al. (2009). We attempted
to compare the performance of DOSE using Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE), the method in SokolHessner et al. (2009) and Frydman et al. (2011). However, as reported in Appendix G, we were unable to
obtain MLE estimates for a large portion of the sample. The MLE estimates that were obtained were less
accurate—relative to the estimate after 140 questions—than those obtained from Bayesian estimation.

18

Figure 2: Optimal question selection rapidly leads to accurate estimates.
Risk Aversion

30%

Inaccuracy (% final estimate)

Inaccuracy (% final estimate)

Loss Aversion

20%

10%

0

0

20

40
60
80 100
Number of Questions

Random

120

30%

20%

10%

140

Optimal Prior

0

0

20

40
60
80 100
Number of Questions

120

140

Uniform Prior

Notes: Based on data from Sokol-Hessner et al. (2009) and Frydman et al. (2011). Each line shows the
inaccuracy of Bayesian estimates (with uniform initial prior) obtained after each question, starting at question
10, under different orders. “Optimal Prior” and “Uniform Prior” refer to DOSE question selection using
corresponding priors. “Random” orders questions randomly, averaging over 100 different random orderings.

randomly ordered questions, as shown in Figure 2.22 The DOSE estimates of both risk and
loss aversion are consistently closer to the final parameter estimate, indicating—under the
assumption that the final estimate closely approximates an individual’s true parameters—
that the procedure provides accurate estimates considerably faster than selecting questions
at random.23 After 20 questions, the DOSE estimates are almost twice as close to the final
estimate as those under a random question ordering (12% vs. 21–22%). The DOSE estimates
are also more highly correlated with the final estimates (shown in Appendix Figure G.1),
an important feature when seeking to identify correlations between preferences and other
population characteristics.24
22

For loss aversion, 45 randomly-ordered questions are needed to be as close to the final estimate as 20
DOSE questions. For risk aversion, 55 questions are required.
23
Supporting this assumption, the next subsection finds that DOSE achieves similar levels of accuracy in
a simulation where we know the true parameter values.
24
Further, the average benefits we estimate are not limited to the particular distribution of preferences
we observe in the laboratory. As we show in Appendix G, the DOSE estimates converge rapidly to the final
estimate for the entire range of λ and ρ.

19

These simulations also show that using the uniform prior is close to optimal for question
selection. To do so, we compare the performance of DOSE question selection using a uniform
prior to that using an optimal prior constructed from the distribution of the estimates after
140 questions. To focus on the question selection impacts of the prior, we estimate the
parameter values using a uniform prior in both cases. As shown in Figure 2, the accuracy is
similar whether using the optimal or uniform prior.

3.2

Parameter Recovery Study

When participants make mistakes DOSE produces estimates that are about twice as accurate
as traditional risk and loss aversion elicitation mechanisms. We demonstrate this with a
parameter recovery study (or Monte Carlo simulation). This is conducted with an entirely
simulated dataset that allows us to both know and control the true parameters governing
(simulated) participant behavior. Appendix E provides full details.
We evaluate the relative (in)accuracy of DOSE, and two other common risk elicitation
procedures, using 10,000 simulated participants with power utility given in (1), who make
binary choices probabilistically according to (2). For each of these participants, a set of
parameter values (ρi , λi , and µi ) are drawn from the posterior distribution obtained from
the 120 laboratory participants in the previous subsection. We obtain DOSE estimates by
running 10- and 20-question DOSE procedures for each simulated participant, determining
the answer to each question according to her parameters.
As a benchmark for DOSE, we also allow our simulated participants to make choices
in two other common risk elicitation methods: the Lottery Menu (Eckel and Grossman,
2002), and a double MPL (Andersen et al., 2008a; Andreoni and Sprenger, 2012b). In the
Lottery Menu, participants choose from a list of six 50/50 lotteries over gains. In the double
MPL, participants complete two MPLs, each offering a choice between a fixed 50/50 lottery
and a series of ascending sure amounts. The first—which identifies risk aversion—offers a
lottery over gains ($0 and $10), while the second—identifying loss aversion—offers a lottery
20

Table 1: DOSE produces more accurate estimates.
Average
Inaccuracy

Spearman Rank
Correlation with
True Value

Loss Aversion
DOSE 10 question

21%

0.86

DOSE 20 question

15%

0.91

Multiple Price List

36%

0.65

Risk Aversion
DOSE 10 question

21%

0.66

DOSE 20 question

15%

0.79

Multiple Price List

37%

0.45

Lottery Menu

35%

0.28

Notes: Inaccuracy is the absolute distance from the true parameter value as a percentage
of the true value.

between a gain and a loss, both of $10. In both cases, we define a probability distribution
over the possible choices using sequential pairwise comparison of the options with the same
logit choice function in (2). This probability distribution is used to calculate the expected
inaccuracy of the parameter estimate for each simulated participant.
The estimates of risk and loss aversion from DOSE are approximately twice as accurate
as those from the other elicitation procedures, as shown in Table 1. After 20 questions,
DOSE obtains estimates of risk and loss aversion that are, on average, within 15% of the
true parameter value. The average inaccuracy of the MPL and Lottery Menu procedures, in
contrast, is at least 35%—much higher than even a 10-question DOSE procedure.25
DOSE produces more accurate estimates than both other procedures regardless of participants’ level of choice consistency (µ), as shown in Figure 3. This figure repeats the
parameter recovery analysis above, but assigns all simulated participants the same level of
choice consistency, µ. We then vary µ across percentiles of the population distribution. The
20-question DOSE procedure always provides the most accurate estimates. Even the 1025

The improvement in accuracy from DOSE is similar when the utility function used in the question
selection procedure is misspecified—see Section 5.1 and Appendix F.

21

Loss Aversion
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
0

25

50

75

100

Inaccuracy (% true parameter value)

Inaccuracy (% true parameter value)

Figure 3: DOSE is more accurate than other methods at all levels of choice consistency.
Risk Aversion
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
0

25

50

75

100

Choice Consistency (percentile)
DOSE 10 Question
MPL

DOSE 20 Question
Lottery Menu

Notes: Estimates obtained using simulation procedure described in Appendix E, with all simulated participants at a point in the graph having the same value of µ.

question procedure performs better than either the MPL or Lottery Menu, except amongst
extremely inconsistent participants.26
The high accuracy of the DOSE estimates also leads to higher correlations with the true
parameter values than the other two procedures (column 2 of Table 1). Thus, DOSE is less
likely to miss associations between economic preferences and other characteristics through
attenuation bias. The correlation between the true risk aversion parameter and the DOSE
estimate is 0.79, compared to 0.45 with the MPL estimates and 0.28 for the Lottery Menu.
For loss aversion, the DOSE procedure produces correlations above 0.85 with the true values,
even after a 10-question procedure. This is reflected in our survey results, see Section 4.3.
Unlike the MPL, DOSE is able to elicit loss aversion estimates even when participants’
choices violate First Order Stochastic Dominance (FOSD), although this is not an important
factor in the simulation results of Table 1. Because DOSE accounts for the possibility that
26

Although the Lottery Menu procedure appears to perform better than the MPL for inconsistent participants, this advantage is not robust to alternative simulation assumptions, which can drive the average
inaccuracy for low consistency participants as high as 139%. See Appendix E.1 for further details.

22

a participant’s choice is a mistake, the procedure can always recover parameter estimates.
In the double MPL, on the other hand, participants may erroneously make choices on the
second MPL (used to elicit loss aversion) that are First Order Stochastically Dominated given
their choices on the first MPL (used to elicit risk aversion). This prevents estimation of the
loss aversion parameter. In our simulation, the MPL could not recover estimates for 11% of
participants—increasing to more than 50% of participants with low choice consistency.
In practice, the double MPL procedure is unable to elicit loss aversion for a significant
proportion of the population, which may lead to biased conclusions about loss aversion. In
particular, the double MPL used by Chapman et al. (2018) is unable to recover estimates for
37% of their participants, as measurement error and other factors lead to these participants
appearing to make FOSD choices. The prevalence of these choice patterns was not random:
loss aversion could only be computed for 50% of participants in the bottom quartile of
cognitive ability, compared to 70% in the upper quartile. The results in this paper (see
Section 4.2) indicate that high cognitive ability is associated with more loss aversion. This
pattern of missing observations may thus lead to a biased over-estimate of loss aversion.27
In practice, choice data in the MPL is likely noisier than our simulations assume. To
estimate the relative amount of noise in the survey, we compare simulated and real responses
for three additional MPLs—the double MPL procedure (but with different payoffs), and a
second risk aversion MPL as implemented in Chapman et al. (2018).28 The proportion of
FOSD responses in the loss aversion MPL is much lower in this simulation than the real
data: 20% rather than 37%. Further, the correlation between the certainty equivalents in
the risk aversion MPLs—which is higher in the presence of less measurement error (Gillen
et al., Forthcoming)—is higher in the simulation: 0.73 vs. 0.69.29
27

The survey in Chapman et al. (2018) is similar to the one in this paper, although it did not utilize DOSE.
Note this pattern of responses is consistent with results in the next section, as loss-tolerant individuals will
wish to make choices that are close to violating FOSD, and measurement error can push them over the
threshold. Low cognitive ability participants are more loss tolerant and make more FOSD choices.
28
These MPLs have a different structure from those used in the results in Table 1 and Figure 3, but the
simulation methodology is the same. Full details of the simulations are reported in Appendix E.
29
It appears that our simulations underestimate the measurement error in the survey MPLs because we
do not account for participants’ use of rules-of-thumb. Compared to our simulation, participants in the

23

4

Economic Preferences in a Representative Sample

The U.S. population is more loss tolerant than those in lab-based samples. Consistent with
this finding, higher cognitive ability participants are more loss averse. This contrasts with the
prior literature that suggests that those with higher cognitive ability are more “rational,” or,
as it applies here, more likely to make expected value maximizing choices. DOSE estimates
of risk aversion, discounting, and choice consistency, are in-line with this perspective: higher
cognitive ability participants are less risk averse and more patient. The literature, however,
has found mixed results about the relationship between risk aversion and cognitive ability.
We use DOSE estimates of choice consistency (µ) to show that these results may be driven
by inconsistent choice. In particular, we show that if we examine those with above-median
choice consistency we recover a correlation between MPL-based measures of risk aversion
and cognitive ability that is obscured when examining all participants.
Further, prior estimates of the cross-time stability of economic preferences may be understated. Cross-time consistency of DOSE estimates of risk aversion and discounting are
higher than both MPLs and prior studies. The cross-time stability of loss aversion, which
has not been previously measured, is comparable to that of risk aversion and discounting,
suggesting that loss attitudes are at least as stable a descriptor of preferences as these other,
more common, measured preferences.
The results in this section are presented under the assumption, driven by the results in
Section 3, that DOSE is capturing useful information about economic preferences. Although
some of the analyses in this section provide further support for this assumption, we do not
examine it in detail until the next section. There, we show that our results are robust to adjusting for a number of possible issues that may be unique to DOSE, such as misspecification
of the utility function used to select questions and analyze the resulting choices.
survey were more likely to switch in rows of the MPL that are especially salient—such as the first or last
rows, or those referring to the midpoint of the lottery. These choices may be capturing framing effects or
heuristics in the face of the large amount of information in an MPL. DOSE avoids these issues by using
simple binary choices that are likely simpler to understand—a claim supported by evidence in Section 5.2.
Thus, our simulations may actually underestimate the relative advantages of DOSE.

24

4.1

Loss Aversion in the U.S. Population

We find far more loss tolerant participants, and thus a lower average level of loss aversion,
in the general population than in lab-based samples that have used DOSE, as displayed
in Figure 4. While the distribution of parameter estimates from DOSE are largely the
same across both waves of our incentivized survey, those produced by lab-based samples are
markedly different. This is also true for risk aversion: lab-based populations are less risk
averse than the general population, in-line with prior research (see Snowberg and Yariv,
2018, and references therein).30 We compare estimates of risk aversion in this study and
prior studies when examining robustness in Appendix B.
The median estimate of the loss aversion parameter, λ = 0.98, in the U.S. population is
much lower than the “standard” estimate of 2 (Fehr-Duda and Epper, 2012). However, inline with prior studies, DOSE in the lab (N = 439) produces a median estimate of λ = 1.99.
Our lab results come from studies using DOSE in much the same way we do here, based on
our original working paper. For details on three of these studies, see Clay et al. (2017, in
progress) and Krajbich et al. (2017). The fourth study is unpublished, and ran the DOSE
procedure on 207 students at UCLA.31 We use the individual choices from these studies to
calculate parameter estimates as described in Section 2.
The proportion of loss-tolerant participants in the U.S. population—53%—is higher than
in the eight studies, referenced in the Introduction, that have investigated heterogeneity in
loss aversion (all in lab samples). In those experiments, between 13% and 30% (weighted average: 22%, N = 1,023) of participants in laboratory experiments are loss tolerant. However,
as noted above, the methodologies used in several of these studies make classifying many
participants impossible. Our representative sample also produces different results than other
30

The median CRRA coefficient (1-ρ) in the general population is 0.31 vs. 0.05 in the student/lab sample.
We do not have DOSE estimates of the discount rate in the lab. However, the median monthly discount factor
here (0.90) is in the lowest quartile of the results of three recent laboratory studies using the Convex Time
Budget method of Andreoni and Sprenger, (2012a; see Appendix Table D1 in Imai and Camerer 2018). The
distribution of both the discounting and choice consistency measures are displayed in Appendix Figure D.1.
31
The data was generously provided to us by Alec Smith.

25

Figure 4: Distribution of Economic Preferences within the U.S. population

Density

Risk Aversion (1−ρ)

Density

Loss Aversion (λ)

0
1
2
More loss tolerant

3
4
More loss averse

Survey Wave 1

−0.5
0
More risk loving

Survey Wave 2

80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
−$4
−$2
$0
$2
$4
Expected Value − Sure Amount
Loss Tolerant

Loss Averse

Laboratory

Lotteries with Only Gains
Probability Chose Lottery

Probability Chose Lottery

Lotteries with Losses
100%

0.5
1
More risk averse

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
−$2

$0
$2
$4
Expected Value − Sure Amount
Risk Loving

Risk Averse

Notes: The top panel displays the kernel density of each parameter, plotted using Epanechnikov kernel with
bandwidth chosen by rule-of-thumb estimator. The bottom panel displays the Nadaraya-Watson (local mean
smoothing) estimator (bandwidth 0.6) with Epanechnikov kernel and without sample weights.

field studies, discussed in the literature review. Two of those studies obtain estimates for less
than 30% of their participants (Booij and Van de Kuilen, 2009; Booij et al., 2010). A third
produces estimates of the median level of loss aversion between 0.12 and 4.47 depending on
the specification (von Gaudecker et al., 2011). As we show in Section 5.1 and Appendix F,
our results are much more stable under different estimation specifications.
Choice patterns clearly illustrate the source of DOSE estimates, as shown in the bottom
panel of Figure 4. The x-axis is the difference between the expected value of a lottery and
26

the sure amount in a given choice. Loss-tolerant participants (λ < 1) are clearly more likely
to choose lotteries with losses than those who are loss averse (λ > 1), with loss-tolerant
participants choosing lotteries nearly 100% of the time when the expected difference is zero.
Note, however, that the flat parts of both lines in the left-hand side of the bottom-left panel
are due to the fact that DOSE only exposes those who have already revealed loss tolerance
through prior choices of lotteries with large negative expected values. Similar patterns exist
for those who are risk averse versus those who are risk loving: the latter are more likely
to choose gambles with gains at every expected value difference. For all four groups of
participants, the probability of choosing the lottery increases with the difference between
the expected value of the lottery and the sure amount.

4.2

Economic Preferences and Cognitive Ability

Our comprehensive survey allows us to document new facts about the correlates of loss
aversion and choice consistency in the U.S. population. An examination of the simple correlations between economic preferences, socioeconomic characteristics, and cognitive ability
shows that cognitive ability is the most important correlate of loss aversion, and the other
three DOSE-estimated parameters. High cognitive ability participants are more loss averse,
while those of lower cognitive ability are more loss tolerant, on average. This correlation
reflects clear differences in the choices participants made during the survey: high cognitive
ability participants were consistently less likely to choose lotteries involving losses. Higher
cognitive ability participants are more patient (and consistent), in-line with previous studies.
Higher cognitive ability participants are also less risk averse. Examining this result in further
detail in the following subsection allows us to demonstrate that the mixed evidence on the
relationship between risk aversion and cognitive ability in previous studies may be explained
by inconsistent choice (Andersson et al., 2016b; Dohmen et al., 2018).
Cognitive ability was measured using a set of nine questions. Six questions were from
the International Cognitive Ability Resource (ICAR, Condon and Revelle, 2014): three were
27

Table 2: DOSE preference parameters are correlated with individual characteristics.
Loss
Aversion
(λ)

Risk
Aversion
(1 − ρ)

(δ)

Choice
Consistency
(µ)

Cognitive Ability

0.21∗∗∗
(.030)

−0.21∗∗∗
(.028)

0.18∗∗∗
(.029)

0.15∗∗∗
(.026)

Income

0.15∗∗∗
(.032)

−0.15∗∗∗
(.034)

0.12∗∗∗
(.034)

0.06∗
(.033)

Education

0.13∗∗∗
(.032)

−0.10∗∗∗
(.033)

0.17∗∗∗
(.037)

0.11∗∗∗
(.032)

Male

0.08∗∗
(.033)

−0.10∗∗∗
(.032)

−0.02
(.035)

0.01
(.033)

Age

−0.10∗∗∗
(.033)

0.02
(.032)

0.18∗∗∗
(.036)

0.05
(.036)

0.06∗∗
(.031)

−0.11∗∗∗
(.029)

0.10∗∗∗
(.031)

-0.02
(.032)

Stock Investor

Patience

Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Standard errors, in
parenthesis, come from a standardized regression. Each cell corresponds to a single regression.

similar to Raven’s Matrices, and the other three involved rotating a shape in space. We also
administered the Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT; Frederick, 2005): three arithmetically
straightforward questions with an instinctive, but incorrect, answer. Our cognitive ability
score was the sum of correct answers to these questions.
The relationships in Table 2 are consistent with the analyses in the prior subsection
showing that the general population is more risk averse and less loss averse than lab/student
populations. In particular, more educated, higher income, and more cognitively able individuals tend to be more loss averse and less risk averse; and lab populations have higher
cognitive ability than the general population (Snowberg and Yariv, 2018). Men and younger
people tend to be more loss averse, and those that own stock are less loss averse.32
The strong correlations between cognitive ability and economic preferences are robust
32

Appendix Table D.2 presents additional correlations with Church Attendance, Ethnicity, and Home
Ownership, and shows that the correlations with the two components of cognitive ability (CRT and IQ) are
similar to the correlations in Table 2.

28

Figure 5: Low cognitive ability participants chose more lotteries with losses.
Lotteries with Losses

Lotteries with Only Gains
80%
Probability Chose Lottery

Probability Chose Lottery

80%

60%

40%

20%

60%

40%

20%
−$4

−$2

$0

$2

$4

Expected Value − Sure Amount
Low Cognitive Ability

−$2

$0

$2

$4

Expected Value − Sure Amount
High Cognitive Ability

Notes: Figure displays the Nadaraya-Watson (local mean smoothing) estimator (bandwidth 1) with Epanechnikov kernel. Grey dotted lines represent 95% confidence intervals, constructed with 10,000 clustered bootstrap replications. High and low cognitive ability refer to the top and bottom terciles, respectively.

to controlling for the other individual characteristics in Table 2—see Appendix Table D.3.
In fact, differences in cognitive ability appear to explain most of the relationship between
education and economic preferences.
The choices participants make differ by cognitive ability, as shown in Figure 5.33 Across
the range of expected value differences, high and low cognitive ability participants exhibit
different patterns of choice. In the first panel, which focuses only on lotteries with a loss,
low cognitive ability participants are significantly more likely to choose the lottery than high
cognitive ability participants. The u-shape of the curve for both ability terciles is driven by
the fact that DOSE only presents very negative expected value difference choices to those
who have already expressed significant loss tolerance. In contrast, in the second panel,
which focuses on lotteries that only contain a zero payoff and a gain, low cognitive ability
participants are significantly less likely to choose the lottery.
In summary, the patterns of correlation between cognitive ability and risk and loss aver33

Appendix Figure D.1 presents the results in Figure 4 by cognitive ability tercile.

29

sion in Table 2 are clearly driven by underlying choices. Low cognitive ability participants
are especially willing to accept lotteries with losses, even when those result in an expected
value loss. However, low cognitive ability participants are also less willing to choose a lottery
over gains, even when that results in an expected value gain.
Very few participants consistently make expected value maximizing choices, regardless of
cognitive ability. Fewer than 2% of participants made all EV-maximizing choices, and fewer
than 5% made more than 8 such choices (out of ten). Further, in contrast to some previous
studies (for example, Burks et al., 2009; Benjamin et al., 2013), we find the proportion
of choices that maximize expected value is only slightly higher for high cognitive ability
participants: those in the highest tercile of cognitive ability made 57% EV-maximizing
choices compared to 52% for participants in the lowest tercile.

4.3

Choice Consistency and Estimate Accuracy

Accounting for inconsistent choice can explain the mixed evidence about the relationship
between risk aversion and cognitive ability in previous studies (Dohmen et al., 2018). The
simulations in Section 3.2 show that, in the presence of inconsistent choice, MPLs measure
risk aversion with considerable error. It is well known that error will attenuate, and potentially bias, any estimated relationship between these measures and other factors. In this
subsection, we show that inconsistent choice is related to attenuation bias in our survey. The
MPL measure of risk aversion on our incentivized survey is weakly associated with cognitive
ability, in contrast to the DOSE measure. However when we focus only on participants that
make (more) consistent choices, the MPL and DOSE measures exhibit similar correlations.
The MPL-based risk aversion measure is more weakly correlated with other characteristics
than the DOSE measure, as shown in the first panel of Figure 6. For example, the correlation
with cognitive ability is −0.04 (s.e. = .028), compared to −0.21 (.028) for DOSE. This pattern
is consistent with our simulation results, which showed more error in MPLs than DOSE.
Inconsistent choice is related to the attenuation of correlations. Once we use the DOSE
30

Figure 6: DOSE measure of risk aversion is more highly correlated with individual characteristics before choice consistency is accounted for.
Cognitive
Ability

All Participants

High Consistency

Low Consistency

Income
Education
Male
Age
Stock
Investor
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1

0

0.1

−0.3 −0.2 −0.1

0

0.1

−0.3 −0.2 −0.1

0

0.1

Correlation
DOSE

MPL

Notes: Figure displays correlations between the DOSE and MPL measures of risk aversion and individual
characteristics. The left-hand panel includes all participants, the middle contains those with above median
choice consistency, and the right-hand panel contains those with below median choice consistency. The
survey contained two MPL measures of risk preference. Correlations are estimated by stacking the two and
clustering standard errors by participant.

consistency measure to exclude inconsistent participants, there is a strong negative relationship between cognitive ability and the MPL risk aversion measure—see the middle panel
of Figure 6, which contains only those with above median choice consistency parameters
µ.34 The magnitude of the correlations is consistently higher for both risk aversion measures; however the contrast is particularly striking for the MPL measure, where a number
of relationships—including with cognitive ability—are now statistically significant. This is
despite the fact that standard errors are increased by only using half the sample. As shown
in the right-hand panel of the figure, DOSE estimates exhibit similar correlations even for
very inconsistent participants, while correlations with MPL estimates are almost zero. This
is also in-line with our simulation results.
The patterns in Figure 6 also demonstrate that the choice consistency parameter can
34

As we discuss in Section 5.2, DOSE estimates may also contain less measurement error because the
binary choice questions are easier to understand than MPLs.

31

identify individuals that make more mistakes even outside of the DOSE module, and thus
help researchers address survey noise. This information is difficult to obtain through other
easily available measures. For example, as we demonstrate in Appendix D.2, the correlations
in Figure 6 cannot be recovered by truncating the sample based on response time rather
than consistency. In fact, the consistency measure helps distinguish whether fast responses
reflect a lack of attention: restricting the sample to high-consistency participants recovers
correlations even among the subgroup of participants with particularly fast response times.
The value of the choice consistency measure is particularly striking when we consider that
our DOSE design did not focus primarily on eliciting this measure. Simple design tweaks—
such as allowing the procedure to ask questions multiple times—could allow the variable to
be measured more accurately, and hence provide even more information to researchers.

4.4

Within-person Stability of Loss Aversion

The within-person stability of the DOSE estimates of risk and time preference is higher than
other behavioral elicitations, both in our survey and in most previous studies. That is, they
are more highly correlated within-person across time, consistent with the fact that DOSE
reduces measurement error in parameter estimates. The correlation of DOSE estimates
across survey waves was 0.40 (s.e. = .04) for loss aversion (λ), 0.45 (.04) for risk aversion (ρ),
and 0.47 (.05) for discounting (δ). In comparison, the inter-temporal correlation between
choices in the two risk MPLs were 0.29 and 0.26 (.04 for both), and for choices in a risky
project measure (Gneezy and Potters, 1997) the correlation was 0.33 (.04). The stability
in the two time preference MPLs was 0.28 and 0.20 (.06 for both).35 These findings are
consistent with higher measurement error in the MPL measures, as suggested by both the
simulation results (Section 3.2) and the survey results discussed in the previous subsection.
Interestingly, there is no clear relationship between the stability of the DOSE estimates of
35

The stability of the consistency parameter (µ) was 0.22 (S.E.=.05); lower than the other DOSE measures
but similar to the MPLs discussed above. Part of the explanation for this relatively low correlation is that
our DOSE implementation was designed to update more on other parameters: the relatively small number
of questions made it harder to identify inconsistent choices.

32

preference parameters and choice consistency (µ), suggesting that by accounting for mistakes
DOSE blunts the impacts of them. For participants with above-median choice consistency
the over time correlations are 0.41 for loss aversion, 0.43 for risk aversion, and 0.47 for discounting. For participants with below-median choice consistency correlations are 0.38, 0.47,
and 0.46, respectively. This is consistent with evidence in the prior subsection and section
that the accuracy of DOSE estimates is relatively constant across much of the observed range
of choice consistency—except for the most inconsistent.
The over-time correlations of DOSE estimates also compare favorably with methods in
prior studies. The only study we are aware of that measures stability of risk attitudes in the
loss domain is Levin et al. (2007), who report over-time correlations for 62 participants of
0.29 for a risk measure over gains, and 0.20 for a measure of differential risk-taking between
the gain and loss domain.36 Two further studies use incentivized methods to investigate
the stability of risk aversion (over gains) over lengthy periods, both finding lower over-time
correlations than the DOSE estimates. Gillen et al. (Forthcoming) find an inter-temporal
correlation of 0.32 for both of two risk MPLs and 0.36 and 0.47 for two risky project questions.
Lönnqvist et al. (2015) report a within-subject correlation of 0.21 for an MPL measure across
a year.37 There is a similar pattern when comparing the stability of the DOSE-measured
time preferences to the prior literature, although differences in methodology and samples
make it harder to compare (see discussion in Appendix B). Thus, DOSE is an answer to
Meier and Sprenger’s (2015, p. 286) challenge to develop, “A more precise experimental
technique for eliciting time preferences...to make further study of stability.”
Notably, the DOSE estimates are more stable, despite these previous studies occurring
in the laboratory or with high-IQ college populations (or both)—suggesting that DOSE can
obtain levels of measurement error similar to a laboratory environment in an online survey.
Economists have often shied away from using incentivized measures in large samples because
36

Levin et al. (2007) report correlations for 62 pairs of parents and children. The figures above are from
the adults, for comparability. For the children, over-time correlations are 0.38 and 0.30 respectively.
37
Andersen et al. (2008b) elicit risk aversion over time, however, they do not report over-time correlations.

33

of high measurement error and the prohibitive cost of implementing multiple elicitations
(Schildberg-Hörisch, 2018). DOSE overcomes this constraint and, as we show in Section 5.2,
the procedure is faster to complete than an MPL module.

5

Robustness

In this section we use our data to demonstrate the robustness of DOSE parameter estimates,
providing further evidence for our finding that a significant proportion of the U.S. population
is loss tolerant. DOSE obtains accurate parameter estimates even if the utility function used
in the question selection procedure is misspecified. Consequently, it is straightforward to test
robustness to different utility specifications: our survey conclusions are unchanged assuming
either exponential (CARA) utility or allowing curvature to vary across gains and losses.
Further tests suggest that our results are not driven by inattention or misunderstanding.

5.1

Robustness to Misspecification

DOSE is largely robust to misspecification of the parametric form used to select questions
because the choice data itself can be used to estimate the parameters of different functional
forms. This re-estimation can be done in response to new information, or simply as a
robustness check. In this subsection, we focus on the latter application, and assess the
robustness of our loss aversion results to different forms of the utility function over gains and
losses. Our estimates are largely robust. This should be unsurprising based on the patterns
of choice described in Sections 4.1 and 4.2.
Simulations indicate that using a misspecified utility function produces little change in our
results. In Appendix F.1, we run the DOSE question selection procedure with a exponential
(CARA) utility function for the simulated participants used in Section 3.2. As the simulated
participants make choices using a power (CRRA) utility function, this means that the utility
function used to select questions is misspecified. The Spearman rank correlation between the

34

(misspecified) CARA risk aversion parameter estimates and the (true) CRRA parameters is
almost exactly the same as when using the correct utility function–0.75 (versus 0.79) for risk
aversion and 0.90 (versus 0.90) for loss aversion. Moreover, we are able to recover equally
accurate CRRA parameter estimates using the choice data. Even when misspecified in this
way, DOSE outperforms other measures by similar margins to those shown in Table 1.
Applying this procedure to our survey data, in Figure 7, shows that our conclusions
regarding loss aversion are similar using different utility functions. In addition to the CRRA
utility function used in (1), we add a CARA utility function, and a CRRA utility function
with different curvature parameters over losses and gains (Tversky and Kahneman, 1992).
The latter specification produces the biggest difference. However, the finding that a large
portion of the population are loss tolerant is unchanged: the proportion of participants
with estimated λ < 1 ranges from 46% to 53% across the three models. The variation in
the median value of the loss aversion parameter λ is very narrow across the three models,
ranging from 0.98 to 1.12.38 The second panel of Figure 7 breaks down both the one- and twoparameter CRRA utility parameters by cognitive ability. Again, there is the same pattern
as in the prior section: those with higher cognitive ability are more loss averse, and those
with lower cognitive ability are more loss tolerant.
The CRRA model we used in prior sections fits the data best: it predicts 89% of choices
correctly, compared to less than 85% for the other two functions. Moreover, we estimate that
most (68%) participants are risk averse over gains and risk loving over losses, in-line with prior
experiments and Prospect Theory (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979). The average difference
in the curvature between the domains is close to zero, offering support for specification (1),
although there is considerable individual heterogeneity—see Appendix F.
The individual choice data demonstrate widespread loss tolerance without making any
parametric assumptions. A loss-averse participant should never accept a lottery with neg38

The correlation between the loss aversion parameters under different utility functions is greater than 0.8.
Risk aversion over gains is also highly correlated across the different specifications (Spearman correlations
of 0.98 or above).

35

Figure 7: Results on loss aversion are robust to different parametric specifications.
Loss Aversion for Low and High Cognitive Ability

Density

Density

Loss Aversion with Alternative Utility Functions

0

1

2
3
Loss Aversion (λ)

4

Power Utility (CRRA)
CRRA: Different ρ Over Gains and Losses
Exponential Utility (CARA)

0

1

2
3
Loss Aversion (λ)

4

CRRA with 1 ρ: Low Cognitive Ability
CRRA with 1 ρ: High Cognitive Ability
CRRA with 2 ρ: Low Cognitive Ability
CRRA with 2 ρ: High Cognitive Ability

Notes: Plotted using Epanechnikov kernel, with bandwidth chosen by rule-of-thumb estimator. Figure displays the estimated loss aversion parameter after re-estimating the model parameters with alternative functional forms for the utility function—see Appendix F for full details. “Power utility (CRRA)” does not allow
for differential curvature over gains and losses—see (1), whereas “CRRA: Different ρ over gains and losses”
allows for this possibility.

ative expected value in our implementation, as they could always choose a certain amount
of $0 instead. Yet, many participants do, as shown in Figure 4. Accepting a lottery with a
negative expected value implies that the magnitude of the negative value for a loss is less
than that for an equally-sized gain—implying loss tolerance. The fact that a large proportion
of the population is loss tolerant is thus apparent without any parametric assumptions.
The results in this subsection clearly demonstrate that the DOSE estimates reflect participants’ choices. However, they cannot speak to the extent to which those choices accurately
reflect individual preferences or, specifically, whether participants comprehended or paid attention during the DOSE module. Thus, in the next subsection, we address concerns that
our results are driven by a lack of understanding or care in completing the survey.

5.2

Response Times

36

The questions we used in DOSE appear to be easy to understand. First, respondents across
the cognitive ability spectrum complete DOSE questions in similar amounts of time, as opposed to more complicated methods, which take lower cognitive ability participants longer.
Second, the speed of response is not evidence of participants “giving up,” or misunderstanding the questions. Removing participants that complete DOSE more quickly has no effect
on estimates of the distributions of parameters.
Earlier results provide some evidence that participants did, in fact, find DOSE relatively
simple. The higher correlation of DOSE elicitations across time (compared to MPL elicitations) suggests that it was easier to maintain similar response patterns even more than six
months later. Moreover, the fact that correlations between DOSE estimates of risk aversion,
discounting, and sociodemographic characteristics largely mirror the existing literature, and
are stronger than the correlations with MPL measures, also suggests that they more reliably
extract information on preferences. However, the fact that lab and general population results
differ could be interpreted as evidence of possible confusion in the representative sample.
As a reminder, we designed our questions in order to make expected value comparisons
as simple as possible, as discussed in Section 2.2.2. In particular, all questions contained
only one 50/50 lottery, and at least one of the three payoffs (the sure payoff, and the two
lottery payoffs) was zero. This implies that computing the expected value of a gain lottery
only required dividing the lottery by two. Comparing a gain/loss lottery to a sure payoff of
zero required only comparing the magnitude of the gain and the loss.
A way to assess the complexity of a question is the amount of time participants take to
answer: if participants struggle to understand a question they will usually take longer to
answer it (or much shorter if they give up). The DOSE module (including instructions),
was, however, fast to complete. The median time on the risk-loss DOSE module was 115
seconds, and on the time-discounting module was 107 seconds. In comparison, the median
time taken to complete the MPL instructions and first elicitation was 259 seconds.39
39

The first MPL measured time preferences. The DOSE modules always appeared prior to this MPL.

37

Figure 8: Low cognitive ability participants take longer on MPL questions, but not on DOSE.
DOSE Risk and Time Modules

MPL Module (Time)
350

Response Time (seconds)

Response Time (seconds)

350

300

250

200

300

250

200
1

2
3
Quartile of Cognitive Ability

4

1

2
3
Quartile of Cognitive Ability

4

Notes: DOSE module includes 20 questions addressing both risk and time preferences. MPL module includes
two MPLs assessing time preferences, which was the first MPL module on the survey. Respondents with
response times greater than 15 minutes for either module are excluded. Both panels include time taken for
questions and explanatory text.

Additional evidence that DOSE was simple to understand is that low cognitive ability
participants took the same amount of time as high cognitive ability participants to complete
the DOSE module, in contrast to the MPL—see Figure 8. Participants in the top cognitive
ability quartile took, on average, 34 seconds less in the MPL module than those in the bottom
quartile. For DOSE, in contrast, high cognitive ability participants took 3 seconds longer on
average (p-value=0.68). Moreover, the variance of time taken was relatively constant across
quartiles, as indicated by the confidence intervals in the figure. Together, these facts suggests
that DOSE was equally easy for participants all along the cognitive ability spectrum.
However, just because participants, in general, seem to have found DOSE easier to understand than the MPL doesn’t mean there were no participants confused by DOSE, or that
all were paying attention. We examine this possibility next by re-analyzing our data while
leaving out those who were most likely to have given up and rushed through the survey.
The same results hold, implying that neither confusion nor inattentiveness, nor giving up, is
likely to explain many of the choices we see.
Our results are largely unchanged when removing the fastest responses. As shown in

38

Figure 9: Distributions are similar when removing participants with short response times.

0

1
2
3
4
Loss Aversion (λ)

Density

Density

Density

Response Time on Entire Survey

−0.5

0
0.5
Risk Aversion (1−ρ)

1

0

0.2

0.4 0.6 0.8
Patience (δ)

1

0

0.2

0.4 0.6 0.8
Patience (δ)

1

0

1
2
3
4
Loss Aversion (λ)

All participants

Density

Density

Density

Response Time on DOSE

−0.5

0
0.5
Risk Aversion (1−ρ)

1

Slowest 80%
Slowest 40%

Slowest 60%
Slowest 20%

Notes: Plotted using Epanechnikov kernel, with bandwidth chosen by rule-of-thumb estimator.

Figure 9, the distribution of economic preferences is similar when restricting the sample by
removing participants according to the quintile of response time. That is, we first look at
the slowest 80% of respondents, then the slowest 60%, and so on. The distributions overlap
almost entirely—and the median loss aversion parameter consistently remains very similar
in the whole sample (1.02 or below): fast response or inattention cannot be said to be the
explanation for loss tolerance. Moreover, correlations with other characteristics are also
similar when removing the fastest respondents—see Appendix Table D.9.
A final manifestation of inattention might be choosing the same option in each question:
either the lottery (always listed first), or the sure amount (always listed second). However,
there is little evidence of this pattern of inattention in our results: fewer than 6% participants

39

chose the same option in all ten question rounds. While we cannot rule out that some
participants rapidly clicked through the DOSE module, such behavior does not appear to
affect our results.

6

Discussion

In this paper, we introduce DOSE—Dynamically Optimized Sequential Experimentation—
and use it to study loss aversion and other economic preferences in a representative sample of
the U.S. population. Our results are summarized in Table 3. A few are worth highlighting.
First, we find that around 50% of the U.S. population is loss tolerant over small stakes,
differing from prior studies that have found a strong majority of loss averse participants,
usually in lab/student samples. Second, those with greater cognitive ability, education, and
income are more likely to be loss averse, and those with lower cognitive ability are more likely
to be loss tolerant. This, along with the fact that DOSE in lab/student samples produces
similar results to prior studies, suggests that differences in samples are likely the source of
the difference between our results and prior studies. Third, using DOSE’s choice consistency
parameter we show that those with high consistency exhibit a correlation on MPL-based
measures between higher cognitive ability and less risk aversion. This suggests that the
mixed results about this relationship in the literature (Dohmen et al., 2018) may be due
to measurement error (Gillen et al., Forthcoming). Fourth, across a range of evaluations,
DOSE produces better measures: more accurate, more stable, faster, and so on.
Our findings about loss aversion diverge significantly from conventional wisdom, raising
the possibility that the literature may have been influenced by factors beyond the inadvertent sample selection mentioned above. Hints can be found in Fehr-Duda and Epper
(2012, p. 576), who observe, “Since the publication of Tversky and Kahneman (1992), any
estimates of loss aversion that deviate significantly from the value of two have been eyed
with great suspicion, notwithstanding the fact that the original estimate was based on 25

40

Methodological

Substantive

Table 3: Comparison of DOSE with Other Elicitation Methods

DOSE

MPL

Risky
Project /
Lottery
Menu († )

Percent Loss Tolerant

53%

n.a.

n.a.

Median Loss Aversion Parameter

0.98

n.a.

n.a.

Risk Aversion

-0.21

≈0

-0.07



























Loss Attitudes

Loss Aversion

0.40

n.a.

n.a.


























Patience

0.18

0.17

n.a.

Risk Aversion

X

≈0

X

Loss Aversion

X

n.a.

n.a.

Patience

X

X

n.a.

115 secs

259 secs

33 secs

Stability: Risk Aversion

0.45

0.28

0.33

Stability: Loss Aversion

0.40

n.a.

n.a.

Stability: Patience

0.47

0.24

n.a.

Inaccuracy: Risk Aversion

15%

37%

35%†

Inaccuracy: Loss Aversion

15%

36%

n.a.†

Correlation: Risk Aversion

0.79

0.45

0.28†

Correlation: Loss Aversion

0.91

0.65

n.a.†

Correlations w/Cognitive Ability

Correlations w/ Demographics























Representative Survey






















Parameter Recovery Analysis

Speed

Notes: “Inaccuracy” is the average absolute percentage difference between the estimated and true parameter values. “Correlation” is the correlation between the estimated and true parameter values.
“Stability” is the correlation across survey waves. X indicates that a pattern of statistically significant
correlations were identified. Observations denoted with a † are from the Lottery Menu elicitation—which
was included in our simulations, but not our survey—rather than the Risky Project—which was included
in our survey, but not our simulations.

41

subjects, hypothetical decisions over relatively large stakes, and that no standard errors were
reported.” Relatedly, the one study that examines loss aversion in a representative sample,
von Gaudecker et al. (2011), report a median estimate of λ = 2.38, although specifications
in the appendix have medians ranging from 0.12 to 4.47. More directly, Walasek et al. (in
progress) analyze 19 studies of loss aversion in lab/student populations, and find evidence
of publication bias, and Yechiam (2018, p. 1) notes in a review of the loss aversion literature
that, “[T]he findings of some of these studies have been systematically misrepresented to
reflect loss aversion, though they did not find it.”
Our DOSE implementation provides estimates of risk aversion and time preferences that
also appear to dominate MPL-based elicitations. DOSE risk aversion measures show stronger
correlations with cognitive ability and other characteristics than MPL-based measures, as
shown in Table 3. Further, DOSE-based measures of risk and time preferences show greater
stability than MPL-based measures. These facts indicate, in-line with our simulations, that
DOSE produces estimates with lower measurement error in these domains as well.
A common concern about DOSE is that, like most dynamic methods, they are not incentive compatible. For example, participants could misleadingly say they prefer a lottery to a
sure amount in the first question in order to increase the magnitude of the sure amounts offered in the future. However, this is possible with any sequence of questions that participants
believe are dynamic—and few experiments explicitly rule out this possibility (our survey did
not explicitly mention the dynamic nature of our 20 questions). However, in practice this
is of little concern: Ray et al. (2012) find minimal possible benefits of manipulation, and
little evidence that even very sophisticated participants engage in this behavior even when
explicitly informing participants that the question sequence is manipulable. For more on
this concern, see Appendix A.
The accuracy, speed, and simplicity of DOSE potentially expands the range of research
settings in which incentivized preference elicitation is viable. The procedure may be particularly valuable in field experiments, where it is difficult to provide participants with detailed

42

instructions. Similarly, it may also be easier to implement than more complex or time
consuming designs when conducting experiments with low literacy participants, children,
patients with medical disorders, or even animals. DOSE performs better with low cognitive
ability, low-education, and low-income participants, suggesting that it could be particularly useful in development environments, where current elicitation methods can be plagued
by inconsistent choice (Jacobson and Petrie, 2009; Charness and Viceisza, 2012) and new
techniques are particularly needed (Berry et al., 2015). DOSE can also be used to discriminate between models on an individual level in real time—an application developed for time
preferences in Imai and Camerer (2018), based on an earlier working paper version of this
manuscript (Wang et al., 2010).
There is more to be learned about loss aversion with DOSE simply by broadening the
types of questions participants are asked. Offering participants lotteries with prizes only in
the loss domain would allow better identification of differences in the curvature of the utility
function in the gain and loss domain. Further, the degree of loss aversion may be affected
by stake size and “zero avoidance” (Ert and Erev, 2013). The questions used in this paper
involved only small stakes and always contained a prize of zero payoff—the sure amount
in questions involving a lottery with a loss, and one of the lottery prizes in the questions
only involving gains. These design choices could straightforwardly be varied to obtain a
richer view of the factors affecting loss aversion, and something like “zero aversion” could be
modeled directly and relevant parameters estimated.
Even with these questions outstanding, our findings relate to current psychological and
neuroscientific work on gain-loss differences. The fact that loss aversion depends on cognitive skill suggests it may have some basis in effortful cognitive processes. Recent evidence
indicates aversion or tolerance to loss is associated with mental information accumulation
(Clay et al., 2017) and attention paid to losses and gains (Bhatia and Golman, 2015; Yechiam
and Hochman, 2013). The clearest evidence for the role of attention is that visual attention
to losses correlates modestly (0.31) with the loss aversion parameter inferred from choices

43

(Pachur et al., 2018). In addition, exogenously manipulating attention by visually presenting it for an extra 0.6 seconds increased estimated loss-aversion by about 10%. It would be
useful to know whether people with lower cognitive ability pay less attention to losses.
A small amount of neuroscientific evidence indicates stronger encoding in the amygdala
in response to loss (Yacubian et al. 2006; De Martino et al. (2010); though not in Tom
et al. 2007). The anti-anxiety drug Propranalol lowers loss aversion by about 15% (in
low-BMI subjects; Sokol-Hessner et al., 2015). Given the role of the amygdala in rapid
“vigilance” threat processing, these results suggest lower cognitive ability participants may
simply feel less fear or anxiety about losses. Experiments have shown that differences in
the distributions that are faced can influence choices—losses are more tolerated when many
choices include possible losses, due to a general cognitive process called “adaptive coding”
(Walasek and Stewart, 2015). Thus, it is possible that people with lower cognitive ability
are more routinely exposed to everyday gain and loss distributions, which create a tolerance
for loss.
Obviously, our incentivized survey data cannot test any of these mechanistic hypotheses.
Given the striking behavioral association between loss tolerance and cognitive skill, however, it would be useful to further explore the roles of attention, anxiety, and distributional
experience with low and high cognitive ability groups.

44

References
Abdellaoui, Mohammed, Han Bleichrodt, and Corina Paraschiv, “Loss Aversion
under Prospect Theory: A Parameter-Free Measurement,” Management Science, 2007, 53
(10), 1659–1674.
, , and Olivier l’Haridon, “A Tractable Method to Measure Utility and Loss Aversion
under Prospect Theory,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2008, 36 (3), 245.
, Olivier L’Haridon, and Corina Paraschiv, “Experienced vs. Described Uncertainty:
Do We Need Two Prospect Theory Specifications?,” Management Science, 2011, 57 (10),
1879–1895.
Abernethy, Jacob, Theodoros Evgeniou, Olivier Toubia, and Jean-Philippe Vert,
“Eliciting Consumer Preferences Using Robust Adaptive Choice Questionnaires,” IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2008, 20 (2), 145–155.
Aigner, Dennis J., “A Brief Introduction to the Methodology of Optimal Experimental
Design,” Journal of Econometrics, 1979, 11 (1), 7–26.
Allen, Eric J. Patricia M. Dechow, Devin G. Pope, and George Wu, “ReferenceDependent Preferences: Evidence from Marathon Runners,” Management Science, 2016,
63 (6), 1657–1672.
Andersen, Steffen, Glenn W. Harrison, Morten I. Lau, and E.Ẽlisabet Rutström,
“Eliciting Risk and Time Preferences,” Econometrica, 2008, 76 (3), 583–618.
, , Morten I. Lau, and E. Elisabet Rutström, “Lost in State Space: Are Preferences
Stable?,” International Economic Review, 2008, 49 (3), 1091–1112.
, , Morten Igel Lau, and E. Elisabet Rutström, “Elicitation Using Multiple Price
List Formats,” Experimental Economics, 2006, 9 (4), 383–405.
Andersson, Ola, Håkan J. Holm, Jean-Robert Tyran, and Erik Wengström, “Deciding For Others Reduces Loss Aversion,” Management Science, 2016, 62 (1), 29–36.
, , , and , “Risk Aversion Relates to Cognitive Ability: Preferences or Noise?,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 2016, 14 (5), 1129–1154.
Andreoni, James and Charles Sprenger, “Estimating Time Preferences from Convex
Budgets,” The American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (7), 3333–3356.
and , “Risk Preferences Are Not Time Preferences,” The American Economic Review,
2012, 102 (7), 3357–3376.
, Michael Callen, Yasir Khan, Karrar Jaffar, and Charles Sprenger, “Using
Preference Estimates to Customize Incentives: An Application to Polio Vaccination Drives
in Pakistan,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.

References–1

Åstebro, Thomas, José Mata, and Luı́s Santos-Pinto, “Skewness Seeking: Risk Loving, Optimism or Overweighting of Small Probabilities?,” Theory and Decision, 2015, 78
(2), 189–208.
Atlas, Stephen A., Eric J. Johnson, and John W. Payne, “Time Preferences and
Mortgage Choice,” Journal of Marketing Research, 2017, 54 (3), 415–429.
Azrieli, Yaron, Christopher P. Chambers, and Paul J. Healy, “Incentives in Experiments: A Theoretical Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126 (4), 1472–1503.
Barsky, Robert B. F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro,
“Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the
Health and Retirement Study,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (2), 537–
579.
Beattie, Jane and Graham Loomes, “The Impact of Incentives upon Risky Choice
Experiments,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, March 1997, 14 (2), 155–168.
Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler, “Myopic Loss Aversion and the Equity
Premium Puzzle,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1995, 110 (1), 73–92.
Benjamin, Daniel J., Sebastian A. Brown, and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Who Is ‘Behavioral’ ? Cognitive Ability and Anomalous Preferences,” Journal of the European Economic
Association, 2013, 11 (6), 1231–1255.
Berry, James, Greg Fischer, and Raymond P. Guiteras, “Eliciting and Utilizing
Willingness to Pay: Evidence from Field Trials in Northern Ghana,” 2015. University of
Delaware, mimeo.
Bhatia, Sudeep and Russell Golman, “Attention and Reference Dependence,” 2015.
University of Pennsylvania, mimeo.
Booij, Adam S. and Gijs Van de Kuilen, “A Parameter-Free Analysis of the Utility of Money for the General Population under Prospect Theory,” Journal of Economic
Psychology, 2009, 30 (4), 651–666.
, Bernard M.S. Van Praag, and Gijs Van De Kuilen, “A Parametric Analysis of
Prospect Theory’s Functionals for the General Population,” Theory and Decision, 2010,
68 (1-2), 115–148.
Brooks, Peter and Horst Zank, “Loss Averse Behavior,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2005, 31 (3), 301–325.
Burks, Stephen V., Jeffrey P. Carpenter, Lorenz Goette, and Aldo Rustichini,
“Cognitive Skills Affect Economic Preferences, Strategic Behavior, and Job Attachment,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2009, 106 (19), 7745–7750.
Camerer, Colin, Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Richard Thaler, “Labor Supply of New York City Cabdrivers: One Day at a Time,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 1997, 112 (2), 407–441.
References–2

Cavagnaro, Daniel R., Gabriel J. Aranovich, Samuel M. McClure, Mark A. Pitt,
and Jay I. Myung, “On the Functional Form of Temporal Discounting: An Optimized
Adaptive Test,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2016, 52 (3), 233–254.
, Jay I. Myung, Mark A. Pitt, and Janne V. Kujala, “Adaptive Design Optimization: A Mutual Information-Based Approach to Model Discrimination in Cognitive
Science,” Neural Computation, 2010, 22 (4), 887–905.
, Mark A. Pitt, Richard Gonzalez, and Jay I. Myung, “Discriminating Among
Probability Weighting Functions using Adaptive Design Optimization,” Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, 2013, 47 (3), 255–289.
, Richard Gonzalez, Jay I. Myung, and Mark A. Pitt, “Optimal Decision Stimuli
for Risky Choice Experiments: An Adaptive Approach,” Management Science, 2013, 59
(2), 358–375.
Chaloner, Kathryn and Isabella Verdinelli, “Bayesian Experimental Design: A Review,” Statistical Science, 1995, 10 (3), 273–304.
Chang, Alvin, “Four Ways the Lottery Preys on the Poor,” January 2016.
https://www.vox.com/identities/2016/1/13/10763268/lottery-poor-prey.
Chapman, Jonathan, Mark Dean, Pietro Ortoleva, Erik Snowberg, and Colin F.
Camerer, “Willingness to Pay and Willingness to Accept are Probably Less Correlated
Than You Think,” 2017. NBER Working Paper #23954.
,

,

,

, and

, “Econographics,” 2018. NBER Working Paper #24931.

Charness, Gary and Angelino Viceisza, “Comprehension and Risk Elicitation in the
Field: Evidence from Rural Senegal,” 2012. University of California Santa Barbara, mimeo.
, Uri Gneezy, and Brianna Halladay, “Experimental Methods: Pay One or Pay All,”
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2016, 131, 141–150.
Chuang, Yating and Laura Schechter, “Stability of Experimental and Survey Measures
of Risk, Time, and Social Preferences: A Review and Some New Results,” Journal of
Development Economics, 2015, 117, 151–170.
Clay, S.N. A. Harris, and C.L. Reed, “Loss Aversion Affects Inhibitory Processes for
Reward and Loss as Indicated by Inhibition of Return,” in progress.
Clay, Summer N. John A. Clithero, Alison M. Harris, and Catherine L. Reed,
“Loss Aversion Reflects Information Accumulation, Not Bias: A Drift-Diffusion Model
Study,” Frontiers in Psychology, 2017, 8:1708.
Condon, David M. and William Revelle, “The International Cognitive Ability Resource: Development and Initial Validation of a Public-Domain Measure,” Intelligence,
2014, 43, 52–64.

References–3

Cubitt, Robin, Chris Starmer, and Robert Sugden, “On the Validity of the Random
Lottery Incentive System,” Experimental Economics, 1998, 1 (2), 115–131.
Dave, Chetan, Catherine C. Eckel, Cathleen A. Johnson, and Christian Rojas,
“Eliciting Risk Preferences: When is Simple Better?,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
2010, 41 (3), 219–243.
De Martino, Benedetto, Colin F Camerer, and Ralph Adolphs, “Amygdala Damage
Eliminates Monetary Loss Aversion,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
2010, 107 (8), 3788–3792.
Dean, Mark and Anja Sautmann, “Credit Constraints and the Measurement of Time
Preferences,” 2014. Columbia University, mimeo.
DellaVigna, Stefano and M. Daniele Paserman, “Job Search and Impatience,” Journal
of Labor Economics, 2005, 23 (3), 527–588.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, Armin Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, “Are Risk Aversion and Impatience Related to Cognitive Ability?,” The American Economic Review,
2010, 100 (3), 1238–1260.
,
, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, “On the Relationship between Cognitive
Ability and Risk Preference,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2018, 32 (2), 115–34.
Dunn, Lucia F., “Loss Aversion and Adaptation in the Labor Market: Empirical Indifference Functions and Labor Supply,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1996, 78 (3),
441–450.
Eckel, Catherine C. and Philip J. Grossman, “Sex Differences and Statistical Stereotyping in Attitudes toward Financial Risk,” Evolution and Human Behavior, 2002, 23 (4),
281–295.
and , “Men, Women and Risk Aversion: Experimental Evidence,” in Charles R. Plott
and Vernon L. Smith, eds., Handbook of Experimental Economics Results, Vol. 1, NorthHolland, 2008, pp. 1061–1073.
El-Gamal, Mahmoud A. and Thomas R. Palfrey, “Economical Experiments: Bayesian
Efficient Experimental Design,” International Journal of Game Theory, 1996, 25 (4), 495–
517.
El-Gamal, Mahmoud A., Richard D. McKelvey, and Thomas R. Palfrey, “A
Bayesian Sequential Experimental Study of Learning in Games,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 1993, 88 (422), 428–435.
Ert, Eyal and Ido Erev, “On the Descriptive Value of Loss Aversion in Decisions under
Risk: Six Clarifications,” Judgment and Decision Making,, 2013, 8 (3), 214–235.
Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David Huffman,
and Uwe Sunde, “Global Evidence on Economic Preferences,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 2018, p. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjy013.
References–4

Fehr-Duda, Helga and Thomas Epper, “Probability and Risk: Foundations and Economic Implications of Probability-Dependent Risk Preferences,” Annual Review of Economics, 2012, 4 (1), 567–593.
Frederick, Shane, “Cognitive Reflection and Decision Making,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2005, 19 (4), 25–42.
Freeman, David, Yoram Halevy, and Terri Kneeland, “Eliciting Risk Preferences
using Choice Lists,” 2015. University of British Columbia, mimeo.
Frydman, Cary, Colin Camerer, Peter Bossaerts, and Antonio Rangel, “MAOA-L
Carriers are Better at Making Optimal Financial Decisions under Risk,” Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 2011, 278 (1714), 2053–2059.
Gächter, Simon, Eric J. Johnson, and Andreas Herrmann, “Individual-level Loss
Aversion in Riskless and Risky Choices,” 2007. mimeo.
Gillen, Ben, Erik Snowberg, and Leeat Yariv, “Experimenting with Measurement
Error: Techniques and Applications from the Caltech Cohort Study,” Journal of Political
Economy, Forthcoming.
Gneezy, Uri and Jan Potters, “An Experiment on Risk Taking and Evaluation Periods,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (2), 631–645.
Goette, Lorenz, David Huffman, and Ernst. Fehr, “Loss Aversion and Labor Supply,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 2004, 2 (2-3), 216–228.
, Thomas Graeber, Alexandre Kellogg, and Charles Sprenger, “Heterogeneity of
Loss Aversion and Expectations-Based Reference Points,” Working Paper, 2018.
Hardie, Bruce G.S. Eric J. Johnson, and Peter S. Fader, “Modeling Loss Aversion
and Reference Dependence Effects on Brand Choice,” Marketing Science, 1993, 12 (4),
378–394.
Harrison, Glenn W. Morten I. Lau, and E. Elisabet Rutström, “Estimating Risk
Attitudes in Denmark: A Field Experiment,” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
2007, 109 (2), 341–368.
, , and Melonie B. Williams, “Estimating Individual Discount Rates in Denmark:
A Field Experiment,” The American Economic Review, 2002, 92 (5), 1606–1617.
Hey, John and Jinkwon Lee, “Do Subjects Separate (or Are They Sophisticated)?,”
Experimental Economics, September 2005, 8 (3), 233–265.
Holt, Charles A. and Susan K. Laury, “Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects,” The
American Economic Review, 2002, 92 (5), 1644–1655.
Imai, Taisuke and Colin F. Camerer, “Estimating Time Preferences from Budget Set
Choices Using Optimal Adaptive Design,” 2018. Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich,
mimeo.
References–5

Jacobson, Sarah and Ragan Petrie, “Learning from Mistakes: What Do Inconsistent
Choices Over Risk Tell Us?,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2009, 38 (2), 143–158.
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision
under Risk,” Econometrica, 1979, 47 (2), 263–291.
and Dan Lovallo, “Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive Perspective on Risk
Taking,” Management Science, 1993, 39 (1), 17–31.
Karni, Edi and Zvi Safra, “‘Preference Reversal’ and the Observability of Preferences by
Experimental Methods,” Econometrica, 1987, 55 (3), 675–685.
Kirby, Kris N., “One-year Temporal Stability of Delay-Discount Rates,” Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 2009, 16 (3), 457–462.
Kirby, Kris N. Ricardo Godoy, Victoria Reyes-Garcıa, Elizabeth Byron, Lilian Apaza, William Leonard, Eddy Perez, Vincent Vadez, and David Wilkie,
“Correlates of Delay-Discount Rates: Evidence from Tsimane’Amerindians of the Bolivian
Rain Forest,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 2002, 23 (3), 291–316.
Köbberling, Veronika and Peter Wakker, “An Index of Loss Aversion,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 2005, 122, 119–131.
Kornotis, George M. and Alok Kumar, “Cognitive Abilities and Financial Decisions,”
in H. Kent Baker and John Nofsinger, eds., Behavioral Finance, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., 2010.
Kőszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin, “A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (4), 1133–1165.
Krajbich, Ian, Colin Camerer, and Antonio Rangel, “Exploring the Scope of Neurometrically Informed Mechanism Design,” Games and Economic Behavior, 2017, 101,
49–62.
Kujala, Janne V. and Tuomas J. Lukka, “Bayesian Adaptive Estimation: The Next
Dimension,” Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 2006, 50 (4), 369–389.
Kurata, Hiroshi, Hiroshi Izawa, and Makoto Okamura, “Non-Expected Utility Maximizers Behave as if Expected Utility Maximizers: An Experimental Test,” Journal of
Socio-Economics, 2009, 38 (4), 622–629.
Lesmes, Luis Andres, Seong-Taek Jeon, Zhong-Lin Lu, and Barbara Anne
Dosher, “Bayesian Adaptive Estimation of Threshold Versus Contrast External Noise
Functions: The Quick TvC Method,” Vision Research, 2006, 46 (19), 3160–3176.
Levin, Irwin P., Stephanie S. Hart, Joshua A. Weller, and Lyndsay A. Harshman,
“Stability of Choices in a Risky Decision-Making task: A 3-year Longitudinal Study with
Children and Adults,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 2007, 20 (3), 241–252.

References–6

Lewi, Jeremy, Robert Butera, and Liam Paninski, “Sequential Optimal Design of
Neurophysiology Experiments,” Neural Computation, 2009, 21 (3), 619–687.
Lönnqvist, Jan-Erik, Markku Verkasalo, Gari Walkowitz, and Philipp C.
Wichardt, “Measuring Individual Risk Attitudes in the Lab: Task or Ask? An Empirical Comparison,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2015, 119, 254–266.
McFadden, Daniel, “Economic Choices,” The American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (3),
351–378.
Mehra, Rajnish and Edward C. Prescott, “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 1985, 15 (2), 145–161.
Meier, Stephan and Charles D. Sprenger, “Temporal Stability of Time Preferences,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 2015, 97 (2), 273–286.
Moffatt, P., “Optimal Experimental Designs in Models of Decision and Choice,” in
M. Boumans, ed., Measurement in Economics: A Handbook, Elsevier, 2007.
Müller, Peter, Don A. Berry, Andy P. Grieve, Michael Smith, and Michael
Krams, “Simulation-Based Sequential Bayesian Design,” Journal of Statistical Planning
and Inference, 2007, 137 (10), 3140–3150.
O’Donoghue, Ted and Charles Sprenger, “Reference-Dependent Preferences,” in Bernheim B. Douglas, DellaVigna Stefano, and Laibson David, eds., Handbook of Behavioral
Economics: Foundations and Applications, Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2018.
Oechssler, Jörg, Andreas Roider, and Patrick W. Schmitz, “Cognitive Abilities and
Behavioral Biases,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2009, 72, 147–152.
Pachur, Thorsten, Michael Schulte-Mecklenbeck, Ryan O Murphy, and Ralph
Hertwig, “Prospect Theory Reflects Selective Allocation of Attention,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 2018, 147 (2), 147–169.
Paninski, Liam, “Asymptotic Theory of Information-Theoretic Experimental Design,”
Neural Computation, 2005, 17 (7), 1480–1507.
Peirce, Charles S., “Note on the Theory of the Economy of Research,” 1879. United States
Coast Survey for the fiscal year ending June 1876, US Government Printing Office 1879,
reprinted in Operations Research, 1967, vol. XV, 643–648.
Pew Research Center, Evaluating Online Nonprobability Surveys, www.pewresearch.org,
May 2016.
Pope, Devin and Uri Simonsohn, “Round Numbers as Goals: Evidence from Baseball,
SAT Takers, and the Lab,” Psychological Science, 2011, 22 (1), 71–79.
Ray, Debajyoti, Daniel Golovin, Andreas Krause, and Colin Camerer, “Bayesian
Rapid Optimal Adaptive Design (BROAD): Method and Application Distinguishing Models of Risky Choice,” 2012. California Institute of Technology, mimeo.
References–7

Rees-Jones, Alex, “Quantifying Loss-Averse Tax Manipulation,” The Review of Economic
Studies, 2017, 85 (2), 1251–1278.
Ryan, Elizabeth G. Christopher C. Drovandi, James M. McGree, and Anthony N. Pettitt, “A Review of Modern Computational Algorithms for Bayesian Optimal
Design,” International Statistical Review, 2016, 84 (1), 128–154.
Schildberg-Hörisch, Hannah, “Are Risk Preferences Stable?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2018, 32 (2), 135–54.
Schmidt, Ulrich and Stefan Traub, “An Experimental Test of Loss Aversion,” Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty, 2002, 25 (3), 233–249.
Shamosh, Noah A and Jeremy R Gray, “Delay Discounting and Intelligence: A MetaAnalysis,” Intelligence, 2008, 36 (4), 289–305.
Snowberg, Erik and Leeat Yariv, “Testing the Waters: Behavior across Subject Pools,”
2018. NBER Working Paper #24781.
Sokol-Hessner, Peter, Ming Hsu, Nina G. Curley, Mauricio R. Delgado, Colin F
Camerer, and Elizabeth A. Phelps, “Thinking Like a Trader Selectively Reduces
Individuals’ Loss Aversion,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2009, 106
(13), 5035–5040.
, Sandra F. Lackovic, Russell H. Tobe, Colin F. Camerer, Bennett L. Leventhal, and Elizabeth A. Phelps, “Determinants of Propranolols Selective Effect on Loss
Aversion,” Psychological Science, 2015, 26 (7), 1123–1130.
Sprenger, Charles, “An Endowment Effect for Risk: Experimental Tests of Stochastic
Reference Points,” Journal of Political Economy, 2015, 123 (6), 1456–1499.
Tanaka, Tomomi, Colin F Camerer, and Quang Nguyen, “Risk and Time Preferences: Linking Experimental and Household Survey Data from Vietnam,” The American
Economic Review, 2010, 100 (1), 557–71.
Tom, Sabrina M. Craig R. Fox, Christopher Trepel, and Russell A. Poldrack,
“The Neural Basis of Loss Aversion in Decision-Making under Risk,” Science, 2007, 315
(5811), 515–518.
Toubia, Olivier, Eric Johnson, Theodoros Evgeniou, and Philippe Delquié, “Dynamic Experiments for Estimating Preferences: An Adaptive Method of Eliciting Time
and Risk Parameters,” Management Science, 2013, 59 (3), 613–640.
, John R. Hauser, and Duncan I. Simester, “Polyhedral Methods for Adaptive
Choice-Based Conjoint Analysis,” Journal of Marketing Research, 2004, 41 (1), 116–131.
Tovar, Patricia, “The Effects of Loss Aversion on Trade Policy: Theory and Evidence,”
Journal of International Economics, 2009, 78 (1), 154–167.

References–8

Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, “Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative
Representation of Uncertainty,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1992, 5 (4), 297–323.
Urminsky, Oleg and Gal Zauberman, “The Psychology of Intertemporal Preferences,”
in Gideon Keren and George Wu (Editor), eds., Handbook of Judgment and Decision
Making, Vol. 2, Wiley-Blackwell, 2016, pp. 141–181.
von Gaudecker, Hans-Martin, Arthur Van Soest, and Erik Wengström, “Heterogeneity in Risky Choice Behavior in a Broad Population,” The American Economic
Review, 2011, 101 (2), 664–694.
Wakker, Peter P., Prospect Theory: For Risk and Ambiguity, Cambridge University Press,
2010.
Walasek, Lukasz and Neil Stewart, “How to make Loss Aversion Disappear and Reverse:
Tests of the Decision by Sampling Origin of Loss Aversion.,” Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 2015, 144 (1), 7–11.
, Timothy L. Mullett, and Stewart Neil., “A Meta-Analysis of Loss Aversion in
Risky Contexts,” in progress. mimeo.
Wald, Abraham, Statistical Decision Functions, John Wiley and Sons, New York; Chapman and Hall, London., 1950.
Wang, Stephanie W. Michelle Filiba, and Colin F. Camerer, “Dynamically Optimized Sequential Experimentation (DOSE) for Estimating Economic Preference Parameters,” 2010. mimeo.
Wölbert, Eva and Arno Riedl, “Measuring Time and Risk Preferences: Reliability,
Stability, Domain Specificity,” 2013. CESifo Working Paper Series No. 4339.
Yacubian, Juliana, Jan Gläscher, Katrin Schroeder, Tobias Sommer, Dieter F
Braus, and Christian Büchel, “Dissociable Systems for Gain- and Loss-Related Value
Predictions and Errors of Prediction in the Human Brain,” Journal of Neuroscience, 2006,
26 (37), 9530–9537.
Yechiam, Eldad, “Acceptable Losses: The Debatable Origins of Loss Aversion,” Psychological Research, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00426-018-1013-8.
and Guy Hochman, “Losses as Modulators of Attention: Review and Analysis of the
Unique Effects of Losses over Gains,” Psychological Bulletin, 2013, 139 (2), 497–518.

References–9

