NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INNOVATION, KNOWLEDGE DIFFUSION, AND GLOBALIZATION
Nelson Lind
Natalia Ramondo
Working Paper 25071
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25071

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Nelson Lind and Natalia Ramondo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Innovation, Knowledge Diffusion, and Globalization
Nelson Lind and Natalia Ramondo
NBER Working Paper No. 25071
September 2018
JEL No. F1,O4
ABSTRACT
We review a recent body of theoretical literature that links the creation and diffusion of
knowledge and technology to openness. We analyze two channels through which the spread of
new ideas occurs: international trade and the activity of multinational firms (multinational
production). The unifying theme of our survey is methodological. We focus on quantitative
general equilibrium models that treat productivities as Fréchet random variables—as in the model
of trade in Eaton and Kortum (2002) (EK). We present models in the literature that extend the EK
model of trade to innovation, diffusion, and multinational firms, and examine the implications for
counterfactuals related to the gains from trade. We finalize with new directions for research.

Nelson Lind
Department of Economics
Emory University
1602 Fishburne Drive
Rich Bldg., 3rd Floor
Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
nlind@emory.edu
Natalia Ramondo
School of Int'l Relations and Pacific Studies
University of California at San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0519
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
nramondo@ucsd.edu

1

Introduction

A classic question in international economics has always been if—and how—openness
increases the wealth of nations. A large part of the literature seeks to establish an empirical link between income and openness, while, simultaneously, a growing theoretical
literature explores mechanisms through which openness increases income.
In this paper, we review the literature on quantitative general equilibrium models, spurred
by Eaton and Kortum (2002) (EK), that link innovation and knowledge diffusion to international trade and the activity of multinational firms—what we call multinational production. In this context, globalization is broadly understood as openness to international
trade, to MP, and to foreign ideas.
The unifying theme of our review is methodological. All the models reviewed are models
that treat productivity as random draws from a Fréchet distribution. This treatment of
productivities has been the transformative contribution of EK.
Given this organizing methodology, it is natural to start by analyzing growth models
of innovation that generate Fréchet production possibilities frontiers. We present extensions of the EK model of trade that incorporate technology innovation through semiendogenous growth models (as in Jones, 1995; Kortum, 1997; Jones, 2005), and international technology diffusion (as in Eaton and Kortum, 2001, 1999). We review EK-type
models in which trade is the channel for international diffusion and together they shape
the gains from openness, as in Buera and Oberfield (2016). We then present extensions
of the EK model of trade in which the channel for international technology diffusion is
multinational production (MP), as introduced by Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare (2013).
Finally, we review recent research by Lind and Ramondo (2018) that generalizes the EK
model of trade to capture spatial correlation of technologies. Their generalization encompasses most of the EK extensions in the literature and links to the innovation and diffusion
models that generate Fréchet technology frontiers.
Different theories have been (fully and partially) motivated by the empirical evidence on
international technology diffusion, and the role of international trade and MP as channels

1

for technology transfer across countries. Most of the studies focus on outcomes such as
productivity and income in receiving countries.
First, a large literature documents the link between growth and openness to trade. Crosscountry evidence suggests that more open economies have higher income levels and also
they grow faster. Early evidence by Sachs and Warner (1995) shows that a group of eight
always-open economies have consistently higher growth rates in the period 1965-1990
than forty always-closed economies.1 More recently, Alcala and Ciccone (2004) take into
account the endogeneity of trade openness and estimate that the elasticity of productivity
with respect to real openness is around 1.2, after controlling for quality of institutions,
country size, and geography.2 More recent studies try to establish a causal link between
openness and growth by appealing to natural experiments. In that regard, Feyrer (2009)
uses the closure of the Suez Canal during the six-day war to establish the effect of distance on trade flows and of trade on income. Effects are large: A ten-percent decrease
in ocean distance results in a five-percent increase in trade, and one more dollar of trade
increases income by about 25 cents. Finally, a large set of papers, such as Pavcnik (2002),
uses detailed firm-level data to document the effects of trade liberalization on industry
productivity and turnover (see Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare, 2010, for a survey).
Second, a similarly large empirical literature documents how openness to foreign firms
impacts receiving countries (see Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare, 2010; Keller, 2010; Antrás
and Yeaple, 2014, for surveys). The basic premise is that MP is a channel through which
new technology diffuses to firms in developing countries. The primary focus, as for trade
flows, has been on the effect of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) on the productivity of
the receiving industries and domestic firms. Using firm-level data, the typical empirical
tests revolve around measuring: the advantage of multinational firms, relative to domestic firms, in terms of firm outcomes such as productivity and revenues; and whether more
exposure to foreign presence increases the productivity of domestic firms (“spillover”).3
1

See also early work by Ades and Glaeser (1999), Frankel and Romer (1999), and Alesina et al. (2000)
that find a significant effect of trade on productivity. See Donaldson (2015) for a survey.
2
Real openness is measured as imports plus exports in exchange rate US dollars relative to GDP in
purchasing power parity US dollars. Alcala and Ciccone (2004) argue that this is the correct measure of
openness to be used.
3
Ramondo (2009) and Alfaro and Chen (2018) also document the effects of foreign entry on the productivity distribution of the receiving industry through turnover of domestic firms—i.e., exit and entry.

2

The firm-level evidence robustly finds that multinational firms perform better in several
dimension than domestic firms. This result provides support to the hypothesis that multinational firms not only have better technologies, but they transfer them to their affiliates
abroad, constituting a direct positive effect on the receiving industry. In contrast, the evidence on spillovers is mixed; robust findings are mostly related to vertical, not horizontal,
linkages with domestic firms (see Javorcik, 2004).
Finally, the gains from globalization can materialize through direct international technology diffusion, allowing domestic firms to use foreign technologies. This flow is difficult
to measure. As noticed by Ramondo et al. (2016), "except for the small part that happens
through licensing, technology diffusion does not leave a paper trail that can be used to directly measure the value of production done in a country by domestic firms using foreign
technologies." Some indirect evidence shows that international technology diffusion is responsible for most of the productivity growth in OECD countries, except for the United
States (see Eaton and Kortum, 1996, 1999; Keller, 2004). Comin and Hobijn (2004) undertake a more direct effort to measure international technology diffusion and adoption
patterns across countries and their link with income convergence. They build an impressive dataset that spans two centuries, covers as many as 166 countries—starting with
23 industrialized economies—and between 15 and 20 technologies belonging to textile
production, steel manufacture, communications, information technology, transportation,
and electricity. In this and subsequent papers (Comin and Hobijn, 2010; Comin et al.,
2013; Comin and Mestieri, 2018), the authors document the characteristics and extent of
international diffusion and adoption. The salient facts are: Most technologies originate in
advanced economies, get adopted there first, and, subsequently, diffuse to countries that
lag economically; newer technologies get adopted faster than older technologies; adoption rates are very heterogeneous across countries, even though adoption lags between
rich and poor countries are narrower than in the past; differences in adoption rates account for at least 25 percent of per capita income differences; the degree of openness to
trade is among the most important determinants of the speed of adoption; and finally,
technology diffusion follows a spatial pattern with nearby countries experiencing higher
They find that multinational entry increases the exit probability of domestic firms, but also increases the
productivity of entrants.

3

adoption rates of each other’s technology.

2

The Ricardian Model of Trade

We now present the workhorse model of trade introduced by Eaton and Kortum (2002)
(EK). Consider a global economy consisting of N countries. Countries produce and trade
in a continuum of product varieties v ∈ [0, 1]. Consumers in all countries have identical
constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES) preferences with elasticity of substitution σ > 0:
R
σ/(σ−1)
1
(σ−1)/σ
Cd =
C
(v)
dv
. Expenditure by destination d on variety v is Xd (v) ≡
d
0
Pd (v)Cd (v) = (Pd (v)/Pd )1−σ Xd where Pd (v) is the cost of the variety in terms of numeraire,
1
R
 1−σ
1
Pd = 0 Pd (v)1−σ dv
is the price level in country d, and Xd = Pd Cd is the country’s
total expenditure.
We assume that the production function for varieties presents constant returns to scale
in labor and depends on the origin country o where the good gets produced. For each
v ∈ [0, 1], output Yo (v) satisfies
Yo (v) = Ao (v)Lo (v),

(1)

where Lo (v) is the amount of labor used to produce variety v at origin o and Ao (v) is the
marginal product of labor—referred as productivity.
Suppose that to ship goods from country o to d there is an iceberg-type cost τod ≥ 1: Firms
from o need to ship τod units of the good for one unit to arrive to d. Additionally, the usual
triangular inequality is satisfied, for any o, d, and n, τon τnd > τod , and trade is frictionless
within a country, τdd = 1.
The marginal cost to deliver good v to destination d from origin o is then
cod (v) = τod

Wo
,
Ao (v)

(2)

where Wo is the nominal wage in country o. As in the original model, we assume perfect
competition so that prices are equal to unit costs, Pod (v) = cod (v). Good v is provided to

4

country d by the cheapest supplier,
Pd (v) = min τod
o=1,...,N

Wo
.
Ao (v)

(3)

Heterogeneity in production possibilities is captured by modeling productivity Ao (v) as
a random draw. EK assume that productivity is a Fréchet random variable, independent
both across the continuum of goods and across exporters. The joint distribution of productivity across countries is
Y

P[A1 (v) ≤ a1 , . . . , Ao (v) ≤ aN ] =

P[Ao (v) ≤ ao ] = exp −

N
X

!
To a−θ
o

,

(4)

o=1

o=1,...,N

where To > 0 is the scale parameter for origin o and θ > 0 is a common shape parameter. A higher scale parameter To means that a country has on average better productivity
draws (i.e., larger T ’s increases the probability of larger values of Ao (v)), capturing aggregate productivity of country o (i.e., its absolute advantage). A higher shape parameter
θ means less heterogeneity in productivity draws across the continuum of goods (within
each origin), whereby capturing relative productivities differences (i.e., comparative advantage).
Under independent Fréchet with a common shape parameter, tractability is achieved
thanks to a property known as max stability: The Fréchet distribution is preserved under the maximum operator,

P


max Ao (v) ≤ a =

o=1,...,N

"
Y

P[Ao (v) ≤ a] = exp −

N
X

!
To

#
a−θ .

(5)

o=1

o=1,...,N

This max-stability property is key for deriving equilibrium prices and bilateral trade
shares in closed form.
In particular, the joint distribution of productivity determines the joint distribution of
potential import prices. Using (2), the distribution of potential import prices into a desti-

5

nation country d is given by
P[P1d (v) ≤ p1 , . . . , PN d (v) ≤ pN ] =

Y

P[Pod (v) ≤ po ] =

o=1,...,N

Y 

1 − exp −φod pθo ,
(6)
o=1,...,N

where φod ≡ To (τod Wo )−θ . For each origin o, the marginal distribution of prices, P[Pod (v) ≤


p] = 1 − exp −φod pθ , is a Weibull distribution with scale parameter φod and shape parameter θ.
Using (6), we derive the distribution of prices actually paid by consumers in d,
h

i

h
i
0
P min
P (v) ≤ p = 1 − P min
Po d (v) > p = 1 −
0
0
o

o0 d

o

Y



exp φod pθ = 1 − exp −Φd pθ .

o=1,...,N

(7)
The scale is Φd ≡

P

o

φod and the shape is θ. The shape parameter indicates the price

dispersion across the continuum of goods, while the scale summarizes the overall level
of prices in the destination market. This variable indicates how easy it is to access market
d because it determines the overall price index in the destination market.
Using (7), the CES price index in country d is calculated as the following expected value

Pd = E

where γ ≡ Γ

θ+1−σ
θ

1
 1−σ

1−σ

min Pod (v)

o=1,...,N

1
 1−σ

−1

(8)

= γΦd θ ,

and Γ(·) is the Gamma function. This expression tells us that:

Countries that are easy to access (i.e., lower Φd ) have lower prices on average; in autarky
−1

(i.e., τod = ∞ for all o 6= d), prices are the highest and equal to Pd = γAd θ Wd ; and in a
frictionless world (i.e., τod = 1, for all o, d), the law of price holds with Φd = Φ, for all d.
Given the distribution of prices, we can also solve for the fraction of goods that destination d imports from source o. Because draws across goods are i.i.d. and there is a
continuum of goods, by the law of large numbers, the fraction of goods imported from o
into d is equal to the probability that country o is the lowest-cost producer of good v to
destination d,


T (τ W )−θ
P o od o
0 d (v)
≡ P Pod (v) ≤ min
P
=
.
o
−θ
o0 6=o
o0 To0 (τo0 d Wo0 )


πod

6

(9)

The lower bilateral trade costs τod , and the higher source productivity To , relative to all
other sources, the larger the fraction of goods that country o imports into d.
The probability in (9) coincides with the share of expenditure of d on goods from o due to a
key feature of the EK model: The distribution of prices among goods sold in a destination
is equal to the distribution of prices among goods sold by any source to the destination.
This result is a consequence of the max-stability property of the θ-Fréchet distribution
which implies that the conditional and unconditional distribution of the maximum (minimum) are identical. This translates into identical distribution of prices in d unconditional
and conditional on a source o being the lowest-cost producer for d,

P






min Po0 d (v) ≤ p = P Pod (v) ≤ p | Pod (v) = 0 min Po0 d (v) .
0

o =1,...,N

o =1,...,N

Intuitively, origins with better comparative advantage (i.e., lower trade costs, better productivity, or lower labor costs) in serving d sell more goods to d exactly to the point where
the distribution of prices of their goods sold to d is the same as the overall price distribution in d.
Because the conditional and unconditional maximum distributions coincide, the share of
total expenditure in country d devoted to goods from country o is equal to the fraction of goods
imported from o into d,
Xod = πod Xd .

(10)

Intuitively, the distribution of prices across goods imported into country d are the same
regardless of their source, so it is only the probability of being the lowest cost source that
matters.
Combining (9) with (10), we see that expenditure is a CES import demand system with
elasticity of substitution θ. As a result, in the words of Arkolakis et al. (2012), it constitutes
a gravity system since it can be expressed as a log-linear function of two set of country
effects and a bilateral term,
ln Xod = So + Dd − θ ln τod ,

7

(11)

where So ≡ ln To Wo−θ and Dd = ln Xd γPdθ .
Finally, as shown in Arkolakis et al. (2008) and Arkolakis et al. (2012), the real wage in
country d can be written as
Wd
1/θ
−1/θ
= γ −1 × Td × πdd .
Pd

(12)

We refer to the share of goods that a country imports 1 − πdd as its openness. This equation
states that real per-capita income for a country is given by its degree of openness and by
its average productivity level. The influence of both openness and average productivity
on welfare is governed by the same parameter, θ.
In autarky, the real wage is simply
Wdaut
1/θ
= γ −1 Td ,
Pdaut

(13)

so that the gains from trade for country d, defined as the change in real wages from autarky to the actual equilibrium is
−1/θ

GTd = πdd .

(14)

The gains from trade are positively related to the degree of openness.
Further assuming, as in Ramondo et al. (2016), that average productivity in a country is
proportional to the country’s size yields
To = ro Lo .

(15)

This expression, together with (12) and (14), makes clear that the forces that shape the
gains from trade in EK-type trade models—and more generally, in the class of CES models studied in ACR—are the same forces that shape the aggregate scale effects present in
closed-economy semi-endogenous growth models (Jones, 1995; Kortum, 1997). Conditional on openness, average real income levels increase in country size with an elasticity
of 1/θ.
The parameter θ is key in several dimension: it captures the degree of productivity dispersion across goods, equals the elasticity of trade expenditure to trade costs, and determines

8

both the sensitivity of the gains from trade to openness and of income to scale effects. For
instance, a lower θ indicates more heterogeneity, stronger comparative advantage forces,
and stronger effects of size and openness, respectively, on income.
The expression in (15) links a larger population to the scale parameter of the Fréchet
distribution. The strength of the link between income and the creation of (non-rival)
ideas is regulated by the shape parameter of the Fréchet distribution. Next, we turn to
innovation and diffusion models that generate production possibility frontiers that are
Fréchet.

3

Innovation and Diffusion in the Ricardian Model of Trade

In this section, we review the literature that adds knowledge creation and diffusion to
the EK model of trade. First, we show how the literature has gone about generating
production possibility frontiers that are Fréchet, following the work by Kortum (1997).
Second, we present an EK-type model of trade based on Buera and Oberfield (2016) in
which international diffusion of knowledge occurs through trade. Finally, we present the
extension of the EK model of trade to multinational production (MP) in Ramondo and
Rodríguez-Clare (2013) in which diffusion of knowledge occurs through the activities of
multinational firms.

3.1

Fréchet as a result of innovation

We showed in the previous section that, due to the max-stability property, the Fréchet
distribution is the “right” distribution to solve Ricardian-type models in closed form.
This is because the key feature of these models is a head-to-head comparison of unit
costs across producers of the same good for destination market d. But what economic
justification underlies the Fréchet assumption?
The basic idea was introduced in Kortum (1997). He shows that if the production technology is determined by the best “idea”, or blueprint, and if ideas become available according to a Poisson process, then after a sufficiently long period of time productivity can
9

be approximated by an extreme value distribution.4
For illustration purposes, suppose that the number of ideas available for producing a
good is k. Assume that the productivity of each idea is drawn i.i.d. from a distribution
H(a) = P[Ai ≤ a], which we refer to as the exogenous distribution of ideas. Consider the
productivity of the most efficient idea: A∗k = max{A1 , . . . , Ak }. Then the distribution of
the maximum is P[A∗k ≤ a] = H(a)k . By standard results from extreme value theory
(de Haan and Ferreira, 2006), if a limiting normalized distribution exists as k → ∞, it
must be an extreme value distribution: Gumbel, Fréchet, or Weibull.
One important insight from Kortum (1997) is that the limiting distribution remains within
the extreme value family if the number of ideas available is itself a Poisson random variable K with average number of innovations T —so that P[K = k] =

e−T T k
.
k!

In this case,

the productivity distribution of the best idea has a closed form,
P[A∗K

< a] =

∞
X

P[K =

k]P[A∗K

≤ a | K = k] =

k=0

∞
X
e−T T k
k=0

k!

H(a)k = e−T [1−H(a)] .

The productivity distribution across adopted innovations reflects the average number of
innovations, T , and the distribution of productivity across all innovations. The results
in Kortum (1997) arise because, as the scale parameter of the Poisson process gets large,
most goods have many innovations and the distribution converges to an extreme value
distribution. The specific limiting distribution depends on the properties of the innovation distribution, H. For example, a Fréchet distribution arises if the distribution of
productivity across innovations has a Pareto right tail, as specified in Assumption 1.
Assumption 1 (Pareto-Tailed Exogenous Distribution of Ideas). There exists θ > 0 such that
lim

a→∞

1 − H(a)
= 1.
a−θ

Under this assumption, for sufficiently large T , the productivity distribution is approxi4

There is a relatively large literature that models innovation and diffusion of technologies as stochastic
processes in closed economy setups, starting by the early work of Jovanovic and McDonald (1994) and
Jovanovic and Rob (1989), followed by Eeckhout and Jovanovic (2002), Alvarez et al. (2008), Lucas (2009),
Luttmer (2012), Lucas and Moll (2014), Perla and Tonetti (2014), and Benhabib et al. (2017), among others.

10

mately Fréchet, as in (4),
lim P[A∗K < T 1/θ z] = lim e−T [1−H(T

T →∞

T →∞

1/θ z)]

= lim e−z

−θ 1−H(a)
a−θ

a→∞

−θ

= e−z .

This result links EK-type models of trade to models of innovation.
For example, Eaton and Kortum (2001) develop a model of trade based on this result for
the special case of Pareto innovations: H(a) = 1 − a−θ , for a ≥ 1. Researchers in country
o draws ideas independently across countries at a Poisson rate ro with ideas distributed
uniformly across goods. The distribution of innovations across varieties is then independent across countries and Poisson with the average number of innovations determined
Rt
by accumulated research, Tot = ro 0 Lo (s)ds. Applying the previous result, if Tot → ∞
as t → ∞, the distribution of productivity within each country is asymptotically Fréchet
and independent across countries.5
Building on the idea in Kortum (1997) for a closed economy, Eaton and Kortum (1999)
present a model in which ideas diffuse across countries and in each country the distribution of productivities is Fréchet. In this model, however, the international diffusion of
ideas occurs at exogenous rates, and countries are otherwise in autarky. That is, international trade is not a channel through which ideas get diffused, or diffusion accelerates;
international trade and international diffusion are substitutes.6

3.2

Diffusion through trade

As documented by Comin et al. (2013), international diffusion, however, follows a spatial
pattern that may be linked to trade and other international flows such as the activity
of multinational firms (as implied by the empirical exercises in Keller and Yeaple, 2013;
Irarrazabal et al., 2013). In this spirit, there is a set of papers that propose models in which
trade shapes the ideas to which people are exposed (see Alvarez et al., 2014; Perla et al.,
5

A sufficient condition for Tot → ∞ as t → ∞ is that Lo (t) ≥ Lo > 0, for all t.
In the same spirit, Rodríguez-Clare (2007) incorporates diffusion into the EK model of trade. As in
Eaton and Kortum (1999), trade and diffusion are substitutes and any complementarity between them is
ruled out. A similar approach is taken in Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare (2010) who further enlarge the
model in Rodríguez-Clare (2007) to also incorporate MP in ways explained below.
6

11

2015; Sampson, 2016).
We focus here in a recent paper by Buera and Oberfield (2016) which incorporates innovation and international diffusion into an EK-type model, but, crucially, international
diffusion happens because of international trade.7 Their model belongs to the class of
models that generate a Fréchet production possibility frontier for each country. Moreover, the model delivers a simple system of differential equations for the evolution of the
country’s stock of knowledge—the scale parameters of the Fréchet distributions.
Assume that for each good there are M competitive firms within each country.8 For each
firm m, and time t, the production function for good v is the same as in (1) and marginal
cost is the same as in (2). Perfect competition implies that in each country o the firm with
the lowest marginal cost produces good v. The frontier of knowledge in o for producing v is
then given by the productivity of the most efficient firm, Aot (v) ≡ maxm=1,...,M Amot (v).
Provided that Amot (v) is independent across m within o, the frontier distribution of productivity is
F̃ot (a) = P[Amot (v) ≤ a]M .
This distribution is the result of taking the maximum of i.i.d. random variables. As we
explained in Section 3.1, if the distribution converges as M → ∞ (with an appropriate
normalization), then it must converge to an extreme value distribution.
Assume that firms within origin o draw insights independently at a Poisson rate rot . These
insights may come from firms worldwide. The distribution of productivity from which
ideas are drawn, the source distribution, is F̃ot∗ (a). To start, we take this distribution as
exogenous. When an idea arrives to a firm, it has productivity z(a0 )β . The component a0
is drawn from the source distribution and captures learning from others. The parameter
β controls the degree of diminishing returns in the adoption of ideas. The component
z is drawn from a time-invariant distribution H, the exogenous distribution of ideas, and
7
Recent examples of models of innovation in open economies are Atkeson and Burstein (2010), which
use a Melitz dynamic model with an entry stage augmented by a stochastic innovation process, and Somale
(2018), who extends the static trade model in Bernard et al. (2003) to a multi-sector semi-endogenous growth
model in which innovation efforts can be directed to specific industries.
8
Buera and Oberfield (2016) assume Bertrand competition among firms. For simplicity, we assume
perfect competition and end up with the same aggregate implications.

12

represents randomness in adapting the idea.
A firm with original productivity a adopts the idea if it increases its productivity, z(a0 )β >
a. As a result, for a small time increment ∆ > 0,


Z

P[Am,o,t+∆ (v) ≤ a] = P[Amot (v) ≤ a] (1 − rot ∆) + rot ∆

∞

H(a/x

β

)dF̃ot∗ (x)


,

0

so that the frontier distribution evolves as
P[Am,o,t+∆ (v) ≤ a] − P[Amot (v) ≤ a]
∂
∂
ln F̃ot (a) = M ln P[Amot (v) ≤ a] = M lim
∆→0
∂t
∂t
∆P[Amot (v) ≤ a]
Z ∞
[1 − H(a/xβ )]dF̃ot∗ (x).
= −M rot
0

The evolution of the frontier distribution in any given origin depends on the rate at which
ideas diffuse to firms and the source distribution from which firms draw ideas.
We get a Fréchet frontier distribution for productivity in each origin by considering the
limiting case of this economy as M → ∞. We need the two following assumptions in
addition to Assumption 1.
Assumption 2 (Diminishing Returns to Learning). β ∈ [0, 1).
Assumption 3 (Thin-Tail Source Distribution). At each t, lima→∞ aβθ [1 − F̃ot∗ (a)] = 0.
The assumption of diminishing returns implies that the model generates semi-endogenous
growth. The second assumption is a regularity assumption that ensures that growth in
the frontier distribution of productivity remains finite at each point in time.9 Later, when
the source distribution is endogenized, we replace Assumption 3 with an analogous restriction on the initial frontier distribution in each country.
Similar to the approach in Section 3.1, we scale the frontier distribution of productivity
h
i
1
1
1
by M (1−β)θ , and define Fot (a) ≡ P M − (1−β)θ Aot (v) ≤ a = F̃ot (M (1−β)θ a), and Fot∗ (a) ≡
1

F̃ot∗ (M (1−β)θ a). Changing variables yields
∂
ln Fot (a) = −rot a−θ
∂t
9

Z
0

∞




1 − H(M 1/θ axβ ) βθ ∗
x dFot (x).
(M 1/θ ax−β )−θ

For example, a bounded distribution would satisfy Assumption 3.

13

As M → ∞, due to the dominated convergence theorem, the limiting case is given by
∂
ln Fot (a) = −rot a−θ
∂t

Z

∞

xβθ dFot∗ (x).

0

For any fixed a and initial Fo0 (a), this equation is a differential equation with solution
Fot (a) = Fo0 (a)e

−(Tot −To0 )a−θ

Z
where

t

Z

Tot ≡

ros
−∞

∞
∗
xβθ dFos
(x)ds.

0

One can immediately see that if the initial knowledge frontier is Fréchet with scale To0 and
−θ

shape θ, then the distribution at t is also Fréchet with the same shape, Fot (a) = e−Tot a .
Additionally, the evolution of the scale parameter Tot reflects the Poisson rate at which
ideas diffuse into country o and the source distribution of productivity from which ideas
are drawn,
Z

∂
Tot = rot
∂t

∞

xβθ dFot∗ (x).

(16)

0

This model of knowledge diffusion implies that at any point in time productivity is distributed independently Fréchet across countries with a common shape parameter. As a
result, the static trade theory is identical to the EK model of trade in Section 2.
To examine the implications of the static trade equilibrium for the dynamics of knowledge
diffusion, we next endogenize the source distribution of productivity. We focus on a
specification in which domestic firms can learn—and adapt ideas—from those firms in
the global economy which sell goods in o.10 The source distribution of productivity in
country o is given by
F̃ot∗ (a)

=

N Z
X
o0 =1

dv,

(17)

{v∈Vo0 ot |Ao0 t (v)≤a}

where Vo0 ot is the set of varieties produced in o0 and sold in o at time t. International trade
matters for the evolution of the frontier productivity distribution because access to new
ideas depends on which firms sell in the domestic market.
Given the endogeneity of the source distribution, Assumption 3 has to be replaced by the
following condition on the initial frontier of knowledge in each country.
10

This assumption is as in Alvarez et al. (2014).

14

Assumption 4 (Thin-Tail Initial Distribution). ∀o = 1, . . . , N , lima→∞ aβθ [1 − F̃o0 (a)] = 0.
Buera and Oberfield (2016) show that, in the case of an endogenous source distribution
as in (17), Assumption 3 is the result of this assumption on the initial distribution, and
hence, the results derived for an exogenous source distribution go through. In particular,
the law of motion for the scale parameter Tot in (16) specializes to
N
X
∂
Tot = Γ(1 − β) × rot ×
πo0 ot To0 t × πo−β
0 ot ,
∂t
o0 =1

where Γ(·) is the Gamma function. Aggregate productivity growth in country o depends
on the exogenous rate at which domestic firms draw ideas, rot , as well as an expenditureweighted average of the productivity of each of its trading partners. Trade influences
the diffusion of knowledge through two channels. The first channel is captured by the
term πo0 ot To0 t : International competition increases productivity growth because trade allows for more productive foreign firms to sell in the domestic market. When a country
lowers its trade barriers, low-productivity domestic producers lose market share to highproductivity foreign producers. As a result, freer trade improves the average productivity
of the set of firms selling in the domestic market, which means faster learning and higher
growth. The second channel, captured by the term πo−β
0 ot , is an offsetting selection effect:
with low trade barriers, many low productivity foreign firms can compete in the domestic
market. As trade barriers on foreign country o0 fall, the expenditure share πo0 ot increases
and selection toward low-productivity foreign firms dampens learning and growth.
An important implication of these two offsetting effects is that growth is not necessarily
maximized at free trade. Rather, growth is maximized when trade is biased towards those
foreign countries with better technology than the domestic country. Buera and Oberfield
(2016) show that this maximum is achieved by choosing relative trade barriers proportional to wage differences across trading partners. Intuitively, average productivity is
high among firms in countries with high wages. Hence, tilting trade barriers to increase
trade with high wage countries will lead to more rapid diffusion of knowledge and higher
growth.
What are the gains from trade after accounting for trade-induced knowledge diffusion?
15

Since the import demand system is CES, the results of Arkolakis et al. (2012) apply: A
country’s real wage, at each time t, is given by the expression in (12), and the static gains
from trade (holding fixed Tot ) are as in (24).11
To gain intuition for the dynamic gains from trade, we consider the case of a symmetric world economy with cross-country trade barriers τ ≥ 1 and within country trade
barriers equal to one. In this case, each country’s self-trade share is constant, πD =
(1 + (N − 1)τ −θ )−1 , and the import trade share with each partner is πF = (1 − πD )/(N − 1).
Additionally, in order to incorporate exogenous growth of the global economy, assume
γ

that the arrival rate of ideas grows over time at rate γ. Let T̂t ≡ T0 e− 1−β t denote deγ

trended productivity and, analogously, r̂t ≡ rt e− 1−β t . On a balanced growth path—i.e.,
constant r̂t —the evolution over time of aggregate (de-trended) productivity is given by
∂
1−β
T̂t = γ̃ 1−β × r̂t × N × πD
× T̂tβ
∂t

,

γ̃ > 0, 12

which implies that along a balanced growth path aggregate (de-trended) productivity is
constant,
T̂ = γ̃ × r̂

1
1−β

i 1
h
1−β
1−β 1−β
× πD + (N − 1)πF
.

The dynamic gains from trade, which incorporate the difference in productivity relative
to autarky along a balanced-growth path (BGP), are then
1
h
i θ(1−β)
−1
1−β
GT BGP = πD θ × πD
+ (N − 1)πF1−β
.13

While the first term represents the static gains from trade, as in Arkolakis et al. (2012),
the second term captures the dynamic effect of knowledge diffusion and learning. When
there is no learning (β = 0), the model collapses to EK, and the dynamic gains from trade
coincide with the static gains from trade. For β > 0, the increase in aggregate productivity
depends on the degree of openness of the economy: As a country opens up to trade, it
gains opportunities to learn from foreign firms and the productivity of their domestic
11

The counterfactual here is one in which a country has a current self-trade share of πddt = πdd and
moves to autarky for a single moment.
1/(1−β)
12
γ̃ ≡ [(1 − β)Γ(1 − β)/γ]
.
13
These are the gains from trade coming from a unilateral move to autarky.

16

firms increases. As the force of diminishing returns in learning weakens (β increases), the
effect is magnified, and the dynamic part of the gains from trade becomes more and more
important.
Buera and Oberfield (2016) consider an alternative way of endogenizing the source distribution of productivity: Domestic firms learn from other domestic producers rather than
from world-wide sellers.14 In this case, the source distribution of productivity in country
o is specified as
R
F̃ot∗ (a) =

v∈Voot |Aot (v)≤a

R
v∈Voot

dv

dv

,

(18)

where Voot is the set of varieties produced and sold in o at time t. Following the derivations in Buera and Oberfield (2016) and specializing (16) to the source distribution in (18)
delivers
∂
−β
Tot = Γ(1 − β) × rot × Totβ × πoo
.
∂t
Trade increases a country’s stock of knowledge because as a country opens up to trade,
unproductive technologies are selected out and more productive domestic producers survive. This raises the average quality of idea draws and increases the growth rate of the
stock of knowledge.
As in the case in which learning occurs through global sellers, the dynamic gains from
trade consider not only the static gains from trade but also the gains coming from the
changes in the stock of knowledge due to diffusion. In a symmetric world, the de-trended
aggregate productivity in a balance growth path is simply
β

−

1

T̂ = γ̃ × r̂ 1−β × πD 1−β ,
so that the gains from trade in a balance growth path are
−

β

1

GT BGP = πD 1−β θ .
As for the case of a source distribution in which domestic firm learn from world-wide sellers, with no learning β = 0, the dynamic and static gains from trade coincide. For β > 0,
14

This treatment is similar to the one in Perla et al. (2015) and Sampson (2016).

17

learning opportunities increase with openness due to the selection effect on unproductive
domestic producers, with a larger effect as β increases.
The model developed in Buera and Oberfield (2016) constitutes a parsimonious, yet quantitative, theory in which diffusion and international trade interact to shape the gains from
openness. As all the models we review, the Fréchet productivity distribution is at the
center of their analysis.

3.3

Diffusion through multinational production

Multinational production (MP) is arguably the most important channel through which
firms choose to serve foreign consumers.15 As documented by UNCTAD (2017), in 2016,
world sales of foreign affiliates of multinational firms were almost twice as high as world
exports, with an increase over the past two decades of a factor of more than six against
a factor of almost four for exports. Additionally, according to the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA), foreign affiliates of U.S. MNEs accounted, in 2009, for 75 percent of U.S.
sales to foreign customers; the remaining 25 percent was filled by U.S. exports.
Multinational firms also are, not surprisingly, the top innovators of the world. UNCTAD
(2005) estimates that multinational firms concentrated close to half of the world R&D
expenditure, and at least two-thirds of business R&D expenditures, at the beginning of
the 2000’s. The link between R&D and MP activity is also documented by Arkolakis
et al. (2018) who show that the most innovative OECD economies, measured by R&D
expenditures in manufacturing relative to local value-added, are also the ones with net
outward MP flows (measured by the sales of foreign affiliates of Home firm minus the
sales of foreign multinational affiliates at Home).16
Both the macro and micro evidence suggests that MP is an important channel through
15

We follow Ramondo (2014) and use the term "multinational production", rather than "Foreign Direct
Investment" (FDI) to refer to the activity of foreign affiliates (e.g., sales, employment). FDI is a financial
category of the Balance of Payments and, as such, is one of the possible channels through which affiliates
finance their activities abroad.
16
Arkolakis et al. (2018) document a similar positive correlation for the United States across time: R&D
expenditures relative to manufacturing value-added in the United States grew from 8.7 to 12.7 percent
between 1999 and 2009, while at the same time, U.S. multinational firms increased the share of employment
located in their foreign affiliates from 22 to 31 percent.

18

which countries exchange not only goods, but also ideas and technologies, and as such, it
may lead to large gains from international technology sharing.
The idea of MP as a channel for international technology diffusion was present in early
work by Markusen (1984): His concept of "knowledge capital" entailed the idea that this
type of capital was freely shared within different units of the firm, at Home and abroad.
Building on the idea of non-rivalry, more recent papers develop and quantify models in
which international technology diffusion occurs through MP. Using a neoclassical growth
model, McGrattan and Prescott (2009) pair MP with the transfer (and reproduction) of
firm-specific technology capital in foreign countries.17 They calculate (steady state) gains
from MP (from autarky) of 27 percent of real consumption, for a small country, and of one
percent for a large country. Ramondo (2014) uses an EK-type framework in which MP is
paired with the (costly) transfer of home technologies abroad. She calculates gains from
MP (from autarky) of almost nine percent of real per capita income. Irarrazabal et al.
(2013) extend the proximity-concentration tradeoff framework in Helpman et al. (2004)
to incorporate intrafirm transfers of firm-specific inputs, both tangible and intangible.
Using firm-level data for Norway, they estimate that the share of a parent’s input costs in
the affiliate total costs is substantial (9/10). Similarly, Shikher (2012) and Ramondo and
Rodríguez-Clare (2013) also pair MP with the international transfer of technologies for
production abroad. Their model incorporates both trade and MP into an EK-type model
with the goal of quantifying the gains from trade and MP. In particular, Ramondo and
Rodríguez-Clare (2013) extend the probabilistic representation of technologies introduced
by EK, and show that their framework is consistent with the growth models in Section 3.1
that generate a Fréchet production possibility frontier.
Facts documented by Bilir (2014) using detailed firm-level data suggest that multinational
firms are indeed a channel for international technology transfer: Intellectual property
rights have a strong and positive effect on the location decision of multinational firms,
and more so if they operate in sectors in which the scope for imitation is higher. Further
evidence is provided in Bilir and Morales (2018). Using a long panel of U.S. multinational
firms, from BEA, they document that innovation at the parent company substantially
17

In their own words "A firm’s technology capital is its unique know-how from investing in research and
development, brands, and organization capital." The main characteristic of this capital is its non-rivalry.

19

increases the efficiency of affiliates abroad: The average U.S. multinational firm realizes
abroad over a quarter of the gains from innovation.
All these papers treat technology as non-rival within the firm. In contrast, Burstein and
Monge-Naranjo (2007) focus on a scarce resource that cannot be easily replicated within
the firm, managerial know-how, which, in turn, shapes the firm productivity. MP arises
as the reallocation of managerial talent to foreign countries to gain control of foreign factors of production. They calculate output gains from removing barriers to managerial
mobility of 12 percent.18
Next, we present a simplified version of the model in Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare
(2013). We abstract from non-tradable and intermediate tradable goods, an input-output
structure, and the shipment of inputs from the Home country to the country of the affiliate. These are all important components to be taken into account when quantifying the
model. Here, we just want to illustrate how MP can be incorporated into the canonical
Ricardian model as a channel for technology diffusion.
The model inherits the main features of the EK Ricardian model of trade, but it is extended
so that both trade and MP are two possible ways of reaching foreign consumers. As in
models of “horizontal” FDI (e.g., Helpman et al., 2004) trade and MP are competing ways
to serve a foreign market. Additionally, affiliates of multinational firms abroad can serve
markets, other that the one of operations, through exports—i.e., export-platform FDI.
There are N countries and a continuum of tradable goods produced under constant returns to scale with only labor. Knowledge transfers through MP take the following form.
Firms in country i have a technology to produce each good at home and in each foreign
country. These technologies are described by the vector Ai (v) ≡ [Ai1 (v), ..., AiN (v)]. MP
occurs when a country i produces in another country o 6= i with productivity Aio (v). If
Aio (v) = 0 for all o 6= i, and for all v ∈ [0, 1], the model reverts to the EK model of trade in
18

Based on Lucas (1978), Monge-Naranjo (2018) builds a dynamic OLG model in which foreign firms
decide to locate in a foreign country and bring their know-how, while domestic firms decide how much to
invest in know-how given the exposure to foreign know-how and the competition that foreign firms entail.
Know-how comes from two sources: the firm-specific know-how embedded in its older workers that gets
transmitted to the young ones; and the aggregate know-how from all the firms operating in the economy.
Because of the presence of externalities, the model delivers the possibility that openness to foreign firms
may lead to losses in income and welfare.

20

Section 2.
The productivity vector Ai (v) for each good is a random variable drawn independently
across goods and countries from the following distribution,

P[Ai1 (v) ≤ a1 , . . . , AiN (v)] = exp −

!1−ρ 
X

−θ/(1−ρ)

Ti aio

,

(19)

o

where θ > max {1, σ − 1} and ρ ∈ [0, 1). We call the distribution in (19) a symmetric multivariate θ-Fréchet distribution for reasons that will become clear in the next section.19 The
scale and shape parameters are, respectively, Ti and θ, and have the same interpretation
as in the baseline trade model: Lower θ means more heterogeneous productivity draws
and hence stronger comparative advantage forces; higher Ti means better productivity
draws on average for firms from i producing anywhere. The parameter ρ determines the
degree of correlation among productivity draws in Ai (v): If ρ = 0, productivity draws are
uncorrelated across production locations, while as ρ → 1 productivity draws are perfectly
correlated across locations of productions for a good v—i.e., Aii (v) = Aio (v), for all o.
Assume that trade is subject to iceberg-type costs: τod ≥ 1 units of any good must be
shipped from country o for one unit to arrive in country d, with τdd = 1 for all d and
τod ≤ τok τkd for all o, d, k. Similarly, MP from country i with production in o incurs a
productivity loss modeled as an iceberg-type bilateral MP cost, γio ≥ 1, with γoo = 1, for
all i. These costs are meant to capture the various costs of technology transfer incurred by
multinational firms when they operate in a different production location other than their
country of origin. Finally, following Head and Mayer (2018), we assume that MP from
country i selling in destination market d incurs a loss also modeled as an iceberg-type
bilateral cost, δid ≥ 1, with δdd = 1. As they argue, this loss is meant to capture marketing
costs incurred because the headquarter of the firm is different from the market where
consumers are located.20
19
See the Appendix in the working paper version of Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare (2013) for an extension of Eaton and Kortum (2001) that generates a production possibility frontier that is has symmetric
θ-Fréchet form.
20
Head and Mayer (2018) apply their model to the car industry. They argue that “current ‘deep’ integration agreements contain whole chapters that do not operate on the origin-destination path traversed
by goods. Rather, topics such as harmonization of standards, protection of investments, and facilitation
of temporary movement of professionals, mainly affect the flows of headquarters services to production

21

The marginal cost of delivering good v to destination d produced in location o with technologies originated in country i is
ciod
,
Aio (v)

ciod (v) =

(20)

where ciod ≡ Wo τod γio δid . Good v is delivered to consumers in d: through trade if i = o 6= d;
through horizontal FDI if i 6= o = d; through export-platform FDI if i 6= o 6= d; and through
vertical FDI if i = d 6= o.21 Domestic firms will be the ones serving market d in good v
when i = o = d.
Under perfect competition, unit costs are equal to prices, and the lowest-cost producers
will deliver good v to market d,
Pd (v) =

min

o,i=1,...,N

ciod
.
Aio (v)

(21)

Given that the symmetric θ-Fréchet distribution has the max-stability property—for reasons that we explain in the next section—we can apply the same reasoning as for the EK
model of trade and derive similar results.
The expenditure share on goods produced in o for destination d with technology from i is

πiod =

where Piod ≡

−1/θ
ciod Ti
,

Pid ≡

P

N
o=1

Piod
Pid

θ 
− 1−ρ
−θ
Pid
γ
,
Pd

−θ/(1−ρ)
Piod

− 1−ρ
θ

(22)

, and the price index in d is

!−1/θ
Pd = γ

X

Pid−θ

,

(23)

i

where γ ≡ Γ(1+(1−σ)/θ)1/(1−σ) with Γ(·) the Gamma function. The first term on the righthand side of (22) is the share of expenditure that country d allocates to goods produced
with country i’s technologies using labor in country o, while the second term is the share
and distribution affiliates.” Thus, these frictions, they argue, become key in evaluating the welfare gains of
trade agreements such as NAFTA and the European Union.
21
The last case can be thought as capturing "factory-less goods producing firms" described in Bernard
and Fort (2015).

22

of these goods produced everywhere.
The aggregate expenditure share on goods produced in o for d—i.e., the bilateral trade
P
T
= N
share—is πod
i=1 πiod , while the expenditure share on goods from i produced in o—
P
M
i.e., the bilateral MP share—is πio
= N
d=1 πiod .
The question we ask is: How does trade and diffusion through MP interact to shape
the gains from openness? Does trade complement or substitute diffusion forces that act
through MP? Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare (2013) define the concepts of substitution
and complementarity through the relation between the implied gains from trade (MP) in
the model with both flows, and the implied gains from trade (MP) implied by a model
with only trade (MP). The gains from trade (MP) in the full model, denoted by GT (GM P ),
are given by the change in the real wage from a situation without trade (MP), but MP
(trade), to a situation with both trade and MP. The gains from trade (MP) coming from
a model with only trade (MP), denoted by GT ∗ (GM P ∗ ), are given by the change in the
real wage from isolation to an equilibrium with only trade (MP) but in which trade (MP)
flows are the same as in the model with both trade and MP (i.e., the observed flows).
Then: If GT > GT ∗ , trade is MP complement; if GT < GT ∗ trade is MP substitute; and
if GT = GT ∗ trade is MP independent. Analogously, if GM P > GM P ∗ , MP is trade
complement; if GM P < GM P ∗ , MP is trade substitute; and if GM P = GM P ∗ , MP is
trade independent.
Even the simplified model presented here delivers rich patterns of complementarity and
substitutability between the two modes of openness. The key parameter is the parameter
indicating correlation in productivity across production locations, ρ. As Ramondo and
Rodríguez-Clare (2013) show, the special case of independence, ρ = 0, is particularly
illuminating.
First, when ρ = 0, trade and MP shares collapse, respectively, to

T
πod

= (τod Wo )

−θ

N
X
i=1


Ti

γio δid
γ
Pd

−θ
and

23

M
πio

−θ

= Ti (γio Wo )

−θ
N 
X
τod δid
γ
.
P
d
d=1

Assuming that δid = δei × δed , both trade and MP shares satisfy gravity equations,
T
πod
= −θ ln τod + Eo + Id

M
πio
= −θ ln γio + Si + Lo ,

and

P
e −θ
e
e
where Eo ≡ −θ ln Wo + ln N
i=1 Ti (γio δi ) , Id ≡ −θ ln δd + θ ln Pd /γ, Si ≡ ln Ti − θ ln δi , and
P
e
Lo ≡ −θ ln Wo − θ ln N
d=1 γτod δd /Pd .
Second, under independence, the gains from trade are exactly equal to the gains from
trade coming from a model with only trade as in Arkolakis et al. (2012),
T
GTd = πdd

−1/θ

(24)

,

and trade is MP independent. Independent productivity draws across production locations basically makes irrelevant the tradeoff between trade and MP as alternative ways
of serving a foreign market.22 MP, however, is not trade independent. The gains from
diffusion through MP for a country that it is already open to trade are given by

GM Pd =


M −1/θ
πnn

×

T
πdd
T,−M
πdd

!−1/θ
,

(25)

T,−M
is the domestic trade share in the equilibrium with trade but not MP. Because
where πnn

the gains from MP coming from an MP-only model are given by the first term on the righthand side of (25), the expression in (25) implies that MP can be either trade substitute,
trade complement, or trade independent. The size of trade costs, countries, and aggregate
productivity interacts to shape the decision of serving markets through trade, MP, and
export-platform MP, and determines the relation between GM P and GM P ∗ .
For the case of ρ > 0, Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare (2013) provide special cases to illustrate the different forces that determine whether trade and MP are substitutes or complements of each other. For instance, they are able to show analytically that, with symmetric
countries, substitution forces dominate: Trade is an MP substitute, GT < GT ∗ , and MP is
a trade substitute, GM P < GM P ∗ . The calibrated version of their model, that matches
22
Trade becomes MP complement as soon as one assumes that some inputs from the Home country are
needed for production in the host country, and these inputs are sufficiently imperfect substitute of local
inputs (see Proposition 4 in Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare, 2013).

24

the observed bilateral trade and MP data, implies that the gains from trade can be twice as
high as the gains calculated in trade-only models, suggesting that diffusion of technologies through MP complements trade flows; in contrast, MP is a mild trade substitute.23
By now, there is an extensive literature that builds and quantifies models of trade and
MP using static EK-type approaches. For instance, Alviarez (2018) extends the model
in Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare (2013) to many sectors and shows that the gains from
MP are three times higher than in the model with one sector. Arkolakis et al. (2018) extend Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare (2013) to allow for heterogeneous production firms
á la Melitz and creation of firms through free entry—what they call innovation. They
use their framework to quantify the gains and losses of globalization for innovation and
production workers. Tintelnot (2017) incorporates fixed costs of production into a framework similar to Arkolakis et al. (2018). Solving a complex permutational problem, he
calibrates the model and evaluates the role of fixed costs in generating export platforms
and its consequences on the gains from MP. Fan (2017) extends Arkolakis et al. (2018) to
further incorporate the possibility of offshore R&D: Multinational firms born in a given
country match with researchers around the world to develop new blueprints, and then
engage in production—possible offshore—and exports. That is, in his framework, the
Home country of a multinational firm can be different from the place where they decide
to carry innovation, and in turn, different from the production sites and consumer markets. When he quantifies the model, he finds that R&D offshore is an important channel
shaping the gains from globalization. Finally, Sun (2018) uses the framework in Arkolakis et al. (2018) to add a firm’s technology choice: MP not only implies the transfer of
Hicks-neutral productivity, but also the transfer of technologies of (varying) factor intensity. In a model with both capital and labor as factors of production, he shows that MP, by
coming from capital-abundant countries and transferring capital-intensive technologies
to its host countries, changes the aggregate demand of capital relative to labor, and hence,
contributes to the decline in the labor share observed in several countries.
Two common themes in all these papers are that MP is a channel for international technology diffusion and that the modeling strategy is based on the EK Ricardian model of
23

Their calibrated model includes tradable intermediate goods, non-tradable final goods, an inputoutput structure, and the shipment of inputs from the Home country to the affiliate.

25

trade with a Fréchet productivity distribution. By having flexible general equilibrium
models that capture the rich heterogeneity of the data, all these papers are able to draw
quantitative conclusions, through counterfactual exercises, on the effects of MP on their
host and Home countries, and they are able to evaluate the mechanisms through which
technology transfer operates.

4

New Directions for the Ricardian Model of Trade

The EK model of trade assumes that productivities are independent Fréchet random variables across countries with a common shape. This assumption is restrictive in several
ways: First, it does not allow for spatial correlation in technology, as the empirical evidence seems to suggest (Comin et al., 2013; Keller and Yeaple, 2013); second, as pointed
out by Arkolakis et al. (2012), it restricts trade shares to the CES class, generating symmetric substitution patterns (i.e., a change in unit costs has the same effect on the aggregate
price index of the importer regardless of the identity of the exporter); and finally, it does
not include non-CES extensions of the EK model of trade (e.g., many sectors, multinational production, global value chains). The appeal of this assumption, however, has
been that it generates max-stability—the distribution of the maximum is the same up to
scale—which, in turn, is the key property that makes the EK model tractable.
Lind and Ramondo (2018) generalize the distribution of productivities in EK to a multivariate θ-Fréchet distribution, allowing for an arbitrary spatial correlation structure of
productivity while maintaining the key max-stability property necessary for tractability
of the EK Ricardian model. This generalization also encompasses various extensions of
the EK model in the literature to non-CES setups. Moreover, it naturally links to the models of innovation and diffusion in Section 3.24
24

The framework in Lind and Ramondo (2018) falls under the very general class of Ricardian models
analyzed by Adao et al. (2017)—-one in which the factor demand system is invertible.

26

4.1

Productivity as a max-stable multivariate Fréchet random variable

Definition 1 (Multivariate θ-Fréchet distribution). A random vector, (A1 , . . . , AK ), has a
multivariate θ-Fréchet distribution if for any αk ≥ 0 with k = 1, . . . , K the random variable
maxk=1,...,K αk Ak has a Fréchet distribution with shape parameter θ. In this case, the marginal
distributions are Fréchet with (common) shape parameter θ and, for each k = 1, . . . , K, satisfy


P [Ak ≤ a] = exp −Tk a−θ ,

(26)

for some scale parameter Tk .
This definition implies that a multivariate θ-Fréchet distribution is max stable—up to scale
the distribution of the max is the same as the distribution of the marginals. It includes as
special cases the distribution in EK which is independent θ-Fréchet, and the symmetric
θ-Fréchet distribution in Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare (2013).
The class of multivariate θ-Fréchet random variables puts minimal restrictions on dependence, but maintains the property of max stability. The restriction to a common shape is
necessary for that property; general multivariate Fréchet distributions may have marginal
distributions with different shape parameters, in which case the maximum, even under
independence, is not distributed Fréchet.
The joint distribution of a multivariate θ-Fréchet random variable can be characterized
with a correlation function, G : RK
+ → R+ . This function is closely related to a max-stable
copula and to the social surplus function in GEV discrete choice models (McFadden,
1978). As such, the G-function must satisfy three restrictions: homogeneity of degree one;
unboundedness; and differentiability.25 We add a normalization restriction to the correlation function, G(0, . . . , 0, 1, 0, . . . , 0) = 1, that allows us to distinguish between absolute
advantage—captured by scale parameters—and comparative advantage—captured by a
correlation function.
25

Homogeneity: for any λ ≥ 0 G(λx1 , . . . , λxK ) = λG(x1 , . . . , xK ). Unboundedness: G(x1 , . . . , xK ) →
∞ as xk → ∞ for any k = 1, . . . , K. Differentiability: The mixed partial derivatives of G exist and are
continuous up to order K. The k’th partial derivative of G with respect to k distinct arguments is nonnegative if k is odd and non-positive if k is even.

27

The joint distribution of any multivariate θ-Fréchet random variable can be parameterized
in terms of the scale parameters of its marginal distributions and a correlation function,


−θ
P [Ak ≤ ak , k = 1, . . . , K] = exp −G T1 a−θ
.
1 , . . . , T K aK

(27)

The restrictions defining a correlation function ensure that (27) characterizes a valid multivariate Type II extreme value (Fréchet) distribution. Importantly, the homogeneity property of the correlation function implies the max-stability property: the maximum is Fréchet,

P




max Ak ≤ a = exp −G (T1 , . . . , TK ) a−θ ,

k=1,...,K

(28)

with scale parameter G (T1 , . . . , TK ) and shape parameter θ. The correlation function acts
as an aggregator, returning the scale parameter of the maximum when evaluated at the
scale parameters of the marginal distributions.
Correlation functions reflect comparative advantage because they measure relative productivity levels across varieties and across origin countries within the same destination
market. Comparing the case of independence in (5) with (28), it is clear that the EK model
in Section 2 has an additive correlation function. But an additive correlation function
imposes a strong assumption, namely that comparative advantages across countries are
symmetric. By allowing for heterogeneity in correlation, this generalization of the EK
model allows for heterogeneity in comparative advantage.
As mentioned in previous sections, max-stability implies that the conditional and unconditional distributions of the maximum are identical. This property, as in EK, ensures
tractability because it ensures that expenditure shares simply reflect the probability of
importing from an origin country.
We ask next: What are the implications for trade shares and the gains from trade of using
a multivariate θ-Fréchet distribution with arbitrary correlation across exporters?

28

4.1.1

Trade shares

The joint distribution of productivity determines the joint distribution of potential import
prices into market d,


P[P1d (v) ≥ p1 , . . . , PN d (v) ≥ pN ] = exp −Gd T1d W1−θ pθ1 , . . . , TN d WN−θ pθN .
Given the distribution of potential import prices, a country imports each variety from
the cheapest source. As for the Ricardian model under independence in Section 2, the
max-stability property, together with the previous characterization of the potential import price distribution, leads to closed-form results for trade shares and the price index,
respectively,
πod
−1/θ

where Pod ≡ Tod


−θ d
−θ
Pod
Go P1d
, . . . , PN−θd
GEV
 ≡ πod
=
(Pd , Xd ),
−θ
Gd P1d
, . . . , PN−θd

(29)

Wo , Pd = [P1d , . . . , PN d ], Xd is total expenditure in country d,
Gdo (x1 , . . . , xN ) ≡

∂Gd (x1 , . . . , xN )
,
∂xo

and
−θ
Pd = γGd P1d
, . . . , PN−θd

with γ ≡ Γ

 1
θ−σ − σ
θ

− θ1

,

(30)

and Γ(·) the Gamma function.

The formula for the expenditure share in (29) takes the same form as choice probabilities
in generalized extreme value (GEV) discrete choice models (McFadden, 1978), with the
import price index taking the place of choice-specific utility. Accordingly, we refer to the
GEV
implied import demand system, πod
, as a GEV import demand system. In turn, the price

level in each destination market is determined by the correlation function, Gd , which can
be interpreted as an aggregator that defines the welfare-relevant price index. In analogy
to the discrete choice literature, welfare calculations depend crucially on the specification
of this function.
The direct consequence of this result is that a Ricardian model with a multivariate θFréchet productivity distribution as in (27) is equivalent to any model that generates a
29

generalized extreme value (GEV) import demand system as in (29).26 Since expenditure
shares do not depend on overall expenditure, the GEV class is homothetic, features the
gross substitutability property, and belongs to the large class of invertible demand systems.
An important class of models within the GEV class is the CES model. This model is
P
generated by an additive correlation function, Gd (x1 , . . . , xN ) = N
o=1 xo , and entails expenditure shares of the form
P −θ
CES
(Pd , Xd ).
πod = PN od −θ ≡ πod
P
o0 =1 o0 d
The GEV class, however, is much larger than the CES class and accommodates many
non-CES Ricardian trade models commonly used in the literature.27
The MP model in the previous section and the multi-sector EK model in Caliendo and
Parro (2015) belong to the GEV class. They are generated by a correlation function that
takes a cross-nested CES form,

d

G (x1 , . . . , xN ) =

where ωmod ≡ Tmod /Tod , with Tod =

M
X

N
X

m=1

o=1

PM

m0 =1

!1−ρm
1/(1−ρm )

(ωmod xo )

,

(31)

Tm0 od , and m refers to the country of origin of

MP and to sectors, alternately. The import demand system implied by this correlation
function is

θ

πod =

− 1−ρ
M 
X
m
Pmod
m=1

where Pmod ≡

−1/θ
Wo Tmod ,

and Pmd ≡

−θ
Pmd

PM

Pmd

m0 =1


PN

θ
− 1−ρ
m
P
o=1 mod

Pm−θ0 d

,

(32)

− 1−ρθ m
. The model in Ramondo and

Rodríguez-Clare (2013) presented in the previous section is obtained by setting ρm = ρ,
for all m, while Caliendo and Parro (2015) is obtained as the limiting case as θ → 0.28
26

In a recent paper, Lashkaripour and Lugovskyy (2017) use a nested Fréchet in the context of the EK
model of trade, with nests representing firm-specific quality. Their setup also belongs to the GEV class.
27
Multi-sector models (Costinot et al., 2012; Costinot and Rodrìguez-Clare, 2014; Caliendo and Parro,
2015; Ossa, 2015; Levchenko and Zhang, 2016; French, 2016); multinational production models (Ramondo
and Rodríguez-Clare, 2013); global value chains models (Antràs and de Gortari, 2017); and models of trade
with domestic geography (Fajgelbaum and Redding, 2014; Ramondo et al., 2016; Redding, 2016).
28
With θ → 0, the expenditure shares across sectors are Cobb-Douglas. More generally, French (2016)

30

One can go a step further and, adapting results from the discrete choice literature, show
that the set of import demand systems generated by any Ricardian model can be approximated arbitrarily well by the GEV class. This result in Lind and Ramondo (2018) implies
that any import demand system generated by the Ricardian trade model can be approximated by a Ricardian trade model where productivity has a multivariate θ-Fréchet distribution.

4.1.2

Gains from trade

As for the EK model under independence, we can easily calculate the gains from trade
stemming from the GEV import demand system. The calculation entails a simple correction to the formula for gains in Arkolakis et al. (2012). Using a multivariate θ-Fréchet distribution with correlation across exporters adds, however, an important channel for the
gains from trade: Countries gain more if they trade with partners that have more dissimilar technologies. The implied GEV import demand system allows for richer patterns of
substitution across exporters than CES: By having ∂Gd (x1 , . . . , xN ) /∂xo 6= Gd (x1 , . . . , xN ) /∂xo0 ,
for o 6= o0 , the effect of a change in the unit cost on the aggregate importer price index can
vary substantially depending on the exporter.
Evaluating (29) for the domestic pair, and using (30) for the price index, we get

πdd =

−1/θ
Tdd Wd−θ

 d −θ
−θ
Gd (P1d , . . . , PN−θd
γ
.
Pd

(33)

Solving for the real wage yields
Wd
1/θ
= γ −1 Tdd
Pd



πdd
Gdd

−1/θ
,

(34)


−θ
where Gdd ≡ Gdd P1d
, . . . , PN−θd . Under autarky, Gdd = πdd = 1. Hence, the gains from
uses a CES aggregator across sectors, but he restricts the elasticities of substitution for each sector to be the
same, ρm = ρ, for all m.

31

trade from autarky are given by

GTd =

πdd
Gdd

−1/θ
.

(35)

For CES, Gdd = 1 and we are back to the formula from the gains from trade in Arkolakis
et al. (2012)—presented in (14)—that only depends on the self-trade share of a country.
For GEV, countries with the same self-trade share can have very different gains depending
on the way their technology is correlated with their trading partners.29
Next, we show how a multivariate θ-Fréchet distribution with arbitrary correlation function can be generated from an innovation and adoption process.

4.2

Generating max-stable multivariate Fréchet distributions

We next present a structure for technology that is necessary and sufficient for productivity
to be distributed multivariate θ-Fréchet. Lind and Ramondo (2018) assume that technologies are a product of global innovations and a country’s production possibility frontier is
the result of adopting those global innovations according to the country’s ability to apply
them. The equivalence between this structure of technology and multivariate θ-Fréchet
productivity is a consequence of the spectral representation theorem for max-stable processes (De Haan, 1984; Penrose, 1992; Schlather, 2002). In contrast to the results in Section
3, in which a independent θ-Fréchet productivity distribution was obtained asymptotically, the result presented below is exact and for a θ-Fréchet distribution with arbitrary
correlation patterns.
Lind and Ramondo (2018) establish that productivity, {Aod (v)}N
o=1 , is multivariate θ-Fréchet
if and only if it satisfies the following three assumptions—which they refer to as a global
innovation representation.
Assumption 5 (Innovation Decomposition). For each v, there exists a countable set of global
innovations, i = 1, 2, . . . , with global productivity {Zi (v)}i=1,2,... and spatial applicability
29

Lind and Ramondo (2018) show that, given the correlation function Gd , observed trade shares are
sufficient to calculate Gdd . In this way, the adjustment entailed by GEV is not more demanding in terms of
estimation than CES.

32

{{Aiod (v)}N
o=1 }i=1,2,... such that
Aod (v) = max Zi (v)Aiod (v).
i=1,2,...

(36)

Assumption 6 (Independence). {{Aiod (v)}N
o=1 }i=1,2,... is independent of {Zi (v)}i=1,2,... and
i.i.d. over (i, v).
Assumption 7 (Poisson Innovations). There exists θ > 0 such that the collection {Zi (v)θ }i=1,2,...
consists of the points of a Poisson process with intensity measure z −2 dz, and i.i.d. over v.
Assumption 5 states that countries adopt the best innovation (i.e., a blueprint) when producing goods taking as given the spatial applicability of individual innovations. For
a given good v, each innovation i has a global productivity component, Zi (v), and an
origin-destination specific spatial applicability component, Aiod (v). The global productivity component measures the fundamental efficiency of the production technique i and is
identical across all origins and destinations. In turn, the spatial applicability component
captures origin-destination specific factors that determine the efficiency of the technique
when adopted at origin o to deliver goods to destination d.
The key aspect of Assumption 6 is that it does not impose independence of applicability across origin countries; instead, it allows for arbitrary patterns of spatial correlation.
Moreover, the assumption does not impose any particular probability distribution of applicability; this distribution can belong to any family.
Finally, Assumption 7 states that the global productivity component, Zi (v), follows a
non-homogenous Poisson process over i’s, for each v. This assumption implies that
the distribution of Zi (v) over v, conditional on i, is Pareto with shape parameter θ ×
i: Loosely speaking, better innovations—i.e., with higher global productivity—are less
likely to be observed, but conditional on being observed, they have a fatter-tailed—and
lower-variance—Pareto distribution across goods v.
This characterization establishes that θ-Fréchet-distributed productivity can always be
interpreted as arising from the adoption of technologies and that patterns of adoption
depend on the ability of exporters to apply innovations. It also establishes a method
to compute the scale parameters (absolute advantage) and correlation functions (com33

parative advantage) of multivariate θ-Fréchet random variables as moments of spatial
applicability30 ,
Tod ≡ EAiod (v)θ

and

Gd (x1 , . . . , xN ) ≡ E max

o=1,...,N

Aiod (v)θ
xo , for all o = 1, . . . , N.
Tod

For example, assume that the applicability of individual technologies follows a multivariate θ-Fréchet distribution across origin countries with symmetric correlation, as in
our model of MP above. Then, the joint distribution of applicability is

P[Ai1d (v) ≤ a1 , . . . , AiN d (v) ≤ aN ] = exp −

N
X

!1−ρ 
1

1−ρ
(Tod a−θ
o )

,

o=1

where each Tod is an origin-destination specific scale parameter and 0 ≤ ρ < 1 parameterizes the correlation in applicability across origin countries. We can compute the correlation function for this example using the max-stability property of multivariate Fréchet
distributions in (28).31 The correlation function takes the form of a CES aggregator with
the correlation parameter ρ determining the elasticity of substitution across origins; when
ρ = 0, the correlation function is additive, as in EK, and draws are uncorrelated across
origins.
The important question left for future research is how the global innovation representation connects to the dynamic models in Section 3 that obtain Fréchet production possibility frontiers as a result of an innovation and knowledge diffusion process (Eaton and
Kortum, 1999, 2001; Buera and Oberfield, 2016).
30

Since the copula of the joint distribution is related to its correlation function, this result also gives a
method to construct max-stable copulas.
31
Specifically, for any given vector (a1 , . . . , aN ), the random variable maxo=1,...,N Aiod (v)/ao must be θ1−ρ
P
N
−θ 1/(1−ρ)
Fréchet with scale
. Since the θ-moment of a θ-Fréchet random variable is given
o=1 (Tod ao )

1−ρ
1
PN
1−ρ
d
by its scale parameter, the correlation function is G (x1 , . . . , xN ) =
.
o=1 xo

34

5

Conclusions

There have been recent advances in the international trade literature on modeling knowledge creation and international technology diffusion, as well as their links with international flows of goods, services, and firms. This paper reviews the literature on innovation
and knowledge diffusion built on a common methodological theme: Fréchet productivity
distributions. The central pieces of our analysis are the model of innovation in Kortum
(1997) and the Ricardian model of trade in Eaton and Kortum (2002). As such, all the
models reviewed are quantitative general equilibrium models suitable for performing
counterfactual analysis. We focus on the implications of the models regarding the gainsfrom-trade counterfactual and how they fit into the sufficient-statistic approach proposed
in Arkolakis et al. (2012).

References
Adao, R., A. Costinot, and D. Donaldson (2017). Nonparametric counterfactual predictions in neoclassical models of international trade. The American Economic Review 107(3),
633–689.
Ades, A. and E. L. Glaeser (1999). Evidence on growth, increasing returns, and the extent
of the market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(3), 1025–1045.
Alcala, F. and A. Ciccone (2004). Trade and productivity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(2), 613–646.
Alesina, A., E. Spolaore, and R. Wacziarg (2000). Economic integration and political disintegration. American Economic Review 90(5), 1276–1296.
Alfaro, L. and M. X. Chen (2018). Selection and market reallocation: Productivity gains
from multinational production. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10(2), 1–38.
Alvarez, F. E., F. J. Buera, and R. E. Lucas (2008). Models of idea flows. NBER Working
Paper Series (14135).
Alvarez, F. E., F. J. Buera, and R. E. Lucas (2014). Idea flows, economic growth, and trade.
NBER Working Paper Series (19667).
Alviarez, V. (2018). Multinational production and comparative advantage. Manuscript
UBC.
35

Antràs, P. and A. de Gortari (2017). On the geography of global value chains. Mimeo,
Harvard University.
Antrás, P. and S. R. Yeaple (2014). Multinational firms and the structure of international
trade. Handbook of International Economics 4, 55–130.
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodríguez-clare (2012). New trade models, same old
gains? The American Economic Review, 94–130.
Arkolakis, C., S. Demidova, P. J. Klenow, and A. Rodríguez-Clare (2008). Endogenous
variety and the gains from trade. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 98(4),
444–450.
Arkolakis, C., N. Ramondo, A. Rodríguez-Clare, and S. Yeaple (2018). Innovation and
production in the global economy. American Economic Review Forthcoming.
Atkeson, A. and A. Burstein (2010). Innovation, firm dynamics, and international trade.
Journal of Political Economy 118(3), 433–489.
Benhabib, J., J. Perla, and C. Tonetti (2017). Reconciling models of diffusion and innovation: A theory of the productivity distribution and technology frontier. Unpublished.
Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003). Plants and productivity in
international trade. The American Economic Review 93(4), 1268–1290.
Bernard, A. B. and T. C. Fort (2015). Factory-less goods producing firms. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 105, 518–23.
Bilir, K. and E. Morales (2018). Innovation in the global firm. Mimeo, Princeton University.
Bilir, L. K. (2014). Patent laws, product life-cycle lengths, and multinational activity. American Economic Review 104(7), 1979Ð2013.
Buera, F. J. and E. Oberfield (2016). The global diffusion of ideas. National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Burstein, A. and A. Monge-Naranjo (2007). Foreign know-how, firm control, and the
income of developing countries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(1), 149–195.
Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2015). Estimates of the trade and welfare effects of nafta. The
Review of Economic Studies 82(1), 1–44.
Comin, D., M. Dmitriev, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2013). The spatial diffusion of technology. Unpublished.
Comin, D. and B. Hobijn (2004). Cross-country technology adoption: making the theories
face the facts. Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 39Ð83.
Comin, D. and B. Hobijn (2010). An exploration of technology diffusion. American Economic Review 100, 2031Ð2059.
36

Comin, D. and M. Mestieri (2018). If technology has arrived everywhere, why has income
diverged? American Economic Journal forthcoming.
Costinot, A., D. Donaldson, and I. Komunjer (2012). What goods do countries trade? a
quantitative exploration of ricardo’s ideas. Review of Economic Studies 79, 581–608.
Costinot, A. and A. Rodrìguez-Clare (2014). Trade theory with numbers: Quantifying the
consequences of globalization. Technical Report 4.
De Haan, L. (1984). A spectral representation for max-stable processes. The Annals of
Probability 12(4), 1194–1204.
de Haan, L. and A. Ferreira (2006). Extreme Value Theory: An Introduction. Springer Series
in Operations Research and Financial Engineering. Springer New York.
Donaldson, D. (2015). The gains from market integration. Annual Review of Economics 7,
619–47.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (1996). Trade in ideas patenting and productivity in the oecd.
Journal of International Economics 40(3), 251Ð278.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (1999). International technology diffusion: Theory and measurement. International Economic Review 40(3), 537–570.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2001). Technology, trade, and growth: A unified framework.
European Economic Review 45, 742–755.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). Technology, geography, and trade. Econometrica, 1741–
1779.
Eeckhout, J. and B. Jovanovic (2002). Knowledge spillovers and inequality. The American
Economic Review 92(5), 1290–1307.
Fajgelbaum, P. and S. Redding (2014). External integration, structural transformation
and economic development: Evidence from argentina 1870-1914. NBER Working Paper 20217.
Fan, J. (2017). Talent, geography, and offshore r&d. Mimeo, Penn State University.
Feyrer, J. (2009). Distance, trade, and income—the 1967 to 1975 closing of the suez canal
as a natural experiment. NBER Working Paper Series 15557.
Frankel, J. and D. Romer (1999). Does trade cause growth?
view 89(3), 379–399.

American Economic Re-

French, S. (2016). The composition of trade flows and the aggregate effects of trade barriers. Journal of International Economics 98, 114–137.
Harrison, A. and A. Rodríguez-Clare (2010). Trade, foreign investment, and industrial
policy. Handbook of Development Economics, D. Rodrik and M. Rosenzweig, eds. 5, 4040–
4214.
37

Head, K. and T. Mayer (2018). Brands in motion: How frictions shape multinational
production. CEPR DP 10797.
Helpman, E., M. J. Melitz, and S. R. Yeaple (2004). Exports versus fdi with heterogeneous
firms. American Economic Review 94(1), 300–316.
Irarrazabal, A., A. Moxnes, and L. D. Opromolla (2013). The margins of multinational
production and the role of intra-firm trade. Journal of Political Economy 121(1), 74–126.
Javorcik, B. (2004). Does foreign direct investment increase the productivity of domestic firms? in search of spillovers through backward linkages. American Economic Review 94(3), 605–627.
Jones, C. (1995). R&d-based models of economic growth.
omy 103(4), 759–84.

Journal of Political Econ-

Jones, C. (2005). Growth and ideas. Handbook of Economic Growth, P. Aghion and S. Durlauf,
eds. 1A, 1064–1108.
Jovanovic, B. and G. M. McDonald (1994). Competitive diffusion. Journal of Political Economy 102, 24–52.
Jovanovic, B. and R. Rob (1989). The growth and diffusion of knowledge. Review of
Economic Studies 56, 569–582.
Keller, W. (2004). International technology diffusion. Journal of Economic Literature 42,
752–782.
Keller, W. (2010). International trade, foreign direct investment, and technology
spillovers. Handbook of the Economics of Innovation 2, 793–829.
Keller, W. and S. R. Yeaple (2013). The gravity of knowledge. American Economic Review 103(4), 1414.
Kortum, S. (1997). Research, patenting, and technological change. Econometrica 65(6).
Lashkaripour, A. and V. Lugovskyy (2017). Industry-level scale economies: from microestimation to macro-implications. Mimeo, Indiana University.
Levchenko, A. and J. Zhang (2016). The evolution of comparative advantage: Measurement and welfare implications. Journal of Monetary Economics 78, 96–111.
Lind, N. and N. Ramondo (2018). Trade with correlation. NBER Working Paper Series (24380).
Lucas, R. E. (1978). On the size distribution of business firms. The Bell Journal of Economics.
Lucas, R. E. (2009). Ideas and growth. Economica 76(301), 1–19.
Lucas, R. E. and B. Moll (2014). Knowledge growth and the allocation of time. Journal of
Political Economy 122(1), 1–51.
38

Luttmer, E. (2012). Eventually, noise and imitation implies balanced growth. Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper (699).
Markusen, J. (1984). Multinationals, multi-plant economies, and the gains from trade.
Journal of International Economics 16, 205–226.
McFadden, D. (1978). Modeling the choice of residential location. Transportation Research
Record (673).
McGrattan, E. R. and E. C. Prescott (2009). Openness, technology capital, and development. Journal of Economic Theory 144(6), 2454–2476.
Monge-Naranjo, A. (2018). Markets, externalities, and the dynamic gains of openness.
International Economic Review forthcoming.
Ossa, R. (2015). Why trade matters after all. Journal of International Economics 97(2), 266–
277.
Pavcnik, N. (2002). Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvements: Evidence
from chilean plants. The Review of Economic Studies 69, 245–76.
Penrose, M. D. (1992). Semi-min-stable processes. The Annals of Probability 20(3), 1450–
1463.
Perla, J. and C. Tonetti (2014). Equilibrium imitation and growth. Journal of Political Economy 122, 512–76.
Perla, J., C. Tonetti, and M. Waugh (2015). Equilibrium technology diffusion, trade, and
growth. Unpublished.
Ramondo, N. (2009). Foreign plants and industry productivity: Evidence from chile.
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111(4), 789Ð809.
Ramondo, N. (2014). A quantitative approach to multinational production. Journal of
international economics 93, 108–122.
Ramondo, N. and A. Rodríguez-Clare (2010). Growth, size, and openness: A quantitative
approach. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 100(2), 62–67.
Ramondo, N. and A. Rodríguez-Clare (2013). Trade, multinational production, and the
gains from openness. Journal of Political Economy 121(2), 273–322.
Ramondo, N., A. Rodríguez-Clare, and M. Saborío-Rodríguez (2016). Trade, domestic
frictions, and scale effects. American Economic Review 106(10), 3159–84.
Redding, S. (2016). Goods trade, factor mobility and welfare. Journal of International Economics 101, 148–167.
Rodríguez-Clare, A. (2007). Trade, diffusion, and the gains from openness. Unpublished.
Sachs, J. D. and A. Warner (1995). Economic reform and the process of global integration.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1.
39

Sampson, T. (2016). Dynamic selection: An idea flows theory of entry, trade and growth.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(1), 315–380.
Schlather, M. (2002). Models for stationary max-stable random fields. Extremes 5(1), 33–44.
Shikher, S. (2012). International production, technology diffusion, and trade. Journal of
International Trade and Economic Development 23(1), 111–154.
Somale, M. (2018). Comparative advantage in innovation and production. Unpublished.
Sun, C. (2018). Factor-biased multinational production and the labor share. Unpublished.
Tintelnot, F. (2017). Global production with export platforms. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(1), 157–209.
UNCTAD (2005). Transnational corporations and the internationalization of r&d. World
Investment Report.
UNCTAD (2017). Investment and the digital economy. World Investment Report.

40

