NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASUREMENT ERROR IN IMPUTED CONSUMPTION
Scott R. Baker
Lorenz Kueng
Steffen Meyer
Michaela Pagel
Working Paper 25078
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25078

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Scott R. Baker, Lorenz Kueng, Steffen Meyer, and Michaela Pagel. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measurement Error in Imputed Consumption
Scott R. Baker, Lorenz Kueng, Steffen Meyer, and Michaela Pagel
NBER Working Paper No. 25078
September 2018
JEL No. C81,D12,D14,E21,G11
ABSTRACT
Because of limitations in survey-based measures of household consumption, a growing literature
uses an alternative measure of consumer expenditures commonly referred to as "imputed
consumption." This approach typically utilizes annual snapshots of household income and wealth
from administrative tax registries to calculate household spending as the residual of the household
budget constraint. In this paper we use transaction-level retail investment data to assess the
measurement error that can result in imputed consumption due to intra-year changes in asset
values and composition. We show that substantial discrepancies between imputed and actual
spending can arise due to trading costs, asset distributions, variable trade timing, and volatile
asset prices between two annual snapshots. While these errors tend to be quantitatively small and
centered around zero on average, we demonstrate that they vary across individuals of different
types and income levels and are highly correlated with the business cycle. We end by suggesting
ways to minimize the impact of these imputation errors in future research and we discuss which
research questions are least likely to suffer from such errors.
Scott R. Baker
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Suite 4394
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
s-baker@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Lorenz Kueng
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Suite 4394
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-kueng@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Steffen Meyer
Leibniz Universitaet
Koenigsworther Platz 1
30167 Hannover
Germany
meyer@gif.uni-hannover.de
Michaela Pagel
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mpagel@columbia.edu

“One of the biggest impediments to further development of empirical research on intertemporal allocation seems to be the lack of good longitudinal data on expenditures
and/or saving.” Browning and Leth-Petersen (2003)

1

Introduction

Economists need accurate measures of spending to analyze consumption and saving behavior, to
study aggregate fluctuations in consumption, and for constructing measures of economic wellbeing, such as inequality or poverty. Consumption data free of measurement error are difficult
to come by, especially when seeking detail over a long period of time. Consumption surveys use
paper or phone interviews to ask stylized questions on spending in a few broad consumption good
categories over a particular recall period (e.g., the Interview Survey of the Consumer Expenditure
Survey, CEX). Alternatively, households can be asked to keep track of recurrent expenditures,
such as groceries, for a short period of time in a diary (e.g., the Diary Survey of the CEX).
For obvious reasons, survey respondents may have difficulties in recalling past purchases and
have little incentive to answer the questions accurately. For instance, respondents may not
understand the wording of the questions, behave differently in practice, simply forget some past
purchase transactions, or strategically underreport to avoid more detailed follow-up questions
(Parker and Souleles 2017).1 Moreover, such measurement error or noise in the data generated
by surveys that simply ask about past purchases can increase with the length of the recall period
(de Nicola and Giné 2014).2
In recent years, researchers have started to use two alternative sources of consumption data.
First, using collaborations with private-sector companies, researches have gained access to deidentified consumer transaction data. Such data automatically tracks household spending behavior
and other financial transactions at high frequency with minimal recording errors.3
Second, a growing literature develops and utilizes an alternative measure of consumption
1

A large literature has documented basic problems with survey-based measures of consumption (e.g., Pistaferri
2015). Ahmed et al. (2006) for example compare two measurements for the same set of households and find that
recall food consumption data, which is the basis of a great deal of empirical work, suffers from considerable
measurement error, while diaries records are found to be somewhat more accurate. Other work has compared
consumption measures across different surveys or across different waves of the same survey (e.g., Bound et al.
2001, Pudney 2008). The measurement error in household-level consumption data, and the difficulty of estimating
nonlinear models in the presence of such error, have led some to call for abandoning Euler equation estimation
altogether (Carroll 2001).
2
Additionally, surveys can produce data with systematic biases if respondents have justification bias, concerns
about surveyors sharing the information, or stigma about their consumption habits (Karlan and Zinman 2008).
3
See for example Gelman et al. (2014), Grinstein-Weiss et al. (2014), Kuchler and Pagel (2015), Baker (2017),
Kueng (2018), Ganong and Noel (2018), or Olafsson and Pagel (2018) for a discussion of the advantages and
disadvantages of this type of data.

1

based on highly-detailed administrative data, often referred to as “imputed consumption,” which
avoids many of the problems with standard survey-based data and often covers the country’s
entire population.4 Imputed consumption is constructed as a residual from a household’s budget
constraint, the part of total income that was not saved or invested. This approach imposes heavy
data requirements on the measurement exercise because the researcher needs comprehensive
measures of income as well as comprehensive asset transactions, holdings, and price data for
both real and financial assets.
Sweden, Norway, and Denmark collect most of the required information at an annual level as
part of their tax registries (or they collected this data previously in the case of Sweden), often supplemented by additional administrative data. The registries, when utilized in full by researchers,
can be quite comprehensive, containing data on stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and bank accounts
each taxpayer owns at the end of the year. Furthermore, data on capital gains and dividends
is available for some years and some researchers have managed to obtain additional information
on intra-year security transactions (e.g., Eika et al. 2017 for Norway). Home-ownership and
household permanent address can be tracked via the housing registry, and the data also contains
information on labor and financial income and transfers.
Sweden and Norway also run standard consumer expenditures surveys which can be matched
with the households in the registry data (Koijen et al. 2014, Kolsrud et al. 2017, Eika et al. 2017,
Fagereng and Halvorsen 2017). This setup allows for the comparison of registry-imputed and
survey-based measures of consumption. Koijen et al. (2014), for example, uncover significant
discrepancies between registry- and survey-based consumption measures that increase in income
and wealth.5
The registry-based or imputed consumption approach thus attempts to measure all consumer
spending on services and non-durable and durable goods at an annual frequency. While the benefits of this approach relative to other measures can be substantial, some caveats remain. The
imputed consumption approach generally cannot distinguish between types of consumption or
spending, but only aggregates. For some countries with sufficient registry information regarding
large durables like cars, a partial distinction between durables and nondurables may be made.
In addition, as with many survey- or transaction-based consumption measures, the imputed consumption approach can likewise not distinguish between quantities and prices. This distinction
4
Important studies include Browning and Leth-Petersen (2003), Koijen et al. (2014), Bach et al. (2015), Sodini
et al. (2016), Fagereng et al. (2016), Fagereng et al. (2017), Eika et al. (2017), and Kolsrud et al. (2018).
5
While the mean and median of the consumption distribution are similar, the survey understates the consumption of wealthy and high-income households, while slightly overstating consumption of the poorest quintile
of households. Moreover, Koijen et al. (2014) show that registry-based consumption is sensitive to an accurate
imputation of returns that households are earning on their assets. The authors show that incorrectly applying
a broad total return measure to a household’s financial asset holdings leads to substantial deviations from the
properly imputed registry measure and that these discrepancies are increasing in wealth.

2

can be significant under many utility functions (e.g., non-homothetic preferences). Finally, there
may be measurement issues arising from actions taken by households to evade taxes and thus
render some assets or income less visible to government registries. Alstadsæter et al. (2017) find
that there exists non-trivial amounts of tax evasion in Norway, Sweden, and Denmark, especially
among the wealthy.
In this paper, we use high-frequency transaction-level retail investment data on trades and
portfolio holdings for approximately 20,000 retail investors in Germany from 2004 to 2015 to
document potential measurement error affecting imputed consumption.
More specifically, discrepancies between imputed and actual consumption may arise whenever
investors buy and sell assets at different points within the year, incur trading costs, or are
paid dividends or other asset distributions that differ from those of the market at large, and
researchers only observe administrative records at the end of the year. That is, miscalculating
asset growth experienced by a household will mistakenly attribute changes in asset values to the
household consuming more or less than it actually does. As one example, it is well-known that
some U.S. retail investors have substantial annual turnover, have significantly different levels of
returns relative to the market, and may incur substantial trading costs that can eat up the entire
historical equity premium (Barber and Odean 2000). More recently, similar results have been
documented for Scandinavian and German investors (e.g., Bach et al. 2015, Koestner et al. 2017).
Our study accomplishes the following goals. First, we demonstrate that imputing consumption from annual portfolio snapshots using a variety of methodologies can lead to substantial
measurement error, both in absolute terms and relative to household income, especially for highincome and wealthy households. Second, we show that these imputation errors, both across
households and within household over time, are not purely “classical” measurement error, i.e.,
uncorrelated with the outcome variable or the regression error term. In particular, we show that
these imputation errors on financial consumption are correlated with household-level financial
characteristics like income, wealth, and trading behavior. Third, we show that the measurement
error in imputed consumption from investment portfolios is correlated with aggregate economic
variables such as home prices, stock market returns, and GDP growth. Finally, we suggest ways to
minimize the impact of these imputation errors in future research and we discuss which research
questions are least likely to suffer from such errors and which results will be most sensitive.
While we do demonstrate that there exists substantial amounts of measurement error for some
(economically important) households, consumption imputation errors stemming from household
equity portfolios are relatively small for most households, on average. This is especially true in
Germany, where many households do not participate in equity markets to any large extent. In
addition, the inclusion of data that seems to be available to researchers across numerous countries
can substantially reduce issues arising from imputation errors. We discuss these recommendations
3

for researchers in Section 5.
This paper is most closely related to Eika et al. (2017). Using data from a different country
and using financial transactions from a bank instead of administrative registry data, we reach a
similar conclusion. Many assumptions in consumption imputation are not innocuous—substantial
measurement error and even biased average values can result from an annual snapshot approach—
especially for households with higher levels of income, wealth, and financial market trading
activity.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data. Section 3 discusses the
methodology of imputing consumption from the household’s intertemporal budget constraint and
potential sources of measurement error. Section 4 assesses the financial portfolio’s contribution
to measurement error in imputed consumption using the German investment accounts data.
Section 5 recommends steps researchers can take to minimize the impact of these imputation
errors on their analysis. Section 6 concludes.

2

Transaction-Level Investment Data

To investigate the extent of measurement error in imputed consumption data, we use a unique
panel data set that tracks the daily trading of over 20,000 private investors in Germany spanning
the years 2004 to 2015. The investment data comes from a large German bank, with a random
sample being drawn from the several hundred thousand clients the brokerage serves. With this
data, we can precisely measure each trader’s daily activity from his logging into an account to
every single trade that he makes. We are also able to identify quasi-automatic trades, such as
savings plan transactions. Moreover, trading decisions in our sample are not moderated by any
influence from third parties, such as financial advisors.
This data set has been used and discussed in detail in previous studies (e.g., Schmittmann
et al. 2014). It consists of a monthly asset position file, a daily transactions file, a file containing bookings to cash accounts, and a file containing investor demographics. The monthly asset
position file contains identifiers for the investor, the securities as well as the respective volumes
and values in euros. The transactions file contains identifiers for the investors and traded securities, transaction volumes, prices, and dates, as well as information on order types (orders with
and without limits). Investors may also hold checking, savings and settlement accounts, with
transfers between accounts being common.
In addition to portfolio holdings and trades, we also have the time series of checking, savings,
and settlement account transactions as well as balances for all investors. The settlement account
is used as the vehicle to execute trades into and out of the portfolio. With the data on all
transactions in all accounts, we can infer all transfers within the bank as well as all transfers
4

out of the bank. Transactions are automatically categorized and labeled, such as wire transfers,
ATM withdrawals, or debit card transactions. We measure gross financial wealth as the sum of
all assets an investor holds plus his checking, savings, and settlement account balances. The file
with cash bookings contains bookings into the investor’s cash accounts.
With respect to investor demographics, we observe a customer’s income, age, gender, geographic location (postal code), marital status, employment status, whether or not they hold a
doctoral degree, and self-reported risk-preferences.

2.1

Sample selection

We restrict the user sample to individuals who the bank flags as likely using this bank as their only
banking institution, i.e., individuals that do not hold other bank relationships. This flag is based
on an account being dedicated as containing the tax-free allowance (i.e., Freistellungsauftrag),
account activity such as income and spending transactions, and the linking of other accounts
via the bank’s financial aggregation facility. Nevertheless, our measure of financial/investment
consumption may be biased if investors perform offsetting trades in other investment accounts.
Therefore, we undertake multiple steps to ensure that we restrict the sample to individuals who
utilize only this bank.
It is important to note that the bank from which we obtained the data is not only one of the
largest retail brokerages in Germany, but also a multi-service retail financial institution offering
checking and savings account services as well as overdraft facilities, credit cards, mortgage and
auto credits, insurance, and retirement savings vehicles. Because cash payments are still prevalent
in Germany, the bank also offers a dense network of ATMs. In Germany, holding multiple checking
accounts is discouraged as this hurts individual credit scores. Needless to say, the bank offers all
common online transfer facilities and automatic checking account transactions.

2.2

Representativeness

Table 1 displays summary statistics for our sample, including mean and median of each component of gross financial wealth. The table also shows annual portfolio turnover as defined by
Barber and Odean (2000), and the annual sum of all trading fees.
[Table 1 about here.]
The sample does not comprise the entirety of the bank’s customer base, but a 7% sample of all
customers. The bank did not pick the sample of retail investors by trading frequency but rather
chose a random sub-sample of all bank users who held a brokerage account. In that sense, our
5

sample is representative for individuals in Germany holding an investment portfolio at a major
bank.
Panel A displays summary statistics of the customer sample from the bank. For comparison,
Panels B and C provide similar statistics based on two representative surveys, the German SocioEconomic Panel (GSOEP), which is comparable to the PSID, and the “Private Haushalte und
ihre Finanzen” survey of the Bundesbank (PHF), which is comparable to the SCF. One issue
when comparing statistics between the bank sample and these surveys is differences in the unit
of observation. The bank data samples accounts rather than individuals as is the case for the
GSOEP or households for the PHF. While each account is clearly linked to one natural person
(i.e., there are no joint accounts), a couple might nevertheless use just one account instead of
two separate ones.
The average age of the account holder is 44, which is comparable to the population, but the
age distribution is more compressed in our sample of investors. Our sample is also substantially
more male than the nation. Brokerage clients are generally expected (Cole et al. 2014) and found
to be more financially sophisticated than the overall population (Dorn and Huberman 2005).
This is also true for our sample: 5.5% of our investors hold a doctoral degree, which is higher
than the 1.4% in the German adult population age 25-64 in 2016 according to the OECD.6
We see that our sample has both higher income and higher financial wealth than the nation as
a whole. Income observed in the bank data is conceptually closest to labor income in the GSOEP,
including regular salary payments after taxes and social security contribution, but also contains
repeated wire transfers such as government transfers. Average and median labor income is about
twice as high as in the population and average financial wealth (estimated as the sum of portfolio
value, checking, and savings account) is about three times larger. Both sample distributions have
much larger right tails than the population. These descriptive statistics are comparable to those
reported by household finance studies using U.S. data (e.g., Barber and Odean 2000).
Thus, our sample is not representative for the German population as a whole; less than half of
Germans are invested in equities, either directly or indirectly. However, it is a fairly representative
sample of self-directed active retail investors in Germany. We believe that this portion of the
population is of particular interest and importance when thinking about measurement error in
imputed consumption precisely because these individuals are the most likely to be performing
asset trades and seeing the greatest amount of heterogeneity in asset price growth. Households
without substantial volatile assets (e.g., equity portfolios) are therefore less likely to experience
the types of imputation errors that we describe in this paper.
6

Source: OECD.Stat, educational attainment and labour-force status, https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?
datasetcode=EAG_NEAC.

6

3

Calculating Actual and Imputed Financial Consumption

In this section, we discuss our method of computing “financial consumption” and sources of measurement error that may arise from incomplete information about various aspects of the financial
portfolio. By “financial consumption”, we mean a type of active savings or dis-savings flowing
to or from investment accounts, defined precisely below. With this formulation, “financial consumption” need not be actually consumed by the household; these active savings may simply flow
from a checking account to an investment account or be observed elsewhere on the balance sheet
and would not induce error if measuring consumption directly through spending transactions.
However, mismeasurement of “financial consumption” will directly impact imputed consumption
derived as a residual of the budget constraint because it implies a mismeasurement of the amount
of savings being done.

3.1
3.1.1

Calculating Actual Financial Consumption
The Period Budget Constraint

The goal of this paper is to assess the contribution of a household’s financial portfolio to imputed
consumption, which is based on administrative records of income taxes and annual snapshots of
wealth, and potential measurement error resulting from the need to impute unobserved elements
of the household’s portfolio.
Financial assets’ contribution to imputed consumption play an important role in the residual
methodology, especially for the upper tail of the income and wealth distribution where financial
asset holdings are a large component of overall wealth. For this group in particular, mismeasurement of financial returns can be potentially large relative to measured income. This is both
because financial asset prices and returns can be volatile relative to non-financial asset prices
(e.g., home prices) or household income and also because households will buy and sell securities much more often than they will sell homes or change jobs. So, mismeasurement of returns
can pose a persistent problem for imputing consumption in every year that an individual or a
household is in a sample, even when remaining at the same job and living in the same home.
There are three main approaches to expressing consumption expenditures as a residual of the
budget constraint: the flow approach, the stock approach, and the return approach. Denote At
the vector of financial asset positions (including cash as well as debt as negative elements) of a
household’s financial portfolio at date t (which we define to be the end of period t over which we
measure flows) and Pt the corresponding vector of prices (equal to 1 for cash, the numeraire).
The flow measure of imputed consumption equates expenditures and revenues. Consumption
expenditures Ct during period t can be financed in three ways: (i) with capital income net of
7

capital income taxes, capital gains taxes, and wealth taxes as well as trading and other fees; (ii)
with dis-saving (net asset sales); and (iii) with earned income and transfers net of earned income
taxes,
Ct = CItnet − St + Etnet
= CFt0 At−1 − Pt0 ∆At − F eest + (Et − T axest ).

(1)

CG
− T axW
• CItnet = CFt0 At−1 − F eest − T axCI
t is capital income (i.e., cash flows from
t − T axt
CI
assets) net of capital income taxes T axt (if treated differently than earned income taxes),
W
capital gains taxes T axCG
t , wealth taxes T axt , and fees (both trading fees and other fees,
such as annual account fees). CFt is the vector of cash flows during period t, which include
mainly interest payments and dividends.

• St = Pt0 ∆At is active saving (dissaving if Pt0 ∆At < 0).
• Etnet = Et − T axE
t is earned income Et , including transfers (government transfers, gifts,
etc.), net of earned income taxes T axE
t . The second line simplifies notation by collecting
E
CI
CG
tax terms, T axest = T axt + T axt + T axW
t + T axt .
The budget constraint (1) for period t relates to the different administrative tax records that
the residual consumption imputation method can ideally access: personal income tax records
and personal wealth tax records. Financial fees on the other hand are typically not observed in
tax records, although they might be available from other administrative records which could be
linked using social security or other personal identifiers.
The second expression of imputed consumption uses a stock approach. Defining financial
wealth Wt = Pt0 At , we can decompose changes in financial wealth over period t into active saving
and passive capital gains, ∆Wt = Pt0 ∆At + ∆Pt0 At−1 . Substituting for active dis-savings −Pt0 ∆At
in equation (1), we obtain
Ct = CFt0 At−1 − (∆Wt − ∆Pt0 At−1 ) − F eest + (Et − T axest ).

(2)

The third approach expresses the budget constraint using return notation. Denoting portfolio
P
P
CF +∆P
P
Aj,t−1
return rtp = j∈At−1 Pjtj,t−1 jt · j,t−1
≡ j∈At−1 rjt ·ωj,t−1 , capital income and passive capital
Wt−1
gains equal the return on financial wealth, CFt0 At−1 + ∆Pt0 At−1 = rtp · Wt−1 such that imputed
consumption can alternatively be expressed as
Ct = rtp · Wt−1 − ∆Wt − F eest + (Et − T axest ).

8

(3)

This expression has the advantage that it does not require separate information about asset prices
and quantities, A and P , but only about total financial wealth W and its portfolio return rp .
However, as we will see, accurately measuring this portfolio return requires the actual purchase
and sale prices of all assets between two transactions.
3.1.2

Accounting for Intra-Year Trading

The consumption flow expressed as a residual of the budget constraint in equations (1)-(3) above
is accurate only between two trading dates but typically not for an entire year. Given that prices
fluctuate during the year and individuals trade securities during the year, equations (1)-(3) are
incompletely specified. Both realized and unrealized capital gains throughout the year need to
be fully taken into account.
Suppose an individual makes Nt trades in year t. Denote tNt December 31 of year t when
the individual makes a last trade or when the administrative records are consolidated to assess
taxes and t0 January 1 of year t.7 Hence, there are Nt + 1 dates n = 0, 1, ..., Nt that we need to
keep track of to accurately impute annual consumption expenditure flows starting from period
budget constraint (1).
Let Xtn denote the flow of X in period tn between trading dates tn−1 and tn and Xt =
PNt
8
n=1 Xtn the annual flow of X from January 1 to December 31 of year t. Using this notation,
annual consumption expenditures in year t can be written using equation (1) as
Ct =

Nt
X


CFt0n Atn−1 − Pt0n ∆Atn − F eest + (Et − T axest )

(4)

n=1

P
The first term, n CFt0n Atn−1 , is the annual flow of dividends and interest. The second term,
P 0
n Ptn ∆Atn , is the net realized capital gain throughout the year. Note that prices refer not only
to the end-of-period security price but the correct price at which the asset was actually bought
or sold (e.g., a security contained in AtN may not have been purchased at price PtN ).
Relative to this means of measurement in equation (4), using equation (1) to impute consumption from two annual snapshots will cause measurement error in two ways. First, if PtN is
used to measure the purchase price of a security rather than the true but unobserved purchase
prices Ptn , active savings will be measured incorrectly. Second, the annual snapshot approach
will entirely miss gains or losses from intermediate trades conducted during the year that are
P t
partially netted out, e.g., if N
6 AtNt − At0 . Both of these sources of errors will
n=1 |Atn − Atn−1 | =
7

January 1 is a trading holiday so that the value of tradable assets is the same on January 1 and on December
31 of the previous year, i.e., Zt0 = Z(t−1)N ≡ Zt−1 .
8
Similarly, since stocks are measured at the end of period, the end-of-year stock of variable Z is Zt = ZtNt .

9

bias imputed consumption either upwards or downwards, depending on how security prices Ptn
vary through the year, unless the researcher observes active dis-saving flows −Ptn ∆Atn directly,
say because they are recorded in the capital gains and loss tax registry.9
3.1.3

Contribution of Investment Accounts to Imputed Consumption

To focus on the role of financial investment accounts for measures of imputed consumption, we
define a financial portfolio’s contribution to consumption as
F inCont ≡ Ct − RealCont − CashCont − (Et − T axest )
=

=

=

Nt
X

n=1
Nt
X
n=1
Nt
X



(5)


CFt0n Atn−1 − Pt0n ∆Atn − F eest

CFt0n Atn−1 + ∆Pt0n Atn−1 − ∆Wt − F eest

rtpn · Wtn−1 − ∆Wt − F eest .10

n=1

The three items we exclude from the analysis are the contribution of net earnings Et − T axest
to consumption (which is typically well measured in income tax records) and two types of assets
from the vector A, the contribution of real assets, RealCont (e.g., owner-occupied housing), and
the contribution of cash, CashCont (e.g., currency and checking accounts), both of which we do
not observe in our data.11
While we do not observe these other aspects of household income and consumption, we think
that it is relatively unlikely that measurement error in income or real assets would vary negatively
with measurement error in financial consumption. Without such a negative correlation, F inCont
will be linked directly with consumption, so the amount of error we measure in F inCont will be
translated directly into error that affects the measurement of total consumption.
9

Note that new purchases and hence the initial cost basis of an asset position will not generate a gain or loss
and hence will not show up in the capital gains and loss tax registry. The cost basis might be available from the
wealth tax registry.
PNt
10
The third and fourth lines use the fact that n=1
∆Wtn = WtN − Wt0 = Wt − Wt−1 = ∆Wt .
11
We abuse notation slightly here as the vectors A, P , and CF now only contain a subset of the elements of
the corresponding vectors in the previous equations.

10

3.2
3.2.1

Imputing Financial Consumption
Potential Sources of Measurement Error

We now simulate how different issues of missing financial data that often occur with administrative tax records affect imputed consumption. Measurement error in this type of consumption
imputation can stem from a number of sources. Compared to a method of constructing a measure of actual financial consumption, these errors range from generally less consequential, like
neglecting trading fees or dividend and interest payments, to much more substantial errors based
on mismeasuring portfolio composition or neglecting portfolio growth altogether. We seek to
understand just how large the potential measurement error might be in each case.
Broadly speaking, these sources of potential error are:
(a) Missing or incomplete trading fees. If researchers exclude fees from their calculation of
financial consumption (F inCont ), they will overstate financial consumption by implicitly
assuming that F eest = 0.
(b) Missing or incomplete cash flows from assets. If researchers exclude dividends and interest
income from their calculation of financial consumption, they will understate financial consumption by implicitly assuming that CFtn = 0. Even when a researcher knows the exact
portfolio composition at year-end, if the timing of asset purchases within a year is unknown,
researchers may be unable to recover whether an individual would have received a particular
cash flow. For example, whether a stock was purchased cum- or ex-dividend.
(c) Missing intra-year gains or losses. Researchers with annual snapshots reporting only actual
portfolio holdings (and prices) may exclude trading conducted during the year that was
“netted out” in the same year (e.g., buying 10 shares of firm X at $10 in February and
selling them 6 months later for $15 each). That is, ∆At will be an accurate portrayal of net
asset holding changes, but will miss intermediate trades conducted during the year (e.g., if
PNt
6 ∆At ) and thus bias imputed consumption either upwards or downwards
n=1 |Atn −Atn−1 | =
depending on how security prices Ptn vary through the year and when exactly an individual
bought and sold the security.
(d) Price errors in intra-year portfolio changes. Researchers with annual snapshots that only
report quantities of securities being held will mis-measure the price at which those securities
were purchased or sold. To the extent that securities vary in price throughout the year,
this will lead to errors in the measurement of F inCont . Similarly to above, this means
of measuring asset changes (i.e, using ∆At ) will obscure intra-year gross changes in asset
11

holdings. In addition, PtN will be mis-measured even when calculating the impact of net
asset changes on F inCont
(e) Incorrect assumptions about portfolio composition and returns. If researchers only observe
the total portfolio value (e.g., they observe P 0 A rather than P and A separately), they will
be unable to determine the actual annual growth of a given portfolio. Researchers may
attribute a broad market return to the portfolio, neglecting any variation across households
in risk preferences, etc. Again, here both Pt and ∆At will be mis-measured to an even greater
extent, depending on how significantly an individual’s portfolio differs from a broad market
index.
(f) Neglecting portfolio growth altogether. Potentially the largest source of measurement error
may be to neglect any growth altogether, taking the difference between year-end portfolio
balances ∆Wt as being equal to −F inCont
3.2.2

Illustrative Imputation Methods

For the purposes of this paper, we construct six different measures of imputed financial consumpd and listed below, corresponding roughly to the sources of measurement
tion, denoted F inCon
error identified above. We then define the imputation error  by comparing measured financial
contribution to the portfolio’s true contribution to consumption, F inCon, which might not be
available to the researcher,
d t − F inCont = C
bt − Ct .
t = F inCon

(6)

Each imputation method is not aimed at precisely mimicking procedures taken in any particular
paper, but attempt to more broadly span the types of imputation that have been seen in the
literature to this point.
Our versions of imputed financial consumption are created as follows:
(i) No fees. For this method of imputation, we assume that the researcher has sufficient information on trading behavior to calculate a given portfolio’s true growth, purchases, sales,
and dividend and interest payments. However, the researcher is unable to observe trading
and other portfolio fees and thus overestimates the amount of financial consumption obtained by the individual. This is generally the best case scenario for registry-based imputed
consumption, assuming that researchers have all relevant information from administrative
records (e.g., all tax records and additional administrative records of asset prices and asset
(i)
holdings or transactions as in Eika et al. 2017). Formally, Fd
eest = 0 such that t = F eest .
12

(ii) No dividends and interest income. Again, we assume that the researcher is able to construct
the actual financial consumption including all elements (including fees) except cash flows
from assets. This scenario might occur if capital income taxes are stored in a separate
database that researchers cannot access. Because cash flows are strictly positive, researchers
thus underestimate the true amount of financial consumption being undertaken by the
d tn = 0 such that
individual if they ignore cash flow distributions from assets. Formally, CF
P
(ii)
t = − n CFt0n Atn−1 .
(iii) No intra-year gross trades. With this method of imputation, the researcher can only observe
the net changes in portfolio composition across annual snapshots and the cost basis of the
net purchases.12 This scenario might occur if financial institutions directly report to the tax
authority (so that the cost basis of each security is observed), but the researcher does not
observe realized capital gains and losses, which might be stored in some other administrative
tax database (e.g., different tax records for wealth, capital gains, and personal income taxes).
Thus, for frequent traders, the researcher will measure trading gains and losses within the
PNt
year with error. Formally,
n=1 |Atn − Atn−1 | 6= AtNt − At0 and intra-year gross asset
positions Âtn are not observed.13
(iv) Mid-year prices instead of cost basis. Similar to the previous method, the researcher can
observe year-end individual asset positions held by the individual and year-end prices.
However, the researcher is now unaware of the price at which a share was purchased (i.e.,
the cost basis). Again, any intra-year trading that is netted out (in terms of the number of
shares, not the gains or losses) by the end of the year will be unobserved by the researcher.
In addition, to the extent that individual securities (stocks, bonds, mutual funds, etc) vary
in price throughout the year, the ability to only observe changes in the number of securities
will introduce error. This scenario might occur if researchers only have access to wealth
tax records, but not the capital gains tax records which also contain the cost basis. Here,
a sensible approach is to attribute change in securities held to have occurred mid-year
on June 30th at the prevailing price, PtJune30 , which the researcher can link to the data
P t
0d
from an external source such ashThomson Reuters Datastream.
Formally, N
n=1 Ptn ∆Atn =
i

P
(iv)
Pt0June30 ∆At such that t = − Pt0June30 ∆At −
.
n Ptn ∆Atn
(v) Using market returns, but no individual securities observed. This method of imputation
is simply a less precise version of (iv). Here, the researcher is able to see only aggregate
portfolio values at year end, e.g., the value of stocks, bonds, etc. The researcher assumes
12

We assume individuals try to lower tax consequences by using a ‘first in, first out’ (FIFO) approach.
(iii)
Expressing the error term t
mathematically would require a substantial amount of additional notation
without yielding much further insights. Hence, we limit the exposition to this specific example.
13

13

that the household holds a portfolio with an equity return equal to that seen by the DAX,
a standard composite equity index in Germany similar to the S&P 500 Index in the United
States. The portfolio is assumed to grow at the same rate as the DAX, with any adjustments
to the portfolio being made on June 30th. Thus, the researcher will observe true financial
consumption with error if the individual’s portfolio differs significantly from broad market
P
(v)
holdings. Formally, r̂tp = rtDAX in equation (3) such that t = rtDAX Wt−1 − n rtpn Wtn−1 .
(vi) “Raw” portfolio change. For the most basic imputation of financial consumption, the researcher looks only at changes in portfolio size between annual snapshots, disregarding any
compositional change or growth. That is, the total financial portfolio balance at the end
of year t is subtracted from the total financial portfolio balance at the end of year t − 1 to
d t = −∆Wt such
obtain the imputed financial consumption during year t. Formally, F inCon
(vi)
p
that t = rt · Wt−1 .

4

Assessing Accuracy of Imputed Financial Consumption

Being able to observe an investor’s actual or ‘true’ financial contribution to imputed consumption,
in this section we determine whether and how these different means of imputing financial consumption might impact the interpretation of research using these methods. To begin we compare
the imputed consumption measures, by portfolio-year, against the actual financial consumption
exhibited by that portfolio-year. Because investors in our sample have dramatically different
portfolio sizes and income, we scale the difference in actual and imputed financial consumption
by average after-tax income over all investor-years, Einet ,
it
.
Einet

(7)

We also exclude individuals with portfolio sizes under 1,000 euros so that this scaling is not
driven by miniscule portfolios.
[Table 2 about here.]

4.1

Distribution of Imputation Errors

Table 2 shows means, standard deviations, and percentiles of this relative error measure for each
of the different imputation methods that are enumerated in Section 3. The first row shows the
relative error if we only lack information on fees (method i). This is the best case scenario
for imputed consumption, assuming that researchers have all relevant information from all tax
14

records. As would be expected, errors stemming from neglecting trading fees are uniformly
positive (overstating actual financial consumption). In general, these errors are not substantial
relative to the individuals’ average income, with an interquartile range of 1.5%. However, in the
tails, we see that trading fees may be over 20% of non-financial income for the heaviest traders
(see also Barber and Odean 2000).
Previous research shows that the amount of trading has a large person fixed effect (e.g., men
tend to trade substantially more; see Figure 3 below). Controlling for individual fixed effects
in panel data or individual characteristics such as gender in cross-sectional data could partially
alleviate this issue. However, trading might still be substantially correlated with the business
cycle, say if investors trade more in downturns, which could lead to biased estimates of the
cyclicality of consumption. Researchers might therefore try to construct proxies for the annual
number of trades, say by counting the number of asset positions that changed across two annual
snapshots.
Errors stemming from omitting portfolio cash flow distributions in the second row (method
ii) are uniformly negative , therefore understating actual financial consumption. Similar to the
first row, these errors are not substantial relative to the individuals’ average income (interquartile
range of 2%), but disregarding cash flows understates of financial consumption by 10% of income
in the 10th percentile.
For the other imputation methods, errors can be both substantially positive and negative. The
third row shows that omitting intra-year trading (method iii) leads to small errors on average with
a mean (median) error of 0.4% (0%) of income, and an interquartile range of only 0.3%. However,
the errors in boths tails of the distribution are very large, understating financial consumption by
more than 60% of household income in the 10th percentile and overstating it by more than 75%
in the 90th percentile.
The fourth row shows that when researchers also lack the cost basis at which additional
assets were purchased and instead have to use mid-year prices (method iv), the tails of the error
distribution become heavier. For instance, the interquartile range of the error increases from
0.3% to 5% of income.
Finally, assuming portfolios simply return the average market return as in the fifth row
(method v) or neglecting returns entirely as in the sixth row (method vi) has extremely large
effects on imputed financial consumption across the error distribution. These errors are largely
driven by a combination of factors, including investors holding portfolios that differ substantially
from (efficient) market portfolios and by realized returns over the specific sample period, both
for the overall market index and for the the cross-section of individual asset returns. Because
realized returns can be highly correlated with other measures that researchers want to study in
relation to consumption, such as individual income or the business cycle, this measure of imputed
15

consumption could result in significant biases.
[Figure 1 about here.]
In Figure 1, we display plots of actual (or “true”) financial consumption on the horizontal
axis against financial consumption imputed according to our six different procedures on the
vertical axis. Both actual and imputed financial consumption are measured in nominal euros at
a portfolio-year level with zero measurement error for a given portfolio-year being represented
by a point anywhere along the 45-degree line. The vertical distance between any point and the
45-degree line represents the imputation error, measured in euros. For display purposes in these
figures, we censor financial consumption at the 1% and 99% level. With this level of censoring, we
find that ‘true’ annual financial consumption ranges between approximately 150,000 euros and
-150,000 euros. That is, households actively are investing or withdrawing up to approximately
150,000 euros.
The top-left panel displays the relationship between actual financial consumption and financial
consumption omitting fees, i.e., method (i). As seen in the summary statistics, every deviation
from the 45-degree line is above the line, implying that the true level of financial consumption is
weakly less than what is imputed while missing any trading fees. In contrast, the top-right panel
shows the relationship between true and imputed consumption where the imputation includes
fees but excludes cash flows, i.e., method (ii), and all deviations are below the 45-degree line.
In the center and bottom rows, we display the relationship with actual financial consumption
for our four other versions of imputation—no intra-year trading (iii), individual securities with
wrong prices (iv), using only market returns (v), and “raw” portfolio differences (vi). These
measures have substantially larger levels of error than seen in the top row. In particular, almost
every portfolio-year in the final two imputation methods has appreciable levels of error.
One feature to highlight in the bottom row is the tendency for there to be substantial amounts
of error even for cases in which there is no actual change in financial consumption. This can be
seen as the vertical cluster of data points above and below the origin in several of the graphs.
That is, for a large number of households, they exhibit no active saving or dis-saving during the
year, solely seeing changes in portfolio value due to passive capital gains and reinvested cash
flows. When incorporating only market returns or “raw” portfolio value changes, we mistakenly
attribute these changes to consumption or savings on the part of the household.
This particular source of imputation error is greatly diminished in the center row where we
are at least taking into account the composition of the portfolio in terms of the number of shares
of a given security. Since the main source of error here is in prices of purchases and sales, a
household conducting no trades during the year will have a relatively well-measured zero even
when imputing financial consumption.
16

4.2

Correlation of Imputation Errors with Economic Outcomes

An important question is whether and how these imputation errors correlate with economic
outcomes of interest.
[Figure 2 about here.]
As a start, Figure 2 shows bin-scatter plots of the imputation error using method (iii)—
ignoring intra-year gross trades and assuming that transactions occur at mid-year prices—against
investors’ average portfolio value and average income. The top row shows that imputation errors
(normalized by investors’ average income) are systematically related to both financial wealth and
income: The relative errors become more negative as investors get richer.
The middle row shows that controlling for household characteristics—including average income when plotting errors against average portfolio balance and average portfolio balance when
plotting errors against average income—helps to mitigate the the systematic bias with income
but does not help to resolve the systematic relation with portfolio size.14 The bottom-left panel
shows that the relative imputation error is more dispersed for wealthier households, and the
bottom-right panel shows that the relative imputation error increases less than proportionally
with income.
[Figure 3 about here.]
In Figure 3, we show box plots of the distribution of imputation errors (again relative to
average income) for a number of subsets of our data. Each panel illustrates relative imputation
error for one of our six methods of imputation in Section 3. Note that the y-axis expands in
scale for the center and bottom rows, denoting much wider distributions of measurement error
for these imputation methods.
Each panel shows how the relative imputation errors are distributed across the full sample
and 7 different subsets of our sample. These subsets are: incomes below 60,000 euros, incomes
between 60,000 and 100,000 euros, incomes above 100,000 euros; male account-holders, female
account-holders; years with positive market returns, and years with negative market returns.
One notable pattern is seen in the measurement error among female account-holders. Across
all versions of our consumption imputation, female account-holders tend to have significantly
lower levels of measurement error. This is driven primarily by the fact that female accountholders tend to trade less often than do males, thereby generating fewer trading fees, less intrayear trading or pricing measurement error, and perhaps less impulsive selling in down-market
years (see also Byrnes et al. 1999 or Barber and Odean 2001).
14

The other controls include age fixed effects, gender, employment status, marital status, and fixed effects for
self-reported risk tolerance.

17

Similarly, account-holders with higher income and higher levels of wealth tend to have the
highest levels of measurement error associated with them. Again, this seems to be caused by the
significantly higher levels of intra-year trading and by deviation of the individual’s portfolio return
from return of the market portfolio. For instance, we see that intra-year trading measurement
error for these individuals, in the left-center panel of Figure 3, exhibits a distribution about 5-10
times wider than the overall distribution.
Finally, the subset of our sample that exhibits the most distinct measurement error distribution in terms of median error is for years in which the market had negative returns. In these
years, the entire distribution of measurement error often shifts in the opposite direction as when
markets are positive for the year. This fact may be troublesome for researchers interested in
investigating the time-series or panel properties of consumption at an individual level. That is,
measurement error for consumption shifts significantly in a manner correlated with the business
cycle and overall income growth.
[Table 3 about here.]
Table 3 displays a set of results regarding some of the time-series properties of two of our
measures of imputation errors. The first is the imputation methodology in which we exclude any
intra-year trades that were netted out by opposite trades during a given year, method (iii). The
second is the imputation methodology in which we assume all households obtain a market rate of
return (e.g., the return on the DAX) for a given year, method (v). Errors are measured in three
ways: (a) in euros, it ; (b) relative to household labor income, it /Ēi ; and (c) as the absolute
value of (b), |it /Ēi |.
For each column, we regress the relevant imputation error on the logged amount of turnover
that a portfolio undergoes through the year, including time and household fixed effects. The
impact on the average trading error is ambiguous, with some measures increasing and others
decreasing as more trading occurs. For instance, a doubling of trading volume decreases the
average amount of intra-year imputation error (method iii) by approximately 153 euros and
increases the amount of market returns imputation error (method v) by approximately 510 euros.
However, in columns (3) and (6), we see that the absolute amount of error increases unambiguously as more trading is done. A doubling of trading volume tends to increase imputation
error relative to income by approximately 1.5-1.7%. Thus, the more trades that an individual
or household conducts, the larger the imputation error—either positive or negative—tends to
become.
[Table 4 about here.]
18

Table 4 further explores the correlation of the imputation errors with the state of the economy.
Each column regresses the measure of imputation error on real GDP growth, the annual return of
the market, or the change in home prices in Germany (each independent variable run separately).
Because these are all measured on a country-wide basis, we do not include annual fixed effects
in any of the regressions.
For almost all macro variables and imputation error measures, we find that increases in
the macro variable tends to increase both the average error (measured in euros or relative to
income) and the absolute value of the average error. That is, the mean and standard deviation
of imputation errors is pro-cyclical by a number of different metrics.
For instance, for every percentage point increase in German home prices, financial consumption tends to be overestimated by approximately 39 euros or 900 euros, depending on the imputation methodology. In addition, for every percentage point increase in German home prices, the
absolute value of imputation errors tends to increase by 0.1%-1% of average income.
We do not assert that imputation errors are driven by changes in GDP or home prices,
but merely note that there exists significant cyclicality in imputation errors that co-varies with
important macro trends. Thus, researchers utilizing any sort of aggregate variation in imputed
consumption are likely to both be picking up actual changes in consumption alongside nonclassical measurement error.
[Table 5 about here.]
Table 5 demonstrates that these patterns can have much more striking magnitudes across the
distribution of wealth. Because households with larger portfolio balances are subject to higher
levels of potential financial consumption imputation error, any heterogeneity in error may be
similarly magnified for this higher-wealth group. Table 5 performs the same analysis as with
market returns in Table 4 but interacting market returns with indicators that indicate which
quintile of the portfolio-balance distribution a household is in.
Unsurprisingly, we find that the largest source of errors, both absolute and relative to household income, are found within the households with the largest portfolio balances. These errors
are quantitatively large for richer households: if equity markets increase by 50% in a year, the
market returns imputation method (method v) can overstate consumption by as much as 20% of
income for households in the highest portfolio balance quintile. In contrast, the lowest portfolio
balance quintile may see an imputation error of only 1.5% of income. This feature of the data
is largely repeated across the different imputation methods and error measurements and demonstrate the extent to which imputed consumption can exhibit errors both over the business cycle
but also differentially across households with varying financial characteristics.
[Table 6 about here.]
19

Given that many papers turn to imputed consumption data to study how consumption responds to changes in income, Table 6 tests whether changes in household income are directly
correlated with imputation error. Here, all columns employ the imputation methodology in
which we exclude any intra-year trades that were netted out by opposite trades during a given
year (method iii), which is a conservative method in the sense that it leads to relatively mild
imputation errors on average (see Table 2).
Column (1) finds that an increase in household income of 1% yields an increase in mean
imputation error of approximately 2.5 euros. In column (2), we find that changes in income
do not exhibit a significant relationship with mean imputation error measured as a fraction of
household income. However, increases in income do tend to increase the variation in imputation
error, as seen in column (3) using the absolute value of imputation error.
Columns (4)-(6) demonstrate that, for all three metrics, households in the highest quintile
of average portfolio balance exhibit stronger positive relationships between imputation error and
income. This makes intuitive sense, as small portfolios will mechanically have a narrower scope
to be measured with substantial error (either measured in total euros as in column (4) or relative
to income as in column (5)). Column (5) shows that mean imputation error for the lowest three
quintiles of portfolios varies little by income, but there is a significantly positive relationship
with income for the highest quintile. Moreover, the variation in imputation errors increases most
significantly for the highest quintile, as seen in column (6).
These results suggest that imputation error can be significant for richer households with large
asset portfolios and can vary within-household as income varies. Again, there is not necessarily a
mechanical linkage that drives this relationship, but households experiencing changes in income
may adjust trading strategies to reflect changing beliefs or to better smooth consumption.
Despite the statistically significant differences, the magnitudes in this table are well below
those seen in Table 5. This is largely because the imputation errors are primarily driven by equity
market behavior and, in our sample period in Germany, equity market returns are virtually
uncorrelated with income (correlation = 0.01). In periods or countries with higher levels of
correlation, substantial amounts of imputation error on consumption could occur and researchers
will be unable to control for this error with simple time effects given the types of heterogeneity
we see in our sample.

5

Recommendations for Researchers

With these results in mind, we now suggest steps that researchers can take to minimize the
impact of these imputation errors on their analysis and discuss which research questions are least
likely to suffer from such errors.
20

Our analysis shows that consumption imputation errors stemming from household equity
portfolios are relatively small for most households, on average. Most households in Germany do
not actively participate in financial markets and financial income constitutes a small share of
total income for them. Research that focuses on the general population or middle- and lowerincome households is therefore least likely affected by this type of measurement error. Researchers
focusing on behavior or financial outcomes among the top of the income and wealth distributions
may have more substantial problems with this source of imputation error.
Other countries, including Scandinavian countries, have considerably higher financial market
participation rates (Campbell 2006, Calvet et al. 2007). In countries with higher shares of
active investors we would expect imputation errors to affect a larger part of the population. For
instance, because the U.S. largely shifted from defined benefit to defined contribution pension
plans (and substantially increased the liquidity and accessibility of such plans), many more
U.S. households actively participate in financial markets and have to allocate their financial
portfolio. The contribution of financial consumption to total consumption is therefore larger
in the U.S. and has substantially larger variance across households, according to idiosyncratic
equity holdings.
Moreover, while the contribution of financial portfolios to consumption imputation errors is
small for most households in many countries, similar issues might arise in the case of non-financial
assets. For instance, Eika et al. (2017) find significant imputation errors for a large fraction of
households below the top if real estate transaction data are missing and need to be imputed.
Our most general recommendation therefore echoes most previous studies of measurement
error: where possible, obtain and utilize better data. While this might be cheap advice in other
contexts (e.g., with survey data where it is often very costly or impossible to improve the data ex
post), we believe it is realistic advice in this case where researchers can request access to many
different types of administrative records which can then be linked.
Researchers interested in consumption behavior—especially at the top of the income and
wealth distribution—should request intra-year data for both real estate and financial transactions
or, at the very least, request asset-level holdings data rather than assuming that households hold
an average portfolio.15 This level of granularity is available not just in Norway but also in Sweden
(Calvet et al. 2007, Kolsrud et al. 2017) and likely also in other countries that have a wealth tax.
Tables 4 and 5 highlight that using such granular asset holdings rather than a broad market
index (such as measure v ) matters quantitatively. Table 4 shows that moving to individual asset
holding data greatly reduces the variance of the error over the business cycle and its correlation
15

While most researchers currently do not have access to such comprehensive data, Eika et al. (2017) show that
it is possible to obtain such data at least for Norway, including intra-year data for both real estate and financial
transactions.

21

with market returns and home prices. Similarly, Table 5 shows that a 20 percentage point change
in market return (roughly equivalent to its annual standard deviation) induces errors of almost
10% of annual income for the wealthiest quintile when using market returns (measure v ), but
only 1% when using annual snapshots of individual-level asset holdings (measure iii ).
In addition, researchers should bear in mind that these sorts of imputation error seem to be
substantial in the cross section, but perhaps vary less within households over time, on average. For
instance, while Table 2 documents substantial variation in imputation errors and Figure 3 shows
that these vary systematically across subsets and demographics (e.g., by gender), our analysis
also shows that including individual-level fixed effects controls for much of this variation. The
reason is that most households’ portfolios (and, consequently, the risk profile and expected return
of the portfolio) do not change much from year to year.
Changes in income within households, for example, are only mildly correlated with consumption imputation errors (Table 6). Even in the top quintile of financial wealth, the upward bias in
the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of monthly income changes is only 0.5 percentage points. This is small compared to the typical estimates of such MPCs, which are about 30
percentage points in the short-run.

6

Conclusion

Survey-based measures of consumption are analyzed in a large number of empirical research
papers despite suffering from considerable measurement error. For that reason, a number of
recent papers turn to an alternative measure of consumption derived from annual administrative
records on income and asset holdings. Commonly referred to as “imputed consumption,” this
approach calculates consumption as a residual from the household’s budget constraint: the part
of total income that was not invested or saved.
However, due to incompleteness in asset records, this measure of consumption may suffer from
measurement error, as well. In this paper, we use transaction-level data from German households’
balances, asset trades, and asset holdings to assess the potential shortcomings in using annual
snapshots of wealth and income in imputing consumption.
We find that imputing consumption from annual portfolio snapshots can lead to substantial
measurement error, both in absolute terms and relative to household income. Moreover, these
errors are correlated with both household financial characteristics as well as key macroeconomic
variables like GDP growth and house price growth. In short, economists should treat annual
snapshot-derived imputed consumption with care, since, especially for households with high levels
of income and wealth, measurement error can bias or distort the results of common empirical
specifications.
22

The findings in this paper should not be understood as arguing against using this methodology. We certainly believe that using detailed administrative tax registries, which include comprehensive data on wealth, income, and changes in financial portfolios, provides an important
alternative to survey-based measures of consumption. In many or even most cases, this may
be a superior approach to measuring consumption than most traditional metrics. Instead, we
encourage researchers to obtain comprehensive access to the different administrative registries
to reduce non-classical measurement error in imputed consumption and to be cautious when
imputing consumption for households with large financial portfolios.

References
Ahmed, N., M. Brzozowski, and T. F. Crossley (2006). Measurement errors in recall food consumption data. IFS Working Paper .
Alstadsæter, A., N. Johannesen, and G. Zucman (2017). Tax evasion and inequality. NBER
Working Paper No. 23772 .
Bach, L., L. E. Calvet, and P. Sodini (2015). Rich pickings? risk, return, and skill in the portfolios
of the wealthy. Swedish House of Finance Research Paper No. 16-03 .
Baker, S. R. (2017). Debt and the response to household income shocks: Validation and application of linked financial account data. forthcoming at the Journal of Political Economy.
Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2000). Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common stock
investment performance of individual investors. Journal of Finance 55 (2), 773–806.
Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2001). Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and common
stock investment. The quarterly journal of economics 116 (1), 261–292.
Bound, J., C. Brown, and N. Mathiowetz (2001). Measurement error in survey data. Handbook
of Econometrics 5, 3705–3843.
Browning, M. and S. Leth-Petersen (2003). Imputing consumption from income and wealth
information. Economic Journal 113 (488).
Byrnes, J. P., D. C. Miller, and W. D. Schafer (1999). Gender differences in risk taking: a
meta-analysis. Psychological bulletin 125 (3), 367.
Calvet, L. E., J. Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini (2007). Down or out: Assessing the welfare costs of
household investment mistakes. Journal of Political Economy 115 (5), 707–747.
Campbell, J. Y. (2006). Household finance. The journal of finance 61 (4), 1553–1604.
Carroll, C. D. (2001). A theory of the consumption function, with and without liquidity constraints. Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (3), 23–45.
Cole, S., A. Paulson, and G. K. Shastry (2014). Smart money? the effect of education on financial
23

outcomes. Review of Financial Studies 27 (7), 2022–2051.
de Nicola, F. and X. Giné (2014). How accurate are recall data? evidence from coastal india.
Journal of Development Economics 106 (0), 52 – 65.
Dorn, D. and G. Huberman (2005). Talk and action: What individual investors say and what
they do. Review of Finance 9 (4), 437–481.
Eika, L., M. Mogstad, and O. Vestad (2017). What can we learn about household consumption
from information on income and wealth. Technical report.
Fagereng, A., L. Guiso, and L. Pistaferri (2017). Portfolio choices, firm shocks, and uninsurable
wage risk. The Review of Economic Studies 85 (1), 437–474.
Fagereng, A. and E. Halvorsen (2017). Imputing consumption from norwegian income and wealth
registry data. Journal of Economic and Social Measurement 42 (1), 67–100.
Fagereng, A., M. B. Holm, and G. J. Natvik (2016). Mpc heterogeneity and household balance
sheets. BI Norwegian Business School Working Paper .
Ganong, P. and P. Noel (2018). Consumer spending during unemployment: Positive and normative implications. forthcoming in the American Economic Review .
Gelman, M., S. Kariv, M. D. Shapiro, D. Silverman, and S. Tadelis (2014). Harnessing naturally
occurring data to measure the response of spending to income. Science 345 (6193), 212–215.
Grinstein-Weiss, M., K. Comer, B. Russell, C. Key, D. Perantie, and D. Ariely (2014). Refund
to savings: Evidence of tax-time saving in a national randomized control trial. Washington
University in St. Louis Working Paper .
Karlan, D. and J. Zinman (2008). Lying about borrowing. Journal of the European Economic
Association 6 (2/3), pp. 510–521.
Koestner, M., B. Loos, S. Meyer, and A. Hackethal (2017). Do individual investors learn from
their mistakes? Journal of Business Economics 87 (5), 669–703.
Koijen, R., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and R. Vestman (2014). Judging the quality of survey data
by comparison with “truth” as measured by administrative records: Evidence from sweden.
In Improving the Measurement of Consumer Expenditures, pp. 308–346. University of Chicago
Press.
Kolsrud, J., C. Landais, P. Nilsson, and J. Spinnewijn (2018). The optimal timing of unemployment benefits: Theory and evidence from sweden. American Economic Review 108 (4-5),
985–1033.
Kolsrud, J., C. Landais, and J. Spinnewijn (2017). Studying consumption patterns using registry
data: Lessons from swedish administrative data. London School of Economics Working Paper .
Kuchler, T. and M. Pagel (2015). Sticking to your plan: Empirical evidence on the role of present
bias for credit card debt paydown. NYU Stern Working Paper .
Kueng, L. (2018). Excess sensitivity of high-income consumers. forthcoming at the Quarterly
24

Journal of Economics.
Olafsson, A. and M. Pagel (2018). The liquid hand-to-mouth: Evidence from personal finance
management software. forthcoming at the Review of Financial Studies.
Parker, J. A. and N. S. Souleles (2017). Reported preference vs. revealed preference: Evidence
from the propensity to spend tax rebates. NBER Working Paper No. 23920 .
Pistaferri, L. (2015). Household consumption: Research questions, measurement issues, and data
collection strategies. Journal of Economic and Social Measurement 40 (1-4), 123–149.
Pudney, S. (2008). Heaping and leaping: Survey response behaviour and the dynamics of selfreported consumption expenditure. University of Essex Working Paper .
Schmittmann, J. M., J. Pirschel, S. Meyer, and A. Hackethal (2014). The impact of weather on
german retail investors. Review of Finance 19 (3), 1143–1183.
Sodini, P., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, R. Vestman, and U. von Lilienfeld-Toal (2016). Identifying the
benefits from home ownership: A swedish experiment. NBER Working Paper No. 22882 .

25

Table 1: Summary Statistics of Retail Investment Accounts
Percentiles
50th
75th

Mean

St.Dev

10th

25th

90th

141,775

236,285

5,538

19,039

59,126

157,099

347,135

Checking Acct Balance

9,408

34,321

136

1,237

4,198

11,104

24,487

Savings Acct Balance

57,719

168,943

1,518

7,108

22,312

58,882

129,668

Gross Financial Wealth

208,902

339,025

14,433

39,716

103,146

242,108

483,152

Annual Turnover*

252,135

627,961

3,982

15,038

53,605

191,166

600,891

Annual Trading Fees

1,103

2,026

47

139

401

1,142

2,800

Labor Income

79,826

167,713

16,343

26,888

47,429

86,204

157,570

Age

44

13.7

27

33

44

54

64

Male

0.88

0.33

0

1

1

1

1

Has a PhD

0.055

0.23

0

0

0

0

0

3.1

1.7

1

1

3

5

5

Panel A: Bank Data
Portfolio Value

Risk Aversion Index
Number of Individuals

20,557

Panel B: GSOEP
Gross Income

39,463

48,489

196

6,732

32,621

56,599

84,565

Net Income

35,852

28,242

13,013

20,168

30,956

44,748

62,395

Labor Income

36,629

41,365

0

1,443

30,944

54,600

81,760

Age

44

23

10

25

45

62

74

Male

0.48

0.50

0

0

0

1

1

More than High-School

.15

.36

0

0

0

0

1

Number of Individuals

353,746

n/a

188

2,908

15,572

55,769

120,450

Panel C: PHF
Gross Financial Wealth

50,844

Number of Households

4,461

Notes: Nominal values are in real euros of 2010, deflated with the German Consumer Price Index (“Verbraucherpreisindex”). Panel A uses the sample from the bank for years 2004-2014. Panel B uses the
Cross-National Equivalent Files (CNEF) of the German Socio-Economic Panel (GSOEP) for years 20042014, which is comparable to the PSID in the U.S. Panel C is based on summary statistics from the survey
“Private Haushalte und ihre Finanzen” (PHF) which is run by the German Bundesbank in 2014 and is comparable to the SCF in the U.S. Because the 25th and 75th percentiles are not reported by the Bundesbank,
we instead use the averages of the 20th and 30th respectively the 70th and 80th percentiles.
* Annual turnover is the sum of the value of securities bought plus the absolute value of securities sold
during the year divided by two. Hence, if the investor would sell and immediately repurchase the same
securities at the same price at one day and not trade at any other day, annual turnover would equal the
portfolio value.

Table 2: Summary Statistics of Imputation Errors (Relative to Average Income, it /Ēinet )
Percentiles

27

Mean

St.Dev

1st

10th

25th

50th

75th

90th

99th

(i) No fees

.01648

.03667

0

0

.00056

.00408

.01490

.03073

.2016

(ii) No cash flows

-.01886

.02006

-.1010

-.05181

-.02529

-.01406

-.00533

0

0

(iii) No intra-year trades

.00353

.1834

-.6096

-.07307

-.00296

0

.00025

.08001

.7678

(iv) No cost basis

.00028

.2010

-.8241

-.08218

-.02031

0

.03064

.09363

.6711

(v) Only market returns

.08922

.2194

-.4490

-.07727

-.02707

.07105

.1804

.3280

.8672

(vi) ‘Raw’ portfolio diff.

-.00721

.27846

-.6719

-.2880

-.1565

-.04495

.10408

.2272

.8765

Notes: The six imputation methods (i)-(vi) that we employ in this paper are are as follows: (i) No Fees - disregard any trading
fees charged to the household, yielding weakly larger levels of imputed financial consumption; (ii) No cash flows - disregard
any dividends paid out to households, yielding weakly smaller levels of imputed financial consumption; (iii) No consideration of
intra-year trades which were netted out during the year (e.g., if you bought 12 and sold 10 shares of Volkswagen, only keep track
of the net 2 that you were holding at the end of the year) but purchase/sale prices are ’correct’ for those net purchases/sales;
(iv) Similar to (iii) but using the incorrect prices of purchase/sale for any net changes in securities held (prices assumed to be
equal to the June 30th price during the previous year); (v) Market Returns imputation dispenses with actual portfolio holdings
and assumes that the household holds the DAX and that any adjustment (i.e., financial consumption) occurs on June 30th at
June 30th prices; (v) ‘Raw’ imputation - disregarding growth altogether and assuming any change in portfolio value ∆Wt is the
result of active savings or dis-savings.

Table 3: Trading and Imputation Errors
(iii) No Intra-Year Trades

ln(Turnover Value)

Observations
R2
Mean of Dep Var
Year FE
Individual FE

(v) Only Market Returns

it

it /Ēinet

|it /Ēinet |

it

it /Ēinet

|it /Ēinet |

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-153.0***

-0.00268***

0.0159***

510.2***

0.0121***

0.0171***

(18.24)

(0.000512)

(0.000694)

(32.61)

(0.00102)

(0.000938)

46,308
0.084
72.9
YES
YES

22,166
0.098
0.002
YES
YES

22,166
0.388
0.057
YES
YES

45,302
0.322
3922
YES
YES

21,718
0.336
0.083
YES
YES

21,718
0.482
0.135
YES
YES

Notes: Each column denotes the results of regressions examining how individual trading affects the size of imputation errors. Columns (1)-(3) use imputation error derived from our third imputation method, (iii) no intra-year
trades. Columns (4)-(6) use imputation error derived from our fifth imputation method, (v) Only Market Returns.
Columns (1) and (4) look at levels of imputation errors in euros, it ; columns (2) and (5) look at imputation errors
relative to individual investors’ average income, it /Ēi ; and columns (3) and (6) look at the absolute value of
imputation errors relative to individual income, |it /Ēi |. Trading values are computed as an individual’s total
gross annual trades multiplied by the price of securities at the time of trade. Standard errors are clustered by
investor. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

28

Table 4: GDP, Market Returns, Home Prices, and Imputation Errors
(iii) No Intra-Year Trades

Real GDP Growth

Observations
R2
Individual FE
Annual Market Return
(DAX)
29

Observations
R2
Individual FE
Real Home Price Growth

Observations
R2
Individual FE

(v) Only Market Returns

it

it /Ēinet

|it /Ēinet |

it

it /Ēinet

|it /Ēinet |

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-865.7

-0.0168

0.229***

34,392***

0.628***

0.202***

(1,153)

(0.0351)

(0.0260)

(1,718)

(0.0509)

(0.0364)

51,862
0.073
YES

24,748
0.088
YES

24,748
0.348
YES

50,862
0.243
YES

24,321
0.260
YES

24,321
0.434
YES

6,122***

0.107***

0.00113

1,706***

0.0330*** -0.00771**

(177.2)

(0.00504)

(0.00345)

(338.3)

(0.00984)

(0.00638)

50,648
0.078
YES

24,169
0.094
YES

24,169
0.350
YES

50,862
0.248
YES

24,321
0.264
YES

24,321
0.434
YES

3,936.7***

0.0999**

0.125***

93,239***

1.971***

0.901***

(1,380.3)

(0.0430)

(0.0462)

(3,139.1)

(0.0954)

(0.0776)

36,640
0.108
YES

17,198
0.114
YES

17,198
0.417
YES

35,906
0.295
YES

16,888
0.326
YES

16,888
0.495
YES

Notes: Each column and row denotes a regression of imputation errors on annual GDP growth in Germany, the
annual return of the DAX (German S&P-500 equivalent), or annual housing price changes in Germany. Columns
(1)-(3) use imputation error derived from our third imputation method, (iii) no intra-year trades. Columns (4)-(6) use
imputation error derived from our fifth imputation method, (v) Only Market Returns. Columns (1) and (4) look at
levels of imputation errors in euros, it ; columns (2) and (5) look at imputation errors relative to individual investors’
average income, it /Ēi ; and columns (3) and (6) look at the absolute value of imputation errors relative to individual
income, |it /Ēi |. All independent variables are measured on a -1 to 1 scale (i.e., 1% real GDP growth is denoted at
0.01). The sample standard deviation is 2.5% for real GDP growth, 20% for the market return, and 2.4% for the real
home price index. Standard errors are clustered by investor. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level, respectively.

Table 5: Imputation Errors from Market Returns by Portfolio Balance Quintiles
(iii) No Intra-Year Trades

Mkt. Ret. ×Wt Quintile 1
Mkt. Ret. ×Wt Quintile 2
Mkt. Ret. ×Wt Quintile 3
30

Mkt. Ret. ×Wt Quintile 4
Mkt. Ret. ×Wt Quintile 5

Observations
R2
Individual FE

(v) Only Market Returns

it

it /Ēinet

|it /Ēinet |

it

it /Ēinet

|it /Ēinet |

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-98.78

-0.00542

-0.0436***

-1,029***

-0.0346***

-0.0735***

(168.8)

(0.00629)

(0.00564)

(263.2)

(0.00975)

(0.00893)

721.1***

0.0144*

-0.0299***

1,151***

0.00905

-0.0549***

(261.1)

(0.00835)

(0.00667)

(309.0)

(0.0124)

(0.0101)

2,299***

0.0496***

-0.00537

2,827***

0.0704***

-0.0380***

(326.8)

(0.00984)

(0.00773)

(480.7)

(0.0153)

(0.0113)

3,337***

0.0604***

0.0137

9,427***

0.189***

0.0303**

(436.8)

(0.0118)

(0.00887)

(741.0)

(0.0217)

(0.0147)

3,043***

0.0471***

0.0364***

28,179***

0.386***

0.204***

(652.5)

(0.0145)

(0.0110)

(1,539)

(0.0386)

(0.0261)

50,648
0.080
YES

24,169
0.096
YES

24,169
0.353
YES

50,862
0.277
YES

24,321
0.279
YES

24,321
0.442
YES

Notes: Each column and row denotes a regression of imputation errors on the annual return of the DAX (German S&P-500
equivalent) interacted with a household-level indicator denoting which quintile of portfolio value Wt the household is in.
All columns (1)-(6) use imputation error derived from our third imputation method, (iii) no intra-year trades. Columns
(1) and (4) look at levels of imputation errors in euros, it ; columns (2) and (5) look at imputation errors relative to
individual investors’ average income, it /Ēi ; and columns (3) and (6) look at the absolute value of imputation errors
relative to individual income, |it /Ēi |. Market returns are measured in percentage points (i.e., 1% real GDP growth is
denoted at 0.01). Standard errors are clustered by investor. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively.

Table 6: Household Income and Imputation Errors (Levels, Relative, and Absolute)
(iii) No Intra-Year Trades

ln(Income)

it

it /Ēinet

|it /Ēinet |

it

it /Ēinet

|it /Ēinet |

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

258.2**

0.00205

0.00592***

(103.7)

(0.00176)

(0.00166)

76.66***

0.000950*

-0.00118**

(27.31)

(0.000524)

(0.000459)

104.4***

0.00193***

0.000837*

(28.01)

(0.000554)

(0.000479)

193.5***

0.00329***

0.00215***

(30.56)

(0.000596)

(0.000516)

266.5***

0.00450***

0.00372***

(33.41)

(0.000652)

(0.000549)

285.5***

0.00533***

0.00527***

(36.95)

(0.000708)

(0.000637)

24,729
0.086
YES
YES

24,748
0.097
YES
YES

24,748
0.363
YES
YES

ln(Inc) ×Wt Quintile 1
ln(Inc) ×Wt Quintile 2
ln(Inc) ×Wt Quintile 3
31
ln(Inc) ×Wt Quintile 4
ln(Inc) ×Wt Quintile 5

Observations
R2
Year FE
Individual FE

24,729
0.079
YES
YES

24,748
0.091
YES
YES

24,748
0.352
YES
YES

Notes: Columns (1)-(3) use imputation error derived from our third imputation method, (iii) no intra-year trades.
Columns (4)-(6) use imputation error derived from our fifth imputation method, (v) Only Market Returns.
Columns (1) and (4) look at levels of imputation errors in euros, it ; columns (2) and (5) look at imputation
errors relative to individual investors’ average income, it /Ēi ; and columns (3) and (6) look at the absolute value
of imputation errors relative to individual income, |it /Ēi |. Standard errors are clustered by investor. ***, **, *
denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 7: Household Income and Errors Across Imputation Methods
it /Ēinet
No Fees
(1)

No Cash Flows
(2)

No Intra-Year
(3)

No Cost Basis
(4)

0.00118***
(0.000269)

Market Returns
(5)

Raw Diffs
(6)

-0.000391

0.00205

0.000649

0.00419

0.00295

(0.000337)

(0.00176)

(0.00190)

(0.00282)

(0.00341)

-0.000329***

0.00125***

0.000950*

0.00121**

-0.00300**

0.00469**

(9.33e-05)

(0.000246)

(0.000524)

(0.000511)

(0.00141)

(0.00201)

-1.51e-05

0.000942***

0.00193***

0.00107**

-0.00103

0.00673***

(9.27e-05)

(0.000250)

(0.000554)

(0.000536)

(0.00143)

(0.00205)

0.000230**

0.000564**

0.00329***

0.000551

-0.000324

0.00606***

(9.85e-05)

(0.000254)

(0.000596)

(0.000577)

(0.00143)

(0.00207)

0.000485***

4.85e-05

0.00450***

0.000322

0.00122

0.00172

(0.000105)

(0.000263)

(0.000652)

(0.000634)

(0.00147)

(0.00212)

0.000922***

-0.00133***

0.00533***

1.29e-05

0.00292*

-0.00925***

(0.000120)

(0.000281)

(0.000708)

(0.000740)

(0.00154)

(0.00229)

25,545
YES
YES

25,545
YES
YES

24,652
YES
YES

24,652
YES
YES

24,748
YES
YES

24,748
YES
YES

Panel A: Average
ln(Income)

Panel B: By Wealth
ln(Inc)×Wt Quintile 1
32

ln(Inc)×Wt Quintile 2
ln(Inc)×Wt Quintile 3
ln(Inc)×Wt Quintile 4
ln(Inc)×Wt Quintile 5

Observations
Year FE
Individual FE

Notes: Panel A displays regression coefficients from a regression of logged income on imputation errors at an individual level. Panel B interacts
logged income with the quintile of equity wealth that an individual possesses. All columns utilize the imputation errors relative to individual
investors’ average income, it /Ēi , as the dependent variable. The type of imputation error utilized is noted above each column and we cover
all six of our imputation methods. Standard errors are clustered by investor. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.

Figure 1: Financial Consumption – Imputed vs. Actual
(i) No Fees

(ii) No Cash Flows

(iii) No Intra-Year Gross Trades

(iv) No Cost Basis & No Intra-Year Trades

(v) Only Market Returns

(vi) ‘Raw’ Portfolio Differences

Notes: Each panel plots imputed financial consumption according to one of six imputation methods against true
financial consumption. From left to right and top to bottom, the imputation methods follow Section 3: (i) No Fees –
disregard any trading fees charged to the household, yielding weakly larger levels of imputed financial consumption; (ii)
No Cash Flows – disregard any dividends paid out to households, yielding weakly smaller levels of imputed financial
consumption; (iii) No Intra-Year Gross Trades – no consideration of intra-year trades which were netted out during
the year (e.g., if you bought 12 and sold 10 shares of Volkswagen, only keep track of the net 2 that you were holding
at the end of the year) but purchase/sale prices are ’correct’ for those net purchases/sales; (iv) No Cost Basis & No
Intra-Year Trades – Similar to (iii) but using the incorrect prices of purchase/sale for any net changes in securities held
(prices assumed to be equal to the June 30th price during the previous year); (v) Only Market Returns – imputation
dispenses with actual portfolio holdings and assumes that the household holds the DAX Index and that any adjustment
(i.e., financial consumption) occurs on June 30th at June 30th prices; (vi) ‘Raw’ Portfolio Differences – disregarding
growth altogether and assuming any change in portfolio value ∆Wt is the result of active savings or dis-savings.

Figure 2: Imputation Errors by Portfolio Size and Average Income
A. by Portfolio Size

B. by Average Income
bias

bias (residualized imputation error)

dispersion (absolute value of imputation error)

Notes: The left Panel A (Panel B) display bin-scatter plots across 20 quantiles of average financial consumption
imputation errors against average individual portfolio balances (average individual income). All imputation errors are
measured as in method (iii) of Section 3 and relative to average individual income, it /Ēi (e.g., -0.01 means an annual
error 1% the size of average income for that individual that is underestimating financial consumption). The middle
row first regresses the relative imputation errors on average income in Panel A and on average portfolio balance in
Panel B and a set of household characteristics, which include age fixed effects, gender, employment status, marital
status, and fixed effects for self-reported risk tolerance. The bottom assesses changes in the dispersion of relative
imputation errors using absolute values instead, i.e., |it /Ēi |.

Figure 3: Imputation Error by Subset
(i) No Fees

(ii) No Cash Flows

(iii) No Intra-Year Gross Trades

(iv) No Cost Basis & No Intra-Year Trades

(v) Only Market Returns

(vi) ‘Raw’ Portfolio Differences

Notes: Each panel plots imputation errors in financial consumption (F inCon) scaled by average individual income
according to one of six imputation methods (i)-(vi) of Section 3. Each panel plots the overall distribution of error
(left-most bar) as well as the error for 7 different subgroups. These groups are: (1) lowest tercile income individuals;
(2) middle tercile income individuals; (3) highest tercile income individuals; (4) males; (5) females; (6) years with
positive market returns; (7) years with negative market returns). Bars denote interquartile ranges, with the middle
lines being the median error scaled by individual average income.

35

