NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EVIDENCE FROM CALIFORNIA ON THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF INEFFICIENT
DISTRIBUTION NETWORK PRICING
Frank A. Wolak
Working Paper 25087
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25087

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

I would like to thank Paul Joskow, Bill Hogan, participants at the NBER Energy Distribution
Conference, and participants in the PERC Lone Mountain Fellow Seminar for comments a
previous draft. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Frank A. Wolak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Evidence from California on the Economic Impact of Inefficient Distribution Network
Pricing
Frank A. Wolak
NBER Working Paper No. 25087
September 2018
JEL No. L94,Q02,Q42,Q5
ABSTRACT
Charging full requirements customers for distribution network services using the traditional cents
per kilowatt-hour (KWh) price creates economic incentives for consumers to invest in distributed
generation technologies, such as rooftop solar photovoltaics, despite the fact that marginal cost of
grid-supplied electricity is lower. This paper first assesses the economic efficiency properties of
this approach to transmission and distribution network pricing and whether current approach to
distribution network pricing implies that full-requirement customers cross-subsidize distributed
solar customers. Using data on quarterly residential distribution network prices and distributed
solar installations from California’s three largest investor-owned utilities I find that larger
amounts of distributed solar capacity and more geographically concentrated solar capacity predict
higher distribution network prices and average distribution network costs. This result continues
to hold even after controlling for average distribution network costs for the utility, Using these
econometric model estimates, I find that 2/3 of the increase in residential distribution network
prices for each of the three utilities between 2003 and 2016 can attributed to the growth
distributed solar capacity. The paper then investigates the extent of the legal obligation that
distributed solar generation customers have to pay for sunk costs of investments in the
transmission and distribution networks. The paper closes with a description of an alternative
approach to distribution network pricing that is likely to increase the economic signals for
efficient electricity consumption and the incentive for cost effective installation of distributed
solar generation capacity.

Frank A. Wolak
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
wolak@zia.stanford.edu

1. Introduction
The falling cost of rooftop solar photovoltaic (PV) installations and generous solar
support mechanisms in many states have led to a rapid increase in the amount of solar capacity
installed by residential customers in these regions. The retail price a household pays for the
last unit of grid-supplied electricity consumed is another important driver of the decision to
install a rooftop solar system because it is the cost avoided from consuming a kilowatt-hour
(KWh) from the distributed solar system. This retail price is typically significantly above the
marginal cost of providing that KWh, because historically state regulators set the average
retail electricity price equal to the vertically-integrated utility’s average total cost of
generating, transmitting, distributing, and retailing electricity.
In regions of the United States with formal wholesale electricity markets, such as
the California Independent System Operator (ISO), the PJM Interconnection, the New
England ISO, and New York ISO, state public utilities commissions (PUCs) continue to
recover the vast majority of the costs of the transmission and distribution networks and the
cost of serving regulated retail customers through per unit charges that are substantially larger
than the marginal cost of providing these services. The resulting retail prices for grid-supplied
electricity increase the attractiveness of installing a rooftop solar system.
A number of PUCs have further increased the magnitude of the difference between
the retail price for the last unit consumed and the marginal cost of supplying this KWh for
high-demand users by charging retail customers according to increasing block price
schedules. For example, the three largest investor-owned utilities in California all charge
residential consumers according to steeply increasing block price schedules. Borenstein
(2015) argues that for Pacific Gas and Electric—the utility with the largest number of
distributed solar residential customers in the United States—the financial incentive to
3

adopt distributed solar during his sample period is due as much to California’s increasing
block rates as it is to the 30 percent federal tax credit for a distributed solar installation.
In the language of interconnection pricing, retail electricity prices that recover fixed
and sunk costs through a per unit KWh charge encourage inefficient bypass in the sense that
residential customers find it privately profitable to install a distributed solar system because
the levelized cost (net of the government support received by the household) of electricity
from their distributed solar system is less than the retail price, but not less than the marginal
cost (to the consumer) of an additional KWh of grid-supplied electricity. Consequently,
although it is privately profitable for the consumer to install the distributed solar system
(ignoring the cost of the government support provided to the household to purchase the
solar system), it is socially inefficient for this investment to occur because it is cheaper
to supply this customer with wholesale energy from the grid rather than pay for the cost of
the distributed solar system. In the former vertically-integrated geographic monopoly regime,
this approach to retail pricing did not lead to inefficient bypass because customers effectively
only had the choice to consume grid-supplied electricity or not consume grid-supplied
electricity. The option to install a distributed solar system was not available.
Retail electricity prices that recover fixed and sunk costs on a per KWh basis when
customers have the option to install distributed solar capacity has created what many
electric utilities argue is an unsustainable dynamic where high marginal prices for gridsupplied electricity encourage customers to install distributed solar PV systems, which then
requires the regulator to set higher retail prices to recover the same fixed and sunk costs
from a smaller volume of sales of grid-supplied electricity. This higher retail price
encourages more customers to install distributed solar PV systems, which then requires
higher retail prices if the utility is going to recover these sunk and fixed costs.
4

The significantly larger monthly bills for grid-suppled electricity by distributed solar
customers under the existing retail tariffs before versus after they install a rooftop solar system
have caused many utilities to claim that these customers are cross-subsidized by fullrequirements customers. This is often referred to as a “cost-shift” from the utility’s
distributed solar customers to its full requirements customers. Solar installers often counter
these claims by arguing that distributed solar installations allow utilities to reduce their
distribution network costs because a declining share of the electricity households consume is
supplied from the grid. Solar installers also claim that this fact implies rooftop solar customers
make much less use of the distribution grid and should therefore pay for less of the fixed and
sunk costs. Utilities counter that they made sunk investments in the distribution grid to serve
all customers and should therefore receive full cost recovery from all customers. There is an
ongoing debate to resolve these issues in a number of states with significant distributed solar
potential such as Arizona, California and Nevada.
This paper contributes to this debate by providing: (1) a theoretical foundation to
address the cost-shift debate, (2) empirical evidence on the claims made by utilities and solar
installers about the impact of solar installations on distribution network costs and prices, (3)
description of the legal risks these issues create for utilities, and (4) a framework for more
efficient pricing to recover to the costs of the transmission and distribution network.1
The economic theory of multi-product cost functions is used to argue that fullrequirements customers are unlikely to be cross-subsidizing customers with distributed
solar systems even under the existing tariffs for grid-supplied electricity because the vast

1

Throughout the paper, distribution network cost refers to the fixed and variable cost of the distribution
network, or in the language of the regulatory process, the distribution network revenue requirement as determined
by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). Distribution network price is the price set by the CPUC to
recover the distribution network revenue requirement.
5

majority of distribution network costs are sunk. The major source of economic inefficiency
from the existing transmission and distribution-pricing scheme is that it encourages
inefficient levels of the electricity consumption and the inefficient decisions by consumers
to bypass grid-supplied electricity.
I then examine the empirical validity of the claim that distributed solar installations
reduce distribution network costs using panel data on quarterly utility-level residential
distribution network prices, utility-level quarterly installed distribution network-level solar PV
capacity, annual utility-level distribution network regulated costs (revenue requirements), and
annual utility-level electricity demand for California’s three large investor-owned utilities. I
estimate an econometric model of the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC)
distribution network price-setting process to quantify the extent to which increases in solar PV
capacity in a utility’s distribution network predict higher residential distribution network prices.
I find that even after the accounting for the mechanical effect that more distributed solar
PV capacity reduces the total withdrawals of grid-supplied electricity and therefore requires an
increase the residential distribution price, more solar capacity in the distribution network
predicts significantly higher distribution network prices. I find that the vast majority of the
almost 100 percent increase in average residential distribution network prices between 2003
and 2017 for each of the three utilities can be explained by increases in the installation of
distributed solar PV capacity. I then repeat this analysis using the annual distribution network
regulated average cost for each utility as the dependent variable and find that increases in the
amount distributed solar capacity in the utility’s service territory predicts a higher average
distribution network cost for the utility. Combing this residential distribution price data with
the annual distribution network average cost data, I find that residential distribution network
prices are higher in utility distribution networks with more solar capacity even after controlling
6

the annual average cost of the distribution network. These results are exactly counter to the
claims of solar PV suppliers about the impact of solar PV installations on distribution costs and
prices. Moreover, they are consistent with state regulators placing a greater share of the burden
of the recovery of the fixed cost of the distribution network on residential consumers in utility
service territories with more distributed solar capacity.
I then consider the legal question of whether utilities will be allowed to recover the
costs of the transmission and distribution network from distributed solar PV customers that
claim not to use these networks at all or as much as they did before installing rooftop solar
capacity. Resolution of this legal question is particularly urgent for utilities experiencing rapid
growth in the amount of distributed solar capacity given the relationship I find between
distribution network prices and costs and amount of solar PV capacity installed in that utility’s
distribution network. There are legal precedents in favor both sides of this debate, which
provides a strong case for these utilities addressing this issue with their public utilities
commissions as soon as possible.
Finally, I develop a simple economic model that provides a mechanism for increasing
the efficiency of distribution network pricing and reduces the incentive for both inefficient
consumption of grid-supplied electricity and inefficient decisions to install distributed solar
systems. This model is first applied to the case that customers have interval meters capable
of recording their consumption on an hourly basis. I then consider an extension to the case
that customers have meters that can only read their monthly consumption. The paper closes
with a brief discussion of how the insights from this simple model can be operationalized
in an actual regulatory price-setting process to improve the efficiency of retail electricity
pricing in regions with significant distributed solar resources.

7

2. The Theory of Multi-Output Production Applied to Electric Utility Costing
To understand of the inefficiency of the existing approach to retail electricity pricing
and to provide essential input into the model used to derive more efficient of retail
tariffs, I rely on the economic concept of a multiproduct cost function, C(q1,q2….,qN), where
qk is the amount of electricity withdrawn from the grid by customer k and N is the total
number of customers served. For each value of (q1,q2….,qN)′, the N-dimensional vector of
the monthly consumption of each customer served by the utility, the function C(q1,q2….,qN)
gives the utility’s total cost of providing this vector of outputs. Under the regularity conditions
on the utility’s technology set described in Panzar (1989) this function is differentiable in all
of the arguments.2
The marginal cost of providing customer k with an additional KWh of grid-supplied
electricity is the increase in the value of C(q1,q2….,qN) associated with a one unit change in qk
keeping the output levels of all other customers constant. Mathematically, the marginal cost
of serving customer k at output vector (q1,q2….,qN)ꞌ is equal to

భ

మ

ಿ

. During virtually all

ೖ

hours of the year, this marginal cost is slightly higher than the hourly wholesale price at the point
of withdrawal from the transmission grid that connects that customer to their distribution grid.
The cost is higher than the wholesale price because of distribution network losses between
the point of injection to the customer’s distribution network and the customer’s dwelling where
the energy is consumed.3 However, during hours when the capacity constraints on the
distribution network are close to binding, the marginal cost of customer k withdrawing an

2

The technology set, T, is composed of pairs of input vectors, x, and output vectors, y, such that the output vector y is
technologically feasible to produce from the input vector x.
3
According to the United States Energy Information Administration annual transmission and distribution network losses average
about 6 percent of the total electricity produced nationally. (https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=105&t=3)
8

additional KWh can be substantially larger than the relevant hourly locational marginal price
of wholesale electricity. In addition, because marginal losses scale with the square of the flow
on the distribution line, the marginal loss factor for customer k is larger the greater is the flow
on the distribution line to that customer.
The next cost concept is the incremental cost of qk, which is equal to difference
between the value of C(q1,q2….,qN) and the value of C(q1,q2….,qk-1,0,qk+1,…,qN), or the
amount that total costs are reduced as a result not selling anything to customer k.
Mathematically, this is equal to IC(qk|Q-k) = C(q1,q2….,qN) – C(q1,q2….,qk-1,0,qk+1,…,qN),
where Q-k = (q1,q2….,qk-1,qk+1,…,qN).

Dividing IC(qk|Q-k) by qk yields the average

incremental cost of qk, AIC(qk|Q-k) = IC(qk|Q-k)/qk, which is also small, because the fixed
costs of the installed generation capacity, transmission and distribution grid, metering and
billing systems must be incurred to serve the remaining customers. Therefore, these costs
are not eliminated by setting customer k’s consumption to zero. One reason for the
difference between the marginal cost of qk and AIC(qk|Q-k) is the existence of fixed costs
associated with providing service to customer k, such as the cost to connect the customer
to the grid (although most of these costs are directly charged to the customer at the time they
connect) and the monthly fixed cost of metering and billing the customer. If the marginal
cost of serving customer k varies with the value of the qk then the marginal cost of serving
customer k at output level qk given Q-k can differ from AIC(qk|Q-k). For the reasons discussed
above, it is extremely unlikely that the incremental cost of providing qk units of electricity
exceeds customer k’s monthly bill, even if customer k has a distributed solar system.
The final cost concept is the stand-alone cost of qk. This is equal to SAC(qk) =
C(0,0….,0,qk,0,…,0), which is equal to the total cost of providing qk units to just customer k
and nothing to all other customers. Dividing SAC(qk) by qk yields the stand-alone average cost
9

of qk which much greater than average incremental cost of qk, because the stand-alone
average cost contains all of the fixed costs of the generation, transmission, distribution, and
retailing segments as well as the monthly fixed cost of providing service to customer k.
It is profitable for the utility to serve a customer if the incremental cost of serving that
customer is less than the revenue the firm earns by providing service to that customer.
Because of the substantial fixed costs of providing grid-supplied electricity to any customer,
such as the sunk cost of the transmission and distribution network, it is possible for a utility
to find it unilaterally profitable to serve each of its customers, but not earn sufficient
revenues to cover its total costs. Specifically, given its existing tariff and existing vector
of monthly outputs, (q1,q2….,qN)′, the utility could find itself in the position of wanting to
continue to provide service to each of its customers, even though the total revenues received
from these customers is considerably less than the total cost of producing this vector of
outputs.
As Faulhaber (1975) explains, as long as all groups of customers are paying more in
revenues for their consumption than the incremental cost of serving that group of consumers
and none of the groups of customers are paying more than the stand-alone cost of serving that
group of customers, there are no cross-subsidies between customers. The first constraint
implies that all possible groups of customers are making a nonzero contribution to the fixed cost
recovery of the firm. The second constraint implies that each of the possible subsets of
customers do not have an incentive to start their own firm to supply the service instead of taking
service from the incumbent monopoly. Under a vector of prices that satisfies these constraints,
the utility may not recover enough revenues from all of its customers to cover its total
production costs. However, if the prices charged to each customer are such that firm recovers
its total revenues from supplying these customers, then the revenues earned by the firm selling
10

from sales to each of the possible groups of customers is greater than the incremental cost of
supplying this group of customers.
To apply these concepts to retail electricity pricing, consider the case of a utility that
was formerly recovering its total cost of production that now has a number of customers
install distributed solar systems. Under the existing tariff these distributed solar customers
are still paying more in revenue to the utility than the incremental cost of providing them
with this reduced amount of grid-supplied electricity. However, because their consumption
of grid-supplied electricity has fallen they are making less of a contribution to fixed cost
recovery than they were as full-requirement customers.
This logic implies that it is highly unlikely that distributed solar customers are
receiving cross-subsidies from full-requirements customers in the sense of Faulhaber (1975).
Clearly, distributed solar customers are now making less of a contribution to fixed cost
recovery as a result of their decision to incur the expense of investing in distributed solar
capacity under the existing retail tariff.

The fixed-cost recovery problem created by a

customer investing in a distributed solar system is no different from the fixed-cost
recovery problem created by a customer reducing their monthly consumption of gridsupplied electricity as a result of an energy efficiency investment or simply becoming more
aware of their electricity consumption. In all of these cases, the utility is still recovering at
least the incremental cost of serving these customers under the existing tariff, but the
customer’s total contribution to fixed cost recovery is lower.
Although cross-subsidies between full-requirements and distributed solar customer
are very unlikely to exist under the current retail pricing regime, as Faulhaber (1975)
notes, a subsidy-free price structure is not necessarily welfare maximizing. As discussed
earlier, the existing pricing regime create incentives for inefficient consumption of electricity
11

and inefficient bypass of grid-supplied electricity because the prices a customer pays for grid
supplied electricity so far above the marginal cost of grid supplied electricity (excluding
unpriced environmental externalities).
3. Impact of Solar Installations on Distribution Networks Prices and Costs
This section assesses the impact of increases in distributed solar capacity in a utility
service territory on residential distribution network prices and regulated distribution network
costs using data from the three large investor-owned utilities in California—Pacific Gas and
Electric (PG&E), Southern California Edison (SCE), and San Diego Gas and Electric
(SDG&E). This assessment is based on a simple model of the CPUC distribution network pricesetting process.
3.1.

Economic Model of CPUC Price-Setting Process
The CPUC process first determines the revenue requirement for the utility based on a

test year output level. The revenue requirement is the utility’s annual costs that the CPUC
allows the utility to recover from its customers through the prices charged. The other input to
the price-setting process is the test year output level, which is a forecast of the utility’s annual
demand during the time period covered by the price. The utility’s revenue requirement divided
by this forecast of demand gives the average price the utility is allowed to charge.
The utility’s annual revenue requirement can and often does change several times within
the year in response to regulatory decisions made by the CPUC. When this occurs, the CPUC
will change the price the utility is allow to charge. Each time a price set by the CPUC is changed,
a new tariff sheet is issued by the CPUC giving this price and the date that it becomes effective.
I model the residential distribution network price-setting process as follows. Let Fiy
equal the revenue requirement for the residential sector for utility i in year y and QRFiy equal
the forecast of demand for utility i and year y for the residential sector. Because prices can be
12

revised numerous time during the year, I assume that the quarterly value of the utility’s annual
residential distribution network revenue requirement is equal to FRiq = (FRiy )exp(εiq), where εiq
is unobserved shock to utility i’s annual revenue requirement in quarter q. I assume that the εiq
are independent, identically distributed random variables with finite first and second moments
for each utility.
According to this simple model, utility i’s residential distribution price in quarter q, is
equal to PRiq = (FRiy )exp(εiq)/QRFiy. Taking logarithms of both sides of this equation yields:
ln(PRiq) = ln(FRiy) - ln(QRFiy) + εiq

(1)

To assess the impact of the amount distributed solar capacity in utility i’s service territory on
residential distribution network prices, I create the following variables. Let CIiq equal the
cumulative megawatts (MWs) of distributed solar installed in utility i’s territory as of the start of
quarter q. Define CONCiq =

೥೜

, where CIzq is the cumulative MWs of distributed solar

೥

capacity installed in zip code z of utility i’s service territory as of the start of quarter q, HHz is
the number of households in zip code z in utility i’s service territory, and Z(i) is the number of
zip codes in utility i’s service territory. CONCiq is larger for given number of MWs in utility i’s
service territory if these MWs are concentrated in a small number of zip codes. To estimate the
impact of solar installations in the utility’s service territory and the geographic concentration of
these solar installations on distribution prices, I estimate the following equation:
ln(PRiq) = αiy + βln(QRFiy) + δln(CIiq) + γln(CIiq)ln(CONCiq) + ηiq,

(2)

where the αiy are utility-year fixed effects and the ηiq are assumed to be independent, identically
distributed mean zero and variance

random variables. Operationalizing this model requires

an estimate of QRFiy, the forecast of utility i’s residential demand during year i.

13

For each of the utility’s I estimate a univariate time series model using QRiy, the annual
residential demand for utility i and year y, using data from 1990 to 2016 and then use the onestep ahead forecast of Qiy as the value of QFiy. For each utility, the model ln(Qiy) = μi + ln(Qiy-1)
+ υiy is sufficient to produce a time series model such that the null hypothesis that the υiy are a
white noise sequence cannot be rejected. I then compute QRFiy = (QRiy-1)exp( +
is the estimate of μi and

, where

is the estimate of the variance of υiy constructed the residuals of

this regression.
This simple model for the distribution network price setting process has a number of
testable restrictions and implications for the parameters of equation (2). First restricting equation
(2) to satisfy the theory in equation (1), implies β = -1, δ = 0, and γ = 0. In addition,
(FRyi)E(exp(εiq)) = exp(αyi)E(exp(ηiq)), which implies that FRyi = exp(αyi)E(exp(ηiq))/E(exp(εiq)),
so that exp(αyi) estimates FRyi up to an unknown scale factor, E(exp(ηiq))/E(exp(εiq)).
The second model I estimate relates the logarithm of the annual average revenue
requirement of utility i and year y to ln(QFiy) and ln(CIiy) and ln(CIiy)ln(CONCiy). QFiy, the
forecast of utility i’s demand in year y, is computed from Qiy, the total demand of utility i in year
y, following the same procedure as described above to derive QRFiy from QRiy. To compute the
annual average distribution revenue requirement for utility i in year y, let RRiy equal the annual
distribution revenue requirement for utility i in year y. Define ARiy = RRiy/QFiy as the annual
average distribution revenue requirement for utility i in year y. I estimate
ln(ARiy) = λi + τy + βln(QFiy) + δln(CIiy) + γln(CIiy)ln(CONCiy) + ηiq,

(3)

where CIiy equals the cumulative megawatts (MWs) of distributed solar installed in utility i’s
territory as of the start of year y, λi is a utility fixed effect, and τy is a year-of-sample fixed effect.
CONCiy =

೥೤

, where CIzy is the cumulative MWs of distributed solar installed in zip code

೥

14

z of utility i’s service territory as of the start of year y. This model assesses whether the utility
i’s average regulated distribution cost is responsive to changes in installed solar capacity and the
distribution of this capacity in its service territory.
The final model I estimate assesses whether increases in installed solar capacity predict
increases in residential distribution prices after controlling for the level of the annual average
utility-level revenue requirement. I estimate the equation:
ln(PRiq) = αi + φln(ARiy) + δln(CIiq) + γln(CIiq)ln(CONCiq) + ηiq,
where the αi are utility fixed effects.

(4)

If δ > 0 and γ > 0, then residential distribution prices

increase in response to more distributed solar capacity in the utility’s service territory and if this
solar capacity is more geographically concentrated in the zip codes in the utility’s service
territory even after controlling for the utility’s average distribution network revenue requirement.
3.2.

Data Sources
The data used to estimate these models comes from variety of sources. The tariffs sheet

for the three investor-owned utilities are the source for the quarterly value of the residential
distribution price. This is the distribution price for the standard residential tariff: (1) the E-1
Tariff for Pacific Gas and Electric, (2) the Schedule D Tariff for Southern California Edison,
and (3) the Schedule DR Tariff for San Diego Gas and Electric. These prices often change
several times during the year.
For each utility and each quarter between quarter 1 of 2003 to quarter 4 to 2016, the
residential distribution network tariff that was in force at the start of the quarter according to
the tariff document is assigned to that quarter of the sample. For much of this sample period
the residential distribution network for each utility was priced according to an increasing block
price schedule. These increasing block price schedules are converted to a single weighted
average residential distribution price for the quarter using the climate-region-weighted tier
15

weights for each investor-owned utility computed in Table A2 of Borenstein (2011). For each
utility residential distribution tariff, I apply the climate region weighted average weight for
consumption on that tier times the value of the distribution price for that tier and sum these
products over all tiers in the increasing block distribution network price schedule to arrive at
quarterly residential distribution price, Piq.
The annual demand in gigawatt-hours (GWh) for electricity by residential consumers of
investor-owned utility i in year y, QRiy, and the aggregate demand in (GWh) served by this
utility in the same year, Qiy, from 1990 to 2016 are available from the California Energy
Consumption Database.4 Figures 1 to 3 plot the values from Qiy for Pacific Gas and Electricity,
Southern California Edison, and San Diego Gas and Electric, respectively. Plots for three
utilities share several common features. First, steady load growth between 1990 and 1998, with
a drop in 1998 and 1999 and a substantial uptick in 2000 consistent with a loss of customers to
direct access in 1998 and 1999 and subsequent return of these customers during electricity crisis
in 2000. The other feature is the significant slowdown in load growth from 2006 onward,
consistent with the start of the California Solar Initiative which provided more than $2 billion
in declining dollar-per-kilowatt-installed subsidies for rooftop solar systems between 2006 and
2016. The plots of QRiy for each utility have these same patterns.
The quarterly values of cumulative MWs of distributed solar capacity installed in each
zip code of each utility service territory are available from the Currently Interconnected Data
Set from the Go Solar California web-site.5 This data is used to construct the CIiq and CIiy
variables. Figure 4 plots the values of CIiq for each utility from quarter 1 2003 to quarter 4 of
2016. Although it is difficult determine from Figure 4, there is small amount of distributed

4
5

http://www.ecdms.energy.ca.gov/
https://www.californiasolarstatistics.ca.gov/data_downloads/
16

solar capacity in each utility‘s service territory as on the start of the sample period. Data on the
number of households in each California zip code, HHz, is obtained from the 2010 US Census.
This data is combined with the Go Solar California data to construct the CONCiq and CONCiy
variables.
The annual total distribution network revenue requirement for utility i in year y, RRiy,
from 2006 to 2016 is available from Table 1.6 of the California Electric and Gas Utility Cost
Report: Public Utilities Code Section 913 Annual Report to the Governor and Legislature
available from the CPUC. Before that date, information on the annual distribution network
revenue requirement for each utility is available from CPUC Advice Letters that summarize the
periodic changes in the distribution network revenue requirements and distribution network
prices.
3.3.

Empirical Results
The empirical results are based on quarterly data from 2003 to 2016 and annual data

from 2006 to 2016. The start date for the quarterly data was chosen to coincide the start of the
California’s renewable energy effort. The state’s renewables portfolio standard (RPS) started
in 2003, and this also initiated widespread discussion of distributed solar PV capacity as a source
of electricity for residential consumers. The start date for the annual revenue requirement data
coincided with the start of the California Solar Initiative noted above. However, the primary
driver of this start date was the difficulty in obtaining data before this data.
Table 1 reports the results of estimating
ln(QRiy) = μi + ln(QRiy-1) + υiy
for each utility using annual data from 1990 to 2016. The ordinary least squares estimate of μi
and the estimated standard error for this parameter estimate are reported for each utility along
with the estimated value of the variance of υiy. For all three utilities, the null hypothesis that μi
17

= 0 cannot be rejected. Each column of the table also reports the value of the Box-Pierce Qstatistic that tests the null hypothesis that the υiy are not autocorrelated up to lag J=11 and J=6.
In all cases the P-value associated with this test statistic is substantially less than 0.05, which
implies that 0.05 size test of this null hypothesis would not be rejected.

Table 2 reports the

results of repeating this same procedure for utility-level demand, Qiy.
Table 3 presents the results of estimating
ln(PRiq) = αiy + βln(QFiy) + δln(CIiq) + γln(CIiq)ln(CONCiq) + ηiq.

(2’)

A number of results are worth noting. First, a 0.05 test of the null hypothesis that β = -1 cannot
be rejected. Second, the estimates of δ and γ are both positive and large relative to their standard
error. This result is consistent with residential distribution prices increasing faster in utility
service territories and after quarters with more cumulative solar MWs and more concentrated
deployment of these distributed solar MWs.
Figures 5 to 7 plot the normalized values of the annual residential distribution network
cost FPiy = exp(αiy)/exp(αiy*) for y* = 2006 implied by our model of residential distribution
network pricing for each utility.

These values of FPiy are plotted along with the normalized

value of the annual distribution revenue requirement for each utility RRiy/RRiy* for y* = 2006.
The trends in these two annual time series for each utility are remarkably similar, except for
Pacific Gas and Electric from 2011 to 2014, which provide further support for the validity of our
model of the regulatory price-setting process.
Table 4 presents the results of estimating
ln(ARiy) = λi + τy + βln(QFiy) + δln(CIiy) + γln(CIiy)ln(CONCiy) + ηiq,

(3’)

using annual data from 2006 to 2016. Once again, the estimate of β is not statistically different
from -1 and δ and γ are both positive. The estimate of δ is significantly smaller in magnitude
than the corresponding the estimate from equation (1) and the estimate of γ is not statistically
18

different from zero. Nevertheless, these results indicate that after controlling for year-of-sample
and utility fixed-effects, higher levels of cumulative MWs of solar installs are associated with
higher average utility-level distribution costs.
Table 5 reports the results of estimating
ln(Piq) = αi + φln(ARiy) + δln(CIiq) + γln(CIiq)ln(CONCiq) + ηiq,

(4’)

The estimates of δ and γ are both positive. The estimate of δ is smaller in magnitude than the
corresponding the estimate from equation (1) and the estimate of γ is not statistically different
from zero. Nevertheless, this result implies that even after controlling for the regulated average
cost of the distribution network, increases in solar installations implies higher distribution
network prices.
The regression results for models (2), (3) and (4) suggest the following conclusions about
the impact of distributed solar installations on both distribution network costs and residential
distribution network prices. First, the results of estimating model (2) support the conclusion that
more solar installations lead to higher residential distribution prices and even higher residential
distribution network prices for utilities where these solar installations are more geographically
concentrated.

Second, the model (3) results imply that the same conclusion applies to the

average utility-wide regulated distribution cost, but the magnitude of these effects are smaller
and they are less precisely estimated. This result could be due to the smaller sample of annual
data used to estimate this regression. Third, the model (4) results support the conclusion that
after controlling for the level of the average regulated distribution network cost, more solar
installations and a greater geographic concentration of these installations leads to higher
residential distribution prices. The above results are consistent with more solar installations
increasing total distribution network costs. They are also are consistent with the view that the

19

amount of these costs that the CPUC allocates to residential customers also increases with the
amount of distributed solar capacity.
The results of estimating our model of the residential distribution network price-setting
process embodied in equation (2) can be used to compute a counterfactual distribution network
price path that keeps the amount of distribution solar capacity at the quarter 1 of 2003 level. This
counterfactual price can be computed by multiplying each quarterly residential distribution
network price by exp(- δln(CIiq/CIiq*) – γ[ln(CIiq)ln(CONCiq) - ln(CIiq*)ln(CONCiq*)]) for q*
equal to quarter 1 of 2003 using the values of δ and γ obtained from estimating equation (2). For
each of the three utilities, Figures 8 to 10 plot the actual average quarterly distribution network
price and the counterfactual quarterly distribution network price that removes the impact of
distributed solar capacity installed after quarter 1 of 2003. For each utility, roughly 2/3 of the
average distribution network price increase between quarter 1 of 2003 and quarter 4 of 2016 can
be attributed to the adoption of distributed solar capacity.
4. Legal Case for Utility to Recover Sunk Costs
There are a variety of reasons why a regulated utility that invests in the long-lived
capital equipment necessary to provide service to consumers may not recover these sunk
costs. Hempling (2015) provides seven examples of a regulated entity that was denied sunk
cost recovery by the courts. Several of these legal decisions appear to be applicable to
case of distributed solar investments.
All of these decisions are related to the basic legal principle in regulatory ratemaking that a utility is only allowed the opportunity to recover its costs if the capital employed
is “used and useful” and the “prudently operated.” The utility is not guaranteed to recover
these costs without regard to these two conditions.

20

The standard argument used by the utilities to justify their claims of cost recovery
is the Fifth Amendment of the Constitution which states in part, “[N]or shall private property
be taken for public use, without just compensation.” Hempling (2015) notes that Justice
Brandeis clarified what this clause meant for a regulated utility as, “The thing devoted by the
investor to the public use is not specific property, tangible and intangible, but capital embarked
in the enterprise. Upon the capital so invested the Federal Constitution guarantees to the utility
the opportunity to earn a fair return.” (p. 2)
Hempling (2015) goes on to emphasize that the courts have determined that
“utility investors enjoy no constitutional guarantee of stranded cost recovery.” (p. 2).
Consequently, one way to justify that the utility’s shareholders bearing the brunt of the
revenue shortfalls relative to total costs of production is that competition from distributed
solar has led to the partial obsolescence of the transmission and distribution grid, which has
significantly reduced the revenues the utility is likely to earn from grid-supplied electricity.
Therefore, the utility’s investors now own a less valuable asset in the same sense that the
owners of the Market Street Railway in San Francisco that operated streetcars and buses in
the city owned a less valuable asset as a result of competition from municipal transportation
companies and other modes of transportation.6 The court upheld the Railway Commission’s
decision to set a lower price for Market Street Railway’s services, which in turn produced a
lower rate of return on its sunk costs. Hempling (2015) notes that “the Court explained that
the Constitution has no sympathy for a company whose services are no longer needed.”
Building on this decision, an argument for full cost recovery would be that the
intermittent nature of distribution solar generation is sufficiently great that the full capacity

6

Market Street Railway Co. v Railway Commission of California, 324, US 548 (1945).
21

of the existing transmission and distribution grid is necessary to serve both distributed
solar and full requirements customers. Specifically, it is sometimes the case that the
distributed solar systems

are not producing any electricity and the transmission and

distribution grid is utilized at the same rate as would be the case in the absence of any
distributed solar investments. However, the argument that transmission and distribution
networks have the same annual peak utilization rates as they did without any distributed
solar investments may be increasingly difficult to make as the share of distributed solar
capacity increases and the diversity of distributed solar locations increases.
These opposing arguments suggest that the ultimate allocation of the sunk costs of the
transmission and distribution grid will involve some of these costs being recovered from
utility shareholders. The above logic also suggests that the longer this regulatory decision
is delayed the greater is the likelihood that more of these sunk costs will be recovered from
utility shareholders, because more households are installing distributed solar systems over
time.

Moreover, as the results in Section 3 demonstrate, the longer utilities that are

experiencing significant increases in distributed solar capacity delay the resolution of this
question the larger are the distribution network costs at risk for under-recovery.
5. Toward More Efficient Retail Tariff Design
This section presents a simple economic model that suggests several pathways for
increasing the efficiency of retail electricity pricing. I first consider the case that customers
have meters that can record their consumption on an hourly basis in order to match the
frequency that the marginal cost of retail electricity changes. Then I consider the case that
customers only have mechanical meters that are typically read on a monthly basis.
Let C(h) equal the marginal cost of retail electricity facing the customer during hour
of the year h, for h=1,2,…,H, where H is the total number of hours in the year. Under all but
22

extreme system conditions, to a first approximation, C(h) is equal to the hourly wholesale price
at the customer’s distribution network location times one plus the marginal distribution loss
factor for delivery to the customer’s premises. Let the customer’s hourly demand curve for
electricity be Q(h) = A(h) – P(h)/θ(h), where Q(h) is the customer’s demand in hour h, P(h)
is the customer’s marginal price in hour h, and A(h) is the customer’s willingness to pay
for the first unit of consumption in hour h, or alternatively the customer’s demand for
electricity at P(h) = 0, and θ(h) is the slope of the customer’s inverse demand curve during hour
h, i.e., − θ(h) = dP/dQ.
Suppose that C(h), A (h), and θ(h) are random variables with compact support and
joint density, f(C,A,θ). The support of C(h) is [CL,CH] and [AL,AH] where 0 < CL < CH < ∞,
0 < AL < AH < ∞, and AL > CH. The last inequality imposes the reasonable assumption that
it is socially optimal for the customer to always consume a positive quantity of electricity
during every hour of the year. Assume that θ(h) also has compact support, [θL,θH], where 0
< θL < θH < ∞.
Economically efficient pricing implies that the hourly retail price of electricity should
be set equal to the hourly marginal cost of grid supplied electricity, so that P(h) = C(h).
Using the logic of two-part tariff pricing, the maximum fixed charge that the consumer would
be willing to pay for grid-supplied electricity during this hour is area below the demand
curve above the hourly price, C(h). This is the shaded area in Figure 11 and is equal
½θ(h)(A(h) – C(h)/θ(h))2.
Suppose that before setting the fixed charge for the year or month, the regulator only
knows that the realizations of (A(h),C(h),θ(h))′ for all hours of the year are independent,
identically distributed draws from f(C,A,θ). Figure 12 shows the value of hourly consumer
surplus (CS) for the extreme case that A(h) = AL and C(h) = P(h) = CH. The hourly value of
23

consumer surplus is extremely small, which implies a small maximum hourly fixed fee. Figure
13 shows the other extreme of A(h) = AH and C(h) = P(h) = CL, and the hourly value of
consumer surplus is extremely large, which allows a very large hourly fixed fee.
Suppose that the consumer is risk neutral with respect to his electricity expenditures and
will remain connected to the grid for the year if the expected annual fixed charge is less than
the expected value of the annual consumer surplus obtained from consuming at P(h) = C(h) each
hour of the year. Note that ½θ(h)(A(h) – C(h)/θ(h))2 can be written as ½θ(h)*(Q(h))2 where
Q(h) is the quantity demanded during hour h. Taking the expectation of ½θ(h)*(Q(h))2 yields
Expected Hourly Willingness to Pay = ½ [ Cov(θ(h),Q(h)2) + E(θ(h))E(Q(h)2)]. (5)
This results implies that customers with an hourly demand that is positively correlated with the
absolute value of the slope of their hourly inverse demand curve, customers with a large
expected value of the slope of their hourly demand curve and customers with a large expected
value of the square of their demand (or equivalently a large variance and mean of their demand)
have the largest willingness to pay to purchase their electricity each hour at a price equal to
C(h).
Assuming θ(h) = 1 for hours of the year, there is an even more straightforward way to
compute each customer’s annual fixed charge:
Expected Hourly Willingness to Pay = ½ [E(Q(h)2)] = ½[Var(Q(h)) + (E(Q(h))2]. (6)
If FRRiy is the fixed cost component of the distribution network revenue requirement, the CPUC
could use historical hourly data for the past year to compute
Estimated Expected Hourly WTP for customer k = EEHWTP(k) =
where customer k’s consumption in hour h of the previous year is Q(h,k). The annual fixed
charge for customer k of utility i for year y is then equal to

24

F(k,i,y) =

೔೤
಼
ೖసభ

ೖ

.

(7)

ೖ

This fixed charge could be equally divided across months of the year or tailored to the
customer’s monthly demand throughout the year. Each time the CPUC updates the revenue
requirement, it could also update F(k,i,y) for each customer. Each year it could also update
EEHWTP(k) for each customer.
This approach to assigning fixed cost recovery should not differ between distributed solar
and full requirements customers, because it accounts for both the benefits and costs a distributed
solar installation provides to the customer.

Specifically, distributed solar would allow the

customer to have a low value for E(Q(h)), its average hourly consumption. However, it is likely
that a distributed solar customer would have a significantly larger value of Var(Q(h)) than a full
requirements customer with the same value of E(Q(h)) because of the intermittency in
distributed solar energy production.

By this logic, it is unclear if a customer would have a

larger value of F(k,i,y) as a full requirements or distributed solar customer. However, because
the distribution network pricing mechanism allows the customer to withdraw electricity from
the grid at hourly marginal cost, it would eliminate the incentive for inefficient bypass of the
grid-supplied electricity at an unsubsidized price for a distributed solar installation. It would
also provide a strong incentive for distributed solar customers to install storage devices to reduce
the variance of their hourly withdraws from the grid and thereby reduce their annual fixed
charge.
The expression for the EEHWTP can also be broken down according to the moments of
the joint distribution of A(h) and C(h) as:
EEHWTP = ½ [Var(A(h)) – 2(Cov(A(h),C(h))) + Var(C(h))] + [E(A(h)) - E(C(h))]2.

25

This implies that customers with a large variance in their hourly baseline (zero price) demands
and a large variance in the hourly marginal cost of grid-supplied electric have a higher WTP pay
to purchase grid-supplied electricity at C(h). One reason for a higher variance in the marginal
cost of grid-supplied electricity is that during some hours the customer’s consumption of
electricity results in binding constraints in the distribution network, which produces an extremely
large marginal distribution loss factor for their deliveries of grid-supplied energy. Customers
with a larger expected consumption, E(Q(h)) = [E(A(h)) – E(C(h))] also have a higher expected
willingness to pay. Customers with demands that are more highly correlated with the marginal
cost of grid supplied electricity have a lower willingness to pay. Because higher wholesale
prices tend to occur during high system demand periods, one interpretation of this result
is that customers whose demands are more highly correlated with the system demand have a
lower willingness to pay to consume at C(h).
The above discussion has focused on the case of customers with interval meters that can
record their consumption on an hourly basis. For the case that the customer only has a
mechanical meter, suppose the customer can only be charged a price for their consumption
each hour of the year equal to the expected marginal cost of grid-supplied electricity, E(C(h)).
Under these conditions, the hourly value of the consumer’s willingness to pay is equal to
½(A(h) – E[C(h)])2. By the above logic:
Expected Hourly WTP = ½ E((Q(h)2) = ½ [Var(A(h)) + [E(A(h) – E(C(h))]2.

(8)

However, because hourly data is not available for customers without interval meters, other
methods must be employed to proxy for the variables used to compute an estimate of the
Expected Hourly WTP for each customer. An approach similar to load profiling can be used
to compute this estimate for each customer. Specifically, for a test sample of customers with
interval meters which are typically used to compute hourly load profiles, the CPUC can
26

compute values of EEHWTP(k) for these customers and then have an algorithm for assigning
values of EEHWTP(k) to each customer based on this algorithm based on observable
characteristics of the customer and then this value of EEHWTP(k) can be used to compute
F(k,i,y) for that customer.
This model also helps illustrates the inefficiency of pricing mechanisms such as a
monthly demand charge that assesses on $/KW charge on a customer’s peak demand during
the month. Unless the hour the demand charge is assessed coincides with the hour when
the marginal cost of grid-supplied electricity is highest, there is no economic efficiency
reason for charging a customer a higher price during the hour in the month that its
demand is highest. Depending on a customer’s pattern of demand throughout the month, the
customer could incur a demand charge which significantly increases the customer’s marginal
price of electricity when the marginal cost of grid-supplied electricity is extremely low.
Consequently, there is no economic efficiency rationale for a demand charge, if the customer’s
hourly demands are uncorrelated with the hourly marginal cost of grid-supplied electricity.
There is, however, a limited efficiency argument for demand charges if customer’s hourly
demands are positively correlated with the marginal cost of grid-supplied electricity, but
this argument can be easily refuted if the hourly marginal price of electricity is set equal
to marginal cost of grid-supplied electricity.
6. Concluding Comments
If current technological and social trends continue, the share of United States
electricity consumption provided by distributed solar generation capacity is likely to continue
to increase. According to our distribution network pricing model parameter estimates, this will
lead to increasing distribution network costs and prices to residential customers. If current
residential distribution network tariffs remain in place, utilities will find it increasingly
27

difficult to recover the costs of their distribution networks, even if the revenues they receive
from supplying distributed solar and full-requirements customers exceeds the incremental
cost to both customers. Moreover, the legal precedents for the recovery of sunk investments
by regulated entities imply that electric utilities would be well-served to seek a resolution to
the cost recovery issue as soon as possible.

Further delay will increase these distribution

network costs (as more customers install distribution solar systems) and increase the
likelihood that a greater share of these sunk costs must be recovered from utility shareholders.
For customers with interval meters, which is the vast majority of customers in
regions

with significant solar resources such as California and Arizona, there is a

straightforward approach to increasing the economic efficiency of retail electricity pricing
and reducing the incentive for inefficient bypass of grid-supplied electricity. If the hourly
retail price were set equal to the hourly marginal cost of grid-supplied electricity,
then the remainder of the utility's costs to be recovered could be obtained through
customer-specific monthly charges that depend on the expected value of the square of the
household’s hourly consumption. Setting default retail electricity prices in this manner would
also provide strong incentives for customers to install on-site storage devices and other
mechanisms for shifting their consumption away from high-priced hours.

28

References
Borenstein, Severin (2011) “Regional and Income Distribution Effects of Alternative Retail
Electricity Tariffs,’ Energy Institute at Haas Working Paper 222, October.
Borenstein, Severin (2015) “The Private Net Benefits of Residential Solar PV: The Role of
Electricity Tariffs, Tax Incentives, and Rebates, National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper Number 21342, July.
Faulhaber, Gerald R. (1975) “Cross-Subsidization: Pricing in Public Enterprises,” American
Economic Review, 65(5), 966-977.
Hempling, Scott (2015) “From Streetcars to Solar Panels: Stranded Cost Policy in the United
States, Energy Regulation Quarterly, Volume 3, Issue 3.
Panzar, John C. “Technological Determinants of Firm and Industry Structure” Handbook
of Industrial Organization, Elsevier Science Publishers, B.V., 1989, 3-59.

29

i

Table 1: Regression Results for Forecasting Annual Utility-Level
Residential Demand in GWh
PG&E
SCE
SDG&E
0.00337
0.00632
0.0123
(0.00845)
(0.0109)
(0.0110)
0.001231
0.00283
0.0284

Box-Pierce statistic
(lag=11)
Prob > chi2(11)
Box-Pierce statistic
(lag=6)
Prob > chi2(6)

6.9430

12.9303

10.9349

0.8039

0.2979

0.4487

5.2154

9.0647

7.2321

0.5171

0.1699

0.2999

Number of Obs.
26
26
Standard errors in parentheses below coefficient estimate

26

Table 2: Regression Results for Forecasting Annual Total Utility-Level Demand in GWh
PG&E
0.00672
(0.00773)
0.0014924

SCE
0.00712
(0.0109)
0.0029975

SDG&E
0.0110
(0.0110)
0.0030489

Box-Pierce statistic
(lag=11)
Prob > chi2(11)

8.4430

14.4959

12.8822

0.6732

0.2068

0.3011

Box-Pierce statistic
(lag=6)
Prob > chi2(6)

7.4304

10.0387

8.2416

0.2829

0.1230

0.2209

i

Number of Obs.
26
26
Standard errors in parentheses below coefficient estimate

30

26

Table 3: Model (2) Estimates--Residential Distribution Network Price-Setting Process
Dependent Variable = Logarithm of Quarterly Average Residential
Distribution Network Price
Regressor
ln(QFR)
ln(CI)
ln(CI)*ln(CONC)

Number of Observations

-0.751
(1.032)
0.058
(0.023)
0.003
(0.001)
Utility*Year Fixed Effects
168

-0.671
(1.085)
0.068
(0.023)

Utility*Year Fixed Effects
168

Table 4: Model (3) Estimates--Average Distribution Network Cost
Dependent Variable = Logarithm of Annual Average Distribution Network Cost
Regressor
ln(QF)
-1.252
-1.671
(1.342)
(1.851)
ln(CI)
0.028
0.039
(0.013)
(0.018)
ln(CI)*ln(CONC)
0.002
(0.002)
Utility and Year Fixed
Utility and Year Fixed
Effects
Effects
Number of Observations
33
33

Table 5: Model (4) Estimates—Residential Distribution Network Price Controlling for
Average Distribution Network Costs
Dependent Variable = Logarithm of Quarterly Average Residential
Distribution Network Price
Regressor
ln(RR/QF)
1.020
1.671
(0.906)
(1.851)
ln(CI)
0.026
0.035
(0.013)
(0.015)
ln(CI)*ln(CONC)
0.001
(0.001)
Utility*Year Fixed Effects
Utility*Year Fixed Effects
Number of Observations
132
132

31

Figure 1: Plots of Annual Demand in GWh for Pacific Gas & Electric
(Red Line) and Forecast Demand (Black Line)

Figure 2: Plots of Annual Demand in GWh for Southern California Edison
(Red Line) and Forecast Demand (Black Line)

32

Figure 3: Plots of Annual Demand in GWh for San Diego Gas and Electric
(Red Line) and Forecast Demand (Black Line)

Figure 4: Cumulative Installed Distributed Solar Generation Capacity by Quarter and
Utility in Megawatts (MWs)

33

Figure 5: Normalized Annual Distribution Cost (Black Line) and Normalized Proxy Annual
Residential Distribution Cost from Model 1 Estimates (Red Line) for Pacific Gas and Electric

34

Figure 6: Normalized Annual Distribution Cost (Black Line) and Normalized Proxy Annual
Residential Distribution Cost from Model 1 Estimates (Red Line) for Southern California

Edison
Figure 7: Normalized Annual Distribution Cost (Black Line) and Normalized Proxy Annual
Residential Distribution Cost from Model 1 Estimates (Red Line) for San Diego Gas and
Electric

35

Figure 8: Actual (Black Line) and Counterfactual (Red Line) (No Post-2003 Distributed Solar
Installations) Quarterly Residential Distribution Price for Pacific Gas and Electric

Figure 9: Actual (Black Line) and Counterfactual (Red Line) (No Post-2003 Distributed Solar
Installations) Quarterly Residential Distribution Price for Southern California Edison

36

Figure 10: Actual (Black Line) and Counterfactual (Red Line) (No Post-2003 Distributed
Solar Installations) Quarterly Residential Distribution Price for San Diego Gas and Electric

37

Figure 11: Efficient Two-Part Tariff Pricing

Q = A − P/θ(h)

A – C/θ(h)

Figure 12: Worst-Case Hourly Willingness to Pay

Q = AL − P/θ(h)
AL – CH/θ(h)

38

Figure 13: Best-Case Hourly Willingness to Pay

Q = AH − P/θ(h)

AH – CL/θ(h)

39

