NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL REALLOCATION
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
Yu Shi
Working Paper 25085
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25085

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

We would like to thank Deborah Lucas, Briana Chang, Wei Cui, Joel David, Matthias Kehrig, Huiyu
Li, Benjamin Moll, Adriano Rampini and David Zeke for helpful conversations and comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.˛˛
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25085.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Yu Shi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Capital Reallocation
Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Yu Shi
NBER Working Paper No. 25085
September 2018
JEL No. E13,E22,E3,E32,E44,G31,G34
ABSTRACT
Capital reallocation is procyclical, despite measured productive reallocative opportunities being
acyclical, or even countercyclical. This paper reviews the advances in the literature studying the
causes and consequences of capital reallocation (or lack thereof). We provide a comprehensive
set of capital reallocation stylized facts for the US, and an illustrative model of capital
reallocation in equilibrium. We relate capital reallocation to the broader literatures on business
cycles with financial frictions, and on resource misallocation and aggregate productivity.
Throughout, we provide directions for future research.

Andrea L. Eisfeldt
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Suite C4.10
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
andrea.eisfeldt@anderson.ucla.edu
Yu Shi
University of California at Los Angeles
yu.shi.1@anderson.ucla.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25085

1

Introduction

Capital reallocation is an important part of US corporate investment, representing 28% of
total investment by publicly traded US firms. Moreover, capital reallocation is a direct
way to reallocate assets from less productive firms to more productive firms. Accordingly,
frictions impeding productive capital reallocation can exacerbate misallocation and depress
aggregate productivity.
Working definitions of capital reallocation are based on measurement in models or in
empirical work. For the purposes of this article, we define capital reallocation as the transfer
or sale of capital between productive technologies or firms. In our stylized model, capital
reallocation involves the sale of capital, k from one firm or technology, with productivity, ai
and size ki , to another firm with productivity aj and size kj prior to reallocation. In the
data, we primarily measure capital reallocation as sales of property plant and equipment
(PP&E), or as acquisitions of entire divisions or firms.
The focus of our review is on the role of capital reallocation in US business cycles. We
aim to promote research studying the frictions which impede productive reallocation over
the business cycle, as well as research into the role of capital reallocation and misallocation
in determining fluctuations in aggregate productivity.
Our focus on the role of capital reallocation in US business cycles is motivated by two
robust stylized facts, first documented by Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006). First, capital reallocation is strongly and significantly procyclical. The correlation between the cyclical
components of corporate capital reallocation and GDP is 0.58 in US data covering public
firms from 1972 to the present, and this correlation is significant at the one percent level.
Second, the highly procyclical nature of capital reallocation stands in stark contrast to the
cyclical properties of the measured benefits to capital reallocation. Measured benefits to
capital reallocation are not procyclical in US corporate data. The gains to corporate capital
reallocation can be computed using measures of the dispersion in the productivity of capital
across firms. The cross-sectional standard deviation of Tobin’s q has no significant cyclical correlation with GDP, nor does the standard deviation of growth rates in total factor
productivity (TFP) across industries (Solow (1957), Brainard and Tobin (1968)). Furthermore, the standard deviation of capacity utilization rates across industries is significantly
countercyclical.
The joint observation that capital reallocation is procyclical, while measures of dispersion
in capital productivity across firms appear to be, if anything, countercyclical, lead Eisfeldt
and Rampini (2006) to conclude that frictions which inhibit capital’s reallocation to its
best use are countercyclical. Business cycle frictions which prevent marginal products from

1

being equated over time or in the cross section were termed business cycle wedges by Chari,
Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007), and Hsieh and Klenow (2009) use them to explore the effects
of misallocation on differences in productivity across countries.
This paper aims to achieve three goals, namely: (1) to review the facts and the empirical
literature studying capital reallocation, (2) to relate the study of capital reallocation to
modern studies of business cycles with frictions, and (3) to explore the integration of research
on capital reallocation with research on misallocation and aggregate TFP. We pursue each
goal with the overarching objective of providing fruitful directions for future research.
In Section 2 we review the empirical literature on capital reallocation and productivity
dispersion. We also present a comprehensive set of stylized facts describing the cyclical
properties of the amount of capital reallocation, the benefits to reallocation as measured by
productivity dispersion across firms, and reallocation frictions such as financial or uncertainty
shocks. In Section 3 we review the literature on business cycles and capital reallocation with
frictions, and provide a simple model of capital reallocation in a static equilibrium model of
capital reallocation and production. We illustrate the role of aggregate productivity, productivity dispersion, borrowing constraints, and capital liquidity costs in determining aggregate
capital reallocation. In our model, increased productivity alone does not lead to a greater
quantity of capital reallocation. Improvements in financial conditions or capital liquidity
increase reallocation, and the increase is greater if dispersion in productivity is large. Finally, in Section 4, we integrate the methods and findings from Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006)
regarding capital reallocation and capital reallocation frictions with the insights from Hsieh
and Klenow (2009) regarding the effects of capital misallocation on aggregate productivity.
We argue that the amount of reallocation provides crucial information about capital misallocation, and reallocation frictions, in the US across booms vs. recessions. A measure of
misallocation costs which uses both capital reallocation and productivity dispersion data
suggests that about half of output losses in recessions are due to the lower rate of capital
reallocation from less produtive to more productive firms.

2

Stylized Facts

In this section, we review the stylized facts on capital reallocation and measures of productivity dispersion that, in a simple frictionless model, capture the benefits to capital reallocation.
We briefly discuss caveats to these benefits measures. A comparison to labor reallocation is
also provided. Finally, motivated by modern studies of business cycles, we discuss the relation betwen measures of capital reallocation, and measures of firm financing and finanical
uncertainty.

2

The empirical literature on capital reallocation has documented two main facts about
corporate capital transactions. First, capital reallocation appears to come in waves that
coincide with either high aggregate productivity, high equity market valuations, or both. This
is true for both piecemeal reallocation through sales of property, plant and equipment (see
Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006)), and for mergers of entire firms (see Caballero and Hammour
(2001), Jovanovic and Rousseau (2002), Harford (2005), Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006), and
Caballero (2007)).1 Second, capital tends to flow from less productive managers, firms, or
divisions to more productive ones (see Maksimovic and Phillips (1998) and Maksimovic and
Phillips (2001), Schoar (2002), Giroud and Mueller (2015), David (2011), and Kehrig and
Vincent (2017)).
The top panel of Table 1 provides data on turnover rates for sales of PP&E and acquisitions by US public companies. On average, 1.96% of capital is reallocated annually. On
average, boom years, defined as years in which GDP is above its HP filtered trend, correspond to a 50% higher reallocation rate. The top panel of Table 1 shows that capital
reallocation measured by sales of PP&E and acquisitions by US public companies is highly
and statistically significantly correlated with GDP at the cyclical frequency.2 The point
estimate is 0.58 and is significant at the 1% level. Figure 1 plots the cyclical components
of reallocation vs. GDP to visually illustrate the procyclical nature of the amount of capital
reallocation.
Understanding the drivers of capital reallocation, as well as potential reallocation frictions and resulting capital misallocation, requires an understanding of the benefits to capital
reallocation. Dispersion in firm-level productivity has been used to measure opportunities for
productive corporate reallocation. However, we note that the extent to which measured productivity dispersion represents reallocation opportunities is an interesting and open question.
The answer depends on the technologies (homogenous capital vs. putty-clay, as in Johansen
(1959)), on the risk characteristics of firms (see David, Schmid, and Zeke (2018) for the effect
of risk-pricing on estimates of the marginal product of capital), and on whether dispersion
proxies for firm-level uncertainty or productivity differences (see Bloom (2009)).
The business cycle properties of productivity dispersion, interpreted as opportunities for
productive reallocation, have been documented in two main studies. Eisfeldt and Rampini
(2006) show that dispersion in firm-level Tobin’s q and dispersion in firm-level investment
rates have no statistically significant cyclical correlation with GDP.3 They also show that dis1

See Ottonello (2017) for the related finding that more structures are vacant following negative financial
shocks.
2
The Appendix contains the data description. Table 1 provides an update to Tables 1 and 3 in Eisfeldt
and Rampini (2006). The results, using sixteen additional years of data, are remarkably similar to the results
in that paper.
3
Jovanovic and Rousseau (2002), argues that dispersion in q drives merger waves. Using Compustat

3

persion in industry-level TFP growth rates and capacity utilization rates are countercyclical.
Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) used Compustat data, along with industry level data. A very
important, and more recent, contribution to the measurement of productivity dispersion over
US business cycles using establishment level data is Kehrig (2015). Kehrig (2015) rigorously
documents two key facts for the capital reallocation and resource misallocation literatures:
First, dispersion in productivity levels across establishments, within industries, is countercyclical. Second, the increase in dispersion in recessions is mainly driven by a higher share
of lower productivity establishments. Kehrig’s study represents a very important step for
understanding the effects of misallocation on aggregate TFP over US business cycles.4 His
evidence shows that, at the establishment level, the apparent benefits to capital reallocation
are strongly countercyclical.
Consistent with this prior research, the middle panel of Table 1, and the associated plot
in Figure 2, illustrate that simple measures of the benefits to reallocation are not statistically
significantly positively correlated with GDP at the cyclical frequency. This fact makes
the procyclical nature of capital reallocation puzzling from the perspective of a frictionless
neoclassical model. Firm-level dispersion in Tobin’s q has no significant cyclical correlation
with GDP. The dispersion in TFP growth rates across industries is not significantly cyclical
either. Dispersion in capacity utilization across industries is countercyclical.
In addition to studying the relationship between the amount of, and benefits to, capital
reallocation and GDP at the cyclical frequency, we also report the direct correlation between
the cyclical components of the amount of reallocation, and measures of the dispersion in the
marginal product of capital, in the top panel of Table 2. The direct correlations support the
conclusions from Table 1. The only significant correlations, between reallocation and industry level dispersion in capacity utilization and between reallocation and firm-level dispersion
in pre-reallocation marginal products of capital, are negative.
For comparison, we also report the cyclical properties of labor reallocation up to the
present date.5 A comparison between labor and capital reallocation is interesting because
labor and capital are likely subject to different frictions, but both labor and capital should
flow from less productive firms to more productive firms to equalize marginal products. As
can be seen in Panel C of Table 1, job creation, which is the counterpart to new investment
for capital is procyclical. The direct labor counterpart to capital reallocation is excess job
data, they show that merger waves coincide with wider dispersion in firm-level Tobin’s q. One caveat is that
aggregate valuation waves can lead to very high values of Tobin’s q for a subset of firms. Indeed, Eisfeldt and
Rampini (2006) show that excluding very large q’s (above five), changes the estimated correlation between
the cyclical component of GDP and dispersion in q from positive to negative.
4
See also Kehrig and Vincent (2017).
5
See Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) and Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1998).

4

reallocation, or the minimum of job creation and job destruction. Excess job reallocation
has no statistically significant correlation with GDP at the cyclical frequency.
Relative to the literature on labor reallocation, the literature on capital reallocation is
less expansive.6 This is striking, because most studies of the effects of financial frictions
focus on constraints which limit the growth of firms’ capital stocks. Moreover, capital reallocation appears to be more procyclical than either gross or excess labor reallocation. Part
of the imbalance between studies of capital vs. labor reallocation may be because suboptimal allocation of capital can be addressed by new investment as well as capital reallocation.
However, capital reallocaction is an important part of investment overall. Reallocation averaged about 28% of total investment for public US firms over our sample, which matches the
finding in Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) using data up to 2000.7 Reallocation, or the purchase
of used capital, can also be a faster way to accumulate capital than new investment. Finally,
if different constraints and costs affect the reallocation of existing capital vs. the production
of new capital, comparing these two types of investment can be used to identify important
business cycle frictions. Finally, Lanteri (2016) presents intriguing new evidence that used
capital prices are more volatile and procyclical than prices of new capital.
The bottom panel of Table 2 reports the correlation between the cyclical components
of the reallocation measures and financial flows, as well as measures of uncertainty. These
financial flow and uncertainty variables are motivated by the literature on business cycles
with financial frictions and uncertainty shocks.
Capital reallocation is significantly positively correlated with debt financing, and total
financing, in support of theories of capital reallocation in the presence of financial frictions.8
On the other hand, capital reallocation is not significantly correlated with equity financing.
Uncertainty measures such as the VIX and dispersion in the idiosyncratic component of
stock returns do not display a significant correlation with measures of capital reallocation
at the cyclical frequency. This may not be surprising, since firm-level uncertainty measures
are closely related to the measures of productivity dispersion used to measure the benefits
to capital reallocation. The bottom panel of Table 1 shows that these related reallocation
benefits measures have little or no cyclical correlation with reallocation. Bloom (2009) shows
that uncertainty shocks can generate realistic business cycle dynamics. Recent studies have
found that the effect of uncertainty shocks may work through an interaction with financial
6

See Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) and Caballero (2007) for comparisons between capital and labor reallocation.
7
Ramey and Shapiro (1998a) also emphasize that capital reallocation represents a sizable contribution to
total US investment.
8
For the reasons stated in Covas and Den Haan (2011), we focus on the bottom 90% of firms as defined
by total asset size. Large firms do not appear financially constrained, and are so large relative to the rest of
firms that their behavior can change the cyclical properties of aggregate quantities in Compustat.

5

frictions.9
Most existing studies of business cycles with financial frictions and uncertainty shocks
focus on new investment. We explore the role of aggregate productivity shocks, financial
constraints, and changes in productivity dispersion in an illustrative equilibrium model of
capital reallocation in Section 3. The model confirms the empirical plausibility of important
interactions between productivity dispersion and financial constraints in explaining capital
reallocation dynamics.

3

Capital Reallocation and Business Cycles: Theory

In this section, we review the theoretical literature on capital reallocation over the business
cycle, and use a simple model to illustrate promising directions for future research. The
literature on capital reallocation over the business cycle is closely related to, and builds on,
the more general literature on business cycles with financial and real frictions. Three widely
studied mechanisms used in the modern business cycle literature to generate realistic economy wide fluctuations are financial frictions, uncertainty shocks, and physical adjustment
costs. We begin by reviewing the related literature, which also includes studies which incorporate realistic over-the-counter (search) models of capital reallocation. We conclude this
section by presenting and analyzing a parsimonious model of equilibrium capital reallocation to illustrate the important role of three key frictions in determining capital reallocation,
namely financial constraints, uncertainty or productivity dispersion, and technological or
specificity costs of reallocation. We use this model to integrate lessons from the literature
and to provide directions for future research.

3.1

Reallocation Theory Literature

Several recent papers study capital reallocation and provide explanations for its cyclical
properties. Many of these papers build on important recent contributions in the business
cycle literature that studies the amplification and propagation of business cycle shocks via
frictions affecting new investment. These modern business cycle models feature either financial shocks (see Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), Khan and Thomas (2013), Jermann and
Quadrini (2012)), or shocks to the dispersion of individual firm-level productivities, (see
Bloom (2009)), or both financial and uncertainty shocks (see Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014), Gilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajšek (2014), Arellano, Bai, and Kehoe (2016), and
Alfaro, Bloom, and Lin (2016)).
9

See Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014), Gilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajšek (2014), Arellano, Bai, and
Kehoe (2016), and Alfaro, Bloom, and Lin (2016).

6

The interaction between financial frictions and capital reallocation has been explored in
several recent papers. Herrera, Kolar, and Minetti (2011) provide the stylized facts for credit
reallocation, and provide a link between credit reallocation and business cycles. By their
measure, the reallocation of credit is highly volatile, but only moderately procyclical. Chen
and Song (2013) show that the difference in capital productivities of financially constrained
firms vs. unconstrained firms is higher in recessions. Their finding supports the idea that
financial constraints play an important role in preventing resources from flowing to the most
productive locations in recessions. Exploiting this fact in a quantitative model with TFP
news shocks, the authors are able to generate realistic business cycles resulting from reallocation to financially constrained, but highly productive firms following good news about future
TFP. In related work, Ai, Li, and Yang (2016) develop an extension of Gertler and Kiyotaki
(2010) in which intermediaries’ ability to finance productive reallocation declines following
negative financial shocks. The resulting decline in reallocation amplifies and propagates the
decline in intermediary net worth through the negative effect on productivity and output.
The authors show that their model produces more realistic business cycle dynamics when
financial shocks are included in addition to traditional TFP shocks. Cui (2017) develops a
model of reallocation between incumbent and exiting firms. In that model, shocks which
tighten borrowing constraints can actually prevent less productive firms from exiting because
the decrease in their leverage increases their option value from remaining active by reducing
debt overhang. This effect seems interesting given the emphasis on entry and exit in the
larger literature on resource misallocation (see Hopenhayn (2014)).
Microfoundations for capital reallocation frictions include adverse selection, agency costs,
and search. Eisfeldt (2004) provides an early model of an endogenous link between adverse
selection and aggregate capital productivity. In that model, adverse selection increases in
recessions due to lower investment in risky projects, leading to fewer reallocative shocks.
Fuchs, Green, and Papanikolaou (2016) combine the effects of delayed asset sales and adverse
selection in a model which generates endogenous capital liquidation costs. That paper uses
the direct intuition that greater dispersion in productivity can exacerbate adverse selection
problems to understand procyclical capital reallocation despite apparently countercyclical
reallocation benefits. Li and Whited (2015) also study a model of capital reallocation with
adverse selection. Like Cui (2017), they emphasize the role of entry and exit. An interesting
feature of their model is that higher moments of the size distribution matter for reallocation
dynamics. The joint distribution of productivity and size is also emphasized in Cooper
and Schott (2013). It is intuitive that this joint distribution should matter for reallocation
dynamics, since both size and productivity determine marginal products.
Eisfeldt and Rampini (2008) motivates countercyclical reallocation frictions with endoge7

nously cyclical agency costs. In their model, managers are more reluctant to downsize in bad
times when outside options deteriorate. Their paper also provides an analytical expression
for the output loss from misallocation due to managerial agency costs over the business cycle.
Given that the market for used capital, plants, divisions and firms is a decentralized
one, incorporating search frictions seems like a very fruitful direction for capital reallocation
research.10 David (2011) develops a search model of mergers and acquisitions which generates
aggregate productivity growth through an efficient reallocation of resources. New work
by Dong, Wang, and Wen (2017) emphasizes the importance of both financial shocks and
search frictions in a quantitative DSGE model that is able to match the stylized facts for
capital reallocation, including the higher relative volatility for used vs. new capital prices
documented by Lanteri (2016). Moreover, Dong, Wang, and Wen (2017) show that search
can explain capital unemployment, as documented by Ottonello (2017).11 A related paper by
Wright, Xiao, and Zhu (2018) develops a model of capital investment and reallocation subject
to search, bargaining, and liquidity frictions, with an explicit focus on microfoundations
and analytical characterizations. Cao and Shi (2014) also study capital reallocation in an
equilibrium search model. They, like Cui (2017), stress the importance of firms’ entry and
exit decisions. Specifically, Cao and Shi (2014) emphasizes the role of procyclical firm entry
in improving capital market liquidity, increasing used capital prices, and encouraging lower
productivity firms to sell more capital in booms.
Physical adjustment costs and capital liquidity also play an important role in capital
reallocation dynamics. Ramey and Shapiro (1998b) is an early contribution studying capital reallocation in the face of adjustment costs. Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) argued that
physical adjustment costs are unlikely to be countercyclical since opportunity costs of foregone output are actually higher in booms. However, Lanteri (2016) points out that despite
the fact that less productive firms may have stronger incentives to downsize after negative
aggregate productivity shocks, more productive firms may prefer to allocate their limited
investment following such negative shocks to new capital if used capital is an imperfect substitute due to capital specificity. Lanteri’s paper thus provides a plausible reconciliation for
why the disincentive to grow by purchasing used capital for high productivity firms dominates the incentives to downsize of less productive firms during recessions, dampening capital
10

Rocheteau and Weill (2011) provide a comprehensive review of the use of search models in understanding
asset markets. See also Gavazza (2011).
11
For related work on frictional markets and labor reallocation dynamics, see Chang (2011) and Zhang
(2016). Chang (2011) focuses on the interaction between sectoral shocks and firms’ optimal hiring and
firing decisions on labor markets’ matching efficiency, while Zhang (2016) develops the important interaction
between financial leverage and employment and wage decisions by firms in a model which emphasizes the
importance of the extensive margin of firm entry and exit on labor reallocation.

8

reallocation in downturns.12

3.2

Model

We develop a one period general equilibrium model of capital reallocation in order to illustrate the role of aggregate productivity, cross sectional dispersion in firm-level productivity,
financial constraints, and capital liquidity costs in determining the quantity and value of
aggregate capital reallocation. Capital reallocation is driven by exogenously given ex-ante
mismatches between firm-level productivity and capital. We begin with a baseline frictionless model, and then we add to this model a collateral constraint, and a technological or
specificity cost of selling capital. Without frictions, marginal products of capital are equated
across firms post-reallocation. In the models with financial or real trading frictions, the degree of frictions determines the remaining dispersion in marginal products post-reallocation.
We study the comparative statics for the amount and value of aggregate capital reallocation,
describing how capital reallocation responds to aggregate productivity, to the tightness of
the collateral constraint, to the dispersion in firm-level productivities, and to the size of the
capital liquidity cost.
In this simple equilibrium model, we illustrate the fact that aggregate productivity shocks
alone are unlikely to generate a realistic business cycle correlation for capital reallocation;
higher aggregate productivity alone does not lead to greater capital reallocation in either a
frictionless model, or a model with financial or real trading frictions. In contrast, relaxing
financial constraints increases reallocation. Moreover, reallocation increases by more when
constraints are relaxed when aggregate productivity is high. We also confirm the result in
Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006), namely that reducing capital liquidity costs increases capital
reallocation. If specificity costs are interpreted to include search or adverse selection costs,
as in the literature described in Section 3.1, it is possible that these costs are countercyclical.
Finally, we also study the effects of changes in productivity dispersion. Productivity dispersion has alternatively been used to measure the benefits to capital reallocation (Eisfeldt and
Rampini (2006)) or capital misallocation (Hsieh and Klenow (2009)), and to measure uncertainty shocks (Bloom (2009)). Future work could help to disentangle the different effects
of productivity dispersion. In our model, an increase in productivity dispersion counterfactually leads to more reallocation, that is, dispersion measures the benefits to productive
reallocation. However, as in the business cycle literature, a higher dispersion in productivity
can magnify the effects of changes in either financial constraints or capital liquidity costs in
12

See also Eisfeldt and Rampini (2007) for a model in which firms choose between new and used capital.
In that paper, used capital is preferred by financially constrained firms because it has a lower up front cost,
despite higher lifetime maintenance costs.

9

a way that appears consistent with empirical patterns.
The economy consists of a measure one of firms who are endowed with zero financial
wealth and a productive technology to produce final output. Each firm is also endowed with
idiosyncratic productivity ai , and capital ki , both of which are drawn from uncorrelated
Pareto distributions.13 Each firm i’s initial capital is drawn from a Pareto distribution
ki ∼ P (km , c), where c > 1 is the curvature parameter and km is the lower bound for capital.
c
m
The probability density function for capital is kckc+1
. Productivity is independently assigned
i
from a Pareto distribution ai ∼ P (aagg , f ). The probability density function for productivity
f af
is afagg
+1 where aagg is the lower bound of productivity and f is the curvature parameter. The
i
lower bound aagg captures the aggregate productivity level in the economy.14 Recall that
the higher is the tail decay parameter for the Pareto distribution, the lower is the amount of
cross-sectional dispersion. Thus, comparative statics over f can be used to study the effects
of increases or decreases in productivity dispersion. A higher f will result in faster decay in
the right tail of productivity levels, and thus a lower dispersion in productivity.
θ
Firms have access to technologies to produce final goods according to ai k̂i , with 0 <
θ < 1, where, as in Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006), k̂i denotes capital after capital sales or
purchases, i.e. after capital reallocation has taken place. We normalize the price of the final
product to be 1. Capital is traded at a marketing clearing price P . Each firm chooses capital
sales or purchases to maximize their output according to:
θ

max ai k̂i − P ri + li − li (1 + rl ),
ri

(1)

subject to the law of motion for capital,
ri = k̂i − ki ,

(2)

where ri is positive if the firm is a net buyer of capital, and negative if it is a net seller, and
the budget constraint
P ri = li ,
(3)
where li denotes the funds that firms borrow to fund capital purchases. In the baseline model,
we assume that firms borrow without constraints at a zero interest rate from an (unmodeled)
financial intermediary (rl = 0). We also assume zero discounting from the beginning of the
period when reallocation (and loans) are chosen to the end of the period when output is
produced and loans are repaid. Firms’ optimization problems are unaffected by borrowing
13

To be precise, we use a Type (I) distribution, for which the two specified parameters are the minimum
value, and the tail decay parameter.
14
The mean of ai increases in aagg , while the coefficient of variation is invariant to aagg .

10

and lending in the frictionless model since the funds borrowed and loan repayments will
cancel out exactly, and hence we drop the last two terms in Equation (1) and constraint (3)
in most of what follows. The market clearing price P ensures that net aggregate reallocation
is zero:
X
ri = 0.
(4)
i

An equilibrium in this economy requires that all firms optimize according to Equations (1)
to (3), and markets clear according to Equation (4). The model can be solved analytically
as follows. Firms’ first order condition is:
k̂i =

1
P  θ−1
.
θai

(5)

Equation (5) holds for each firm in the economy, and thus all marginal products of
are equated to the equilibrium price in the frictionless model. Firms whose initial
 1
P θ−1
is larger than this optimal amount, i.e. those firms for which ki ≥ θa
, will be
i
and firms whose initial capital is smaller than this amount will be buyers. Note that
rewrite the marketing clearing condition in Equation (4) as:
X

k̂i =

X

capital
capital
sellers,
we can

ki .

(6)

i

i

This condition can be used to find the marketing clearing price of capital.15 In particular,
integrating over firm level capital stocks and productivity levels, the market clearing price
of capital must satisfy the following equation:
Z

∞

aagg

f afagg
af +1

∞

c
P 1 ckm
( ) θ−1 c+1
dkda =
k
km θa

Z

Z

∞

aagg

f afagg
af +1

Z

∞

k
km

c
ckm
dkda.
k c+1

(7)

Simplifying, we have the following equation which determines the market clearing price:
1
f
P θ−1
ckm
)
=
.
1 (
c−1
f + θ−1 θaagg

(8)

After solving for the market clearing price, we can get the aggregate quantity of reallocation
R, which is equal to one half of the sum of all capital sales plus all capital purchases:
R=
15

We require f +

1
θ−1

1−c
1 c
P  θ−1
km
c−1
θaagg

f
.
+f

1−c
θ−1

> 1 to ensure that the left hand side of Equation (6) is finite.

11

(9)

This yields the complete model solution.
Figure 3 provides an intuitive picture of the model solution. Fixing one level of firm-level
productivity, this graph shows the trading regions for firms of various sizes as a function
of the market clearing price of capital. Firms’ initial endowment of capital is plotted along
the x-axis. The y-axis plots the optimal post-reallocation firm size as a function of firms’
initial capital, productivity (which is the same for all firms in the illustrative figure), and the
market clearing price. The thin solid line plots the Pareto distribution of firm sizes. Recall
that the higher is the decay parameter c, the smaller is the right tail of firm sizes. The
 1
P θ−1
plots firms’ optimal post-reallocation capital stocks. Because
horizontal line at k̂i = θa
all firms in the figure have the same level of productivity, they all choose the same postreallocation size in the frictionless model. The 45-degree line plots capital stocks with zero
reallocation. In equilibrium, firms move from the 45-degree line to the horizontal line which
 1
P θ−1
denotes optimal capital stocks. Firms to the left of the vertical line at ki = θa
have
initial capital endowments which are smaller than optimal, so they are net buyers, while
firms to the right of this line are net sellers.
With the full solution in hand, we can study how the amount of reallocation changes
as aggregate productivity changes. In the data, reallocation is higher when aggregate productivity is higher. However, without frictions, in equilibrium the market clearing price of
reallocated capital absorbs all of the effects of changes in aggregate productivity, leaving the
quantity of capital reallocated unchanged. To see this, note that market clearing requires
that Equation (6) holds. The optimal choice of capital after reallocation in the left hand side
of this equation is weakly increasing in aPi for each firm, while the right hand side is fixed.
Thus, if aagg increases, increasing ai for all firms by the same amount, then P must increase
by this same amount so that the equation still holds, leaving reallocation unchanged.
Formally, we can compute comparative statics for the market clearing price of capital
using Equation (8) and for the amount of reallocation using Equation (9). We present the
comparative static results for the price and quantity of capital reallocation for the baseline
model in the first rows of Panels A and B of Table 3, respectively. The Online Appendix
contains the analytical details for all comparative statics. Table 3 shows that as aggregate
productivity increases, the price of capital increases, while the amount of reallocation is
unchanged. Similarly, we can get comparative statics for the capital price and the quantity
of reallocation as a function of changes in the dispersion in productivity using the same
conditions. We have that, as f increases so that productivity dispersion decreases, that
the price of capital falls and the amount of reallocation also declines. The increase in the
amount of reallocation as dispersion in productivity increases is intuitive, since productivity
dispersion measures the benefits to capital reallocation. Reallocation increases, absent other
12

frictions, when the benefits to reallocation increase. The price effect is due to the fact that
f controls the thickness of the right tail of the productivity distribution. The resale price of
capital is higher when the right tail is fatter.
Finally, we can compute the cross derivatives between productivity dispersion across
firms, and the level of aggregate productivity. Comparative static results for these cross
derivatives appear in Table 4. Because aggregate productivity has no effect on the quantity
of reallocation in the frictionless model, the cross derivative will also be zero. A higher
aggregate shock leads to a smaller increase in the price of capital the lower is the cross
sectional dispersion in productivity is. This is intuitive, because, with lower dispersion, the
benefits to reallocation are smaller and so is the effect of aggregate productivity on prices.
In contrast, given a countercyclical increase in productivity dispersion, the price would fall
due to lower aggregate productivity, but the decline would actually be attenuated by the
increase in productivity dispersion.
To generate comparative statics in line with the stylized facts describing capital reallocation in Section 2, we augment the baseline model with two frictions motivated by the
literature on business cycles and capital reallocation with frictions, namely financial frictions
and capital liquidity costs. We model the financial friction as a collateral constraint, such
that firms which purchase additional capital can only borrow up to a fraction of the value of
their initial capital stock. With the addition of this collateral constraint, firms’ optimization
problem in Equations (1) to (3) is augmented by the following collateral constraint:
P ri ≤ ξP ki ,

(10)

where ξ ≥ 0 captures the tightness of the collateral constraint.16 A higher value of ξ corresponds to a more relaxed financial constraint.17
The augmented model also nests a capital liquidity cost paid by capital sellers, as in
Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006). The liquidity cost captures capital specificity, namely, the fact
that when a firm sells capital only that fraction that is generally valuable to all firms receives
the market clearing price. With the addition of capital liquidity costs, the law of motion for
16

Technically, we have that li ≤ ξP ki and P ri = li . However, since we have assumed a zero interest
rate for intra-period loans, li − li (1 + rl ) = 0, and the collateral constraint can be applied reallocation itself
without loss of generality.
17
We note that whether firms can leverage only their capital, or also their output matters for the effects on
capital reallocation. If firms can borrow against output, then higher productivity firms are less constrained
and the equilibrium will feature higher reallocation, which is more sensitive to changes in the constraint
tightness (see the Online Appendix for details). A closely related point is made by Li (2015) in the context
of the effect of financial constraints on misallocation. That paper shows that misallocation is lower when
firms can borrow against output vs. capital only.

13

capital for each firm given in Equation (2) is replaced by:
k̂i = ki + ri − Γ(ri )1ri <0 ,

(11)

which says the capital stock deployed for production (k̂i ) equals the initial capital endowment (ki ) plus the amount of reallocated capital ri minus the reallocation cost (Γ(ri )). The
adjustment cost will be zero if firm i is a capital buyer. To aid in analytics, the capital
liquidity cost is specified such that all sellers face same marginal reallocation cost, regardless
of how much capital they sell: Γ(ri ) = γ|ri |, where γ ≥ 0 describes how costly it is for firms
to sell capital.
The first order conditions for buyers and sellers of capital are, respectively:
ai θk̂i
ai θk̂i

θ−1
θ−1


+ λi ξki − (k̂i − ki ) = P, and,

(12)

(1 + γ) = P,

(13)

where λi is the Lagrangian multiplier on the collateral constraint.
Figure 4 illustrates firms’ policy function for k̂i across size ki , for a fixed level of firm
productivity, a, for the augmented model with a collateral constraint and capital liquidity
cost. As can be seen in the figure, the borrowing constraint is linear in initial capital and
the parameter ξ. It limits relatively smaller firms because they don’t have much collateral
to borrow against. The adjustment cost introduces an inaction region for initial capital
stocks within which firms don’t benefit from trading. The intuition is simple. If there is no
inaction region, because sellers lose capital due to the adjustment cost, the marginal sellers
would produce with less capital than marginal buyers. This is suboptimal for the marginal
sellers and they would rather produce with their full initial capital endowment. Firms with
more than the desired capital thus only begin to sell capital once their size implies that the
proceeds from selling capital offsets the capital liquidity cost they must pay.
The model with frictions generates equilibrium dispersion in the marginal product of
capital across firms. The marginal product of capital for unconstrained buyers will be P ,
P
. The marginal product of capital for
and for capital sellers the marginal product is 1+γ
firms in the inaction region lies between these two values. The wedge between marginal
products, and the dispersion in marginal products of capital post-reallocation, increases with
the magnitude of the capital liquidity cost γ, as in Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006). Finally,
financially constrained firms have marginal products of capital higher than P , and the wedge
depends on the tightness of the collateral constraint. As a result, dispersion in the marginal
product of capital is also increasing in the tightness of the financial constraint.

14

As in the baseline model, the model with frictions is solved by first finding the optimal
capital level for each firm for a given price of capital, then aggregating the demand and
supply of capital, and finally solving for the equilibrium capital price which equates supply
and demand and yields the equilibrium quantity of capital reallocation. We provide detailed
solutions in the Appendix, along with formal comparative statics. We summarize the first
order comparative statics in Table 3 for the baseline model, as well as for the augmented
models with frictions. For exposition purposes, we nest each case of the augmented model
as a separate case, turning only one friction on at a time. Panel A in Table 3 describes
the response of the price of capital in each model to changes in parameters that are “improvements” to the economy, namely an increase in aggregate productivity, a reduction in
productivity dispersion, a relaxation of the collateral constraint, and a reduction in the
capital liquidity cost. Panel B of Table 3 describes the response of the quantity of capital
reallocation in each model for these same parameter changes.
The aggregate productivity column of Table 3 shows that, for each model case, the market
clearing price of capital is increasing in aggregate productivity, while, if all other parameters
are held constant, the quantity of reallocation will remain unchanged. The intuition, arising
from the market clearing condition, is the same for the augmented model as for the frictionless
model. Again, the first order conditions for all model cases imply that the optimal choices
of k̂i are weakly increasing in aPi for all firms. Thus, in order to clear the market in Equation
(6), the level change in productivity must be absorbed by an increase in the capital price.
The productivity dispersion column of Table 3 shows that, for all model cases, a reduction
in productivity dispersion leads to a lower capital price and less reallocation. When there
is less cross-sectional dispersion in productivity (higher f ), the demand for reallocation is
lower, and both the price of capital and the quantity of reallocation decrease.
The financial constraint column of Table 3 shows that both the price and quantity of
reallocation increase when financial constraints are relaxed. As seen in the liquidity cost
column of Table 3, the result is slightly different when the capital liquidity cost is reduced;
the amount of reallocation increases but the price of capital actually declines. Thus, reducing
either of the two capital trading frictions increases the amount of reallocation, but whether
the price increases or decreases appears to depend on whether the trading “cost” is paid
by buyers vs. sellers. Intuitively, if we relax the constraint on buyers, there will be more
demand for capital, which will push the price up. The result is the opposite if the cost is
paid by sellers. Relaxing sellers’ reallocation cost will result in a greater supply of capital,
and thus a lower capital price. Thus, the model illustrates the importance of the specific
form of trading frictions for the results in models in which both buyers and sellers can face
costs or constraints.
15

Finally, we present results for the cross effects between the aggregate productivity level,
the dispersion in firm-level productivity, and the level of trading frictions. Recent theories
of business cycles have emphasized the interaction between aggregate productivity and financial frictions, and between financial frictions and cross section dispersion in firm-level
productivities (uncertainty shocks). Table 4 displays the cross comparative static results.
The aggregate productivity columns of Table 4 presents the cross comparative statics for
aggregate productivity and the parameters describing cross section productivity dispersion,
financial constraints, and capital liquidity. The sensitivity of the equilibrium price of capital
increases by less for a given increase in aggregate productivity the lower the cross-sectional
dispersion in productivity is. This result holds for all models. With lower productivity dispersion, the benefits to reallocation are smaller and so is the effect of aggregate productivity
on prices. On the other hand, the price of capital increases more when either financial constraints are relaxed, or capital liquidity costs are reduced, when aggregate productivity is
high. There appears to be a positive multiplier on the price of capital from relaxing trading
frictions when aggregate productivity is high.18 As expected, the level of the aggregate productivity shock has no impact on the comparative statics for the quantity of reallocation in
the aggregate productivity columns of Table 4. This is a direct consequence of the zero first
derivative effect of aggregate productivity on the quantity of reallocation.
The productivity dispersion columns of Table 4 displays the cross comparative statics
for the cross section dispersion in firm-level productivity, and trading frictions. For both
the price of capital, and the quantity of capital reallocation, the effect of relaxing frictions
is smaller when the cross section dispersion in productivities is smaller. This means that
if the cross section dispersion in productivities is larger (a high uncertainty “shock”), then
the effect of relaxing frictions will be larger. Loosening the financial constraint by a given
amount will lead to a larger increase in reallocation and the price of capital when the dispersion in productivity is higher. Similarly, a given reduction in the capital liquidity cost
will increase the quantity and price of reallocated capital by more when the cross section
dispersion in productivity is higher. These findings are consistent with recent work that
emphasizes the important interactions between dispersion in the cross section and financial
or real frictions, such as in the models of Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014), Gilchrist,
Sim, and Zakrajšek (2014), Arellano, Bai, and Kehoe (2016), and Alfaro, Bloom, and Lin
(2016).
The stylized capital reallocation model illustrates how adding financial frictions, or capital adjustment costs, can help to generate realistic patterns of capital reallocation. These
frictions also change the effects of aggregate productivity shocks and uncertainty shocks,
18

See Lanteri (2016) for related empirical results.

16

bringing the effects of those fundamental shocks more in line with the data. However, the
model is very stylized. The output price is fixed at one, whereas in a fully general equilibrium model, the output price would be pinned down by market clearing and consumers’
utility functions. We illustrated the role of capital illiquidity, or specificity costs, on capital
sellers, while in practice buyers face installation costs as well. Another caveat is that, while
the results for the quantity of reallocation appear to be robust, the results for how the price
of capital changes with productivity dispersion depend on the shape of the productivity
distribution. Our model features a Pareto productivity distribution, which provides analytical tractability, and features a fat right tail similar to that of a lognormal distribution.
Many models feature lognormal productivity distributions, and Pareto distributions have
been shown to fit firm size distributions. However, Kehrig (2015) documents a fat left tail in
the productivity distribution during downturns. Using a mixture of uniform distributions,
it is easy to show that an increase in dispersion in a fat left-tailed distribution leads to more
reallocation, but at a lower price. Empirically, both the value and quantity of reallocation
are proycyclical, so an increase in the thickness of the left tail of productivity in downturns
cannot explain procyclical reallocation without other frictions. However, it seems important for future models of heterogeneous firms to incorporate the empirical findings of Kehrig
(2015) regarding productivity distribution dynamics.

4

Reallocation, Misallocation, and Aggregate TFP

The study of capital reallocation, and the frictions which inhibit productivity increasing
reallocation, is closely related to the important research measuring the effects of resource
misallocation on aggregate TFP. Aggregate TFP is determined as a function of the joint
distribution of firm-level TFP and firm size. Capital reallocation can increase aggregate
TFP by increasing the efficiency of this joint distribution, i.e. by allocating more capital to
more productive locations. The idea that capital reallocation can contribute to aggregate
TFP fluctuations is suggested by the two main stylized facts from the literature on capital
reallocation, namely that capital tends to flow from less productive managers or firms, to
more productive ones, and that capital reallocation comes in waves that coincide with high
aggregate productivity.
In this section, we review the developing literature on business cycles and aggregate TFP
fluctuations due to capital reallocation frictions and capital misallocation. For comparison,
we briefly review extensive growth literature on the effects of misallocation on aggregate
TFP. To motivate future work on the role of misallocation in US business cycles, we construct
annual estimates of output losses from capital misallocation in recessions in two ways. The

17

first method follows Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006), using data on both dispersion in firms’
marginal products, and data on capital reallocation. The second method follows Hsieh and
Klenow (2009), using only dispersion in firms’ marginal products.

4.1

Literatures: Business Cycles and Growth

Early business cycle studies were conducted in a representative agent framework, however
modern studies feature heterogeneous firms. Models with heterogeneous firms either explicitly or implicitly feature the effect of shocks and frictions on resource allocation in the cross
section. However, as emphasized by Restuccia and Rogerson (2013) in their review of the
misallocation literature, little is known about the relative fraction of business cycle fluctuations in aggregate TFP that can be attributed to time series variation in the efficiency of
capital allocations in the cross section.
An early contribution studying the effect of misallocation on business cycle dynamics
is Caballero and Hammour (1998), which shows how rent appropriation can lead to labor
misallocation and sharp recessions. Gavazza (2011) studies real asset liquidity and shows that
when real asset markets are thin, firms’ average productivity and capacity utilizations are
lower while dispersion in productivities and utilization rates are higher. Sraer and Thesmar
(2017) show how to scale up estimates from carefully identified micro-econometric studies of
the distortive effects of frictions on firm-level decisions to the macro economy.
Several papers focus on the role of financial frictions in generating capital misallocation in
US data. Khan and Thomas (2013) develops a model in which credit shocks affecting firms’
collateral constraints can lead to persistent recessions through greater capital misallocation
in a model in which reallocation of capital occurs through new investment (see also the
related work by Chen and Song (2013)). Ai, Li, and Yang (2016) explicitly focuses on the
role of capital reallocation in driving variation in capital misallocation over the business cycle
in their study of financial intermediation and capital reallocation. Buera and Moll (2015)
show that what type of wedge collateral constraints generate (efficiency, investment, or labor)
depends crucially on whether firms differ in terms of final goods productivity, investment
costs, or recruitment costs. This is important because Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007)
argue that investment wedges play a small role in business cycle fluctuations, a finding that
has been interpreted as evidence against an important role for financial frictions. More
recently, Kurtzman and Zeke (2017) describe the effects of misallocation due to the Federal
Reserve Bank’s unconventional monetary policy changing financing costs in heterogeneous
way. Finally, Gilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajšek (2013) constructs a misallocation measure based
on the observed dispersion in borrowing costs in the US manufacturing sector.19
19

See also Cui and Radde (2016) for a model of financial misallocation. Whited and Zhao (2016) measure

18

Given the much larger size of the growth literature studying the effects of misallocation on
TFP, it is useful to review that literature with a focus on lessons for understanding the role
of misallocation in business cycle variation in TFP. An important recent literature in growth
economics following Hsieh and Klenow (2009) argues that differences across countries in TFP
can be largely accounted for by misallocation of capital in the cross section.20 Recent reviews
of this literature appear in Hopenhayn (2014), which emphasizes the role of selection, entry
and exit on aggregate TFP, and provides a benchmark framework for analytical aggregation,
and Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2015), which emphasizes the interaction between selection
and financial constraints on long-run growth outcomes.
The growth literature suggests that two main frictions can lead to substantial misallocation, namely, financial frictions and technological adjustment costs. Key contributions to the
role of financial frictions in long run resource misallocation include quantitative theoretical
studies (Buera and Shin (2013), Hopenhayn (2014)), and empirical studies (Midrigan and
Xu (2014), Gopinath, Kalemli-Özcan, Karabarbounis, and Villegas-Sanchez (Forthcoming),
Li (2015)). However, two papers question the role of financial frictions in long run misallocation (Moll (2014), Hopenhayn (2014)). Moll (2014) shows that, in a long run steady state,
self-financing can undo the effects of financial frictions on investment when differences in
productivity are very persistent. On the other hand, financial frictions have large effects on
allocations in transitions across steady states, by making transitions sluggish. Thus, Moll’s
study leaves the door open for financial constraints play a larger role in business cycles. Other
recent studies emphasize technological adjustment costs over financial frictions. Prominent
contributions include the empirical contributions by Asker, Collard-Wexler, and De Loecker
(2014) and Bachmann and Bayer (2014), and the theoretical contribution by Eberly and
Wang (2009). Recent work integrates the role of technological, informational, and policy
frictions (David, Hopenhayn, and Venkateswaran (2016), David and Venkateswaran (2017)).
In summary, the growth literature has identified important contributions to misallocation from policy distortions, from financial frictions, and from technological adjustment costs.
The business cycle literature has made progress in incorporating these frictions into theoretical business cycle studies, however more progress is needed on measuring the quantitative
contribution of misallocation. To stimulate future research in this direction, we provide two
estimates of the output loss from misallocation over US business cycles in Section 4.2.
misallocation in India and China vs. the US using differences in debt to equity ratios within industries.
20
Other key contributions documenting the effects of misallocation on TFP across countries include the
following studies: Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) provide an early investigation of TFP losses from labor
policy reallocation frictions. Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) provide a calibrated model of TFP losses from
resource misallocation from distortive policies, and emphasize the importance of the joint distribution of
distortions and productivity. Hsieh and Klenow (2014) show that older plants survive longer and are less
productive in China and India, driving aggregate TFP lower relative to the US.

19

4.2

Misallocation and Reallocation: Measurement

Hsieh and Klenow (2009) measure misallocation using cross section dispersion in the marginal
revenue product of capital.21 Cross section dispersion in marginal revenue products is a very
intuitive measure of misallocation, since, without reallocation frictions, marginal revenue
products should be equated. In the context of business cycles, however, measures of productivity dispersion are very noisy, and do not seem to exhibit strong business cycle correlations.
As a result, we argue that incorporating data on capital reallocation, for which the cyclical
properties are precisely measured, is useful. Although our simple exercise is only illustrative,
an analogy can be made to more formal estimation techniques for over-identified systems in
which incorporating additional, more precisely measured moments, leads to more efficient
estimation.
To illustrate the additional information in the amount of capital reallocation for understanding capital misallocation in the US time series, we conduct two measurement exercises.
The first is based on Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006). The basic idea is to compute what
the output gain would be if the amount of capital reallocation observed in booms could be
achieved in recessions. We find that bout half of output losses in recessions are due to the
lower rate of capital reallocation from less produtive to more productive firms in downturns.
The remaining difference is explained by higher aggregate productivity, and because, even
before reallocation, the joint distribution of firm productivity and size is more efficient in
booms.
To compute the loss of output in recessions from misallocation due to depressed capital
reallocation, we first construct the firm-level distribution of pre-reallocation marginal products of capital, mpkpre,i , for Compustat manufacturing firms each year from 1985 to 2015
following the procedure for estimating Solow (1957) residuals from a log-linear Cobb and
Douglas (1928) production function detailed in the Appendix. We do this because we only
observe the sellers of property, plant, and equipment, and the buyers in acquisitions. Thus,
when computing hypothetical manufacturing output in recession years, we assume that capital is reallocated perfectly efficiently from the lowest to the highest marginal product firms.22
Then, starting from the distribution of pre-reallocation marginal products of capital, we reallocate capital in each recession year subject to two different constraints. The first, tighter,
constraint restricts the total reallocation rate to be equal to the observed reallocation rate
in that year. The second, looser constraint allows reallocation to reach the average turnover
21

Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) are the first to note the important distinction between TFP
measured in quantity vs. price terms.
22
For evidence that capital reallocation flows from less productive firms to more productive firms, see
Maksimovic and Phillips (1998) and Maksimovic and Phillips (2001), Schoar (2002), Giroud and Mueller
(2015), David (2011), and Kehrig and Vincent (2017).

20

rate observed in boom years. Since reallocation is higher on average in boom years, comparing output under these two constraints yields an estimate of how much higher output in
recessions could be if the observed higher, boom-level capital reallocation could be achieved
in recession years.
Specifically, each year, and under each of the two constraints, we remove capital from
the lowest marginal product firms and allocate it to the highest marginal product firms until
the appropriate constraint on capital reallocation is binding. That is, we begin by allocating
capital to the highest marginal product firm until its marginal product is equalized to the
second highest marginal product firm. We then allocate capital to both firms until their
marginal products are equalized to the third highest marginal product firm. We continue
until the constraint on capital reallocation is binding. We do the same thing for capital sellers.
After the reallocation constraint binds, the marginal product of all capital purchasers will
be equated, the marginal product of all sellers of capital will be equated to a lower value,
and those firms that neither buy nor sell will have a marginal product of capital which lies
between that of buyers and sellers. After reallocation, the ratio between marginal products
of buyers (b) and sellers (s) is given by:
1 + τt =

mpkb
mpks

(14)

where τt can be interpreted, for example, as an unfairly high interest rate on purchased
capital as in Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007). The more reallocation is allowed, the
lower the implied wedge will be. Note that this wedge is very similar to the illiquidity cost
in Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006), however, unlike in that model, here there is no iceberg (lost
capital) cost to capital reallocation.23
Finally, we measure the potential output gain in recessions as the average gain over all
recession years from increasing reallocation to the average boom turnover rate. We compute
E[Y (Rboom )|GDP < trend]
− 1,
E[Y (Rrec )|GDP < trend]

(15)

where Y (Rboom ) and Y (Rrec ) indicate that firm-level output is computed using post-reallocation
capital under the boom and recession reallocation constraints respectively, and aggregate
output is the sum over all firms’ Cobb Douglas production functions. This calculation yields
a potential manufacturing output gain in recession years of 9.08%. Of course, our assumption of efficient reallocation implies that this is an upper bound on misallocation losses in
recessions relative to booms. Thus, to put the potential output gain from higher capital
23

See Samuelson (1954) for a model with iceberg costs of trade in goods.

21

reallocation in perspective using an apples to apples comparison, we also compute output in
both booms and recessions assuming efficient reallocation. We have
E[Y (Rboom )|GDP > trend]
− 1 = 17.01%.
E[Y (Rrec )|GDP < trend]

(16)

Relative to the gain computed using Equation (15), this gain includes the potential effects
of both higher reallocation in booms, and the effect from a higher mean productivity and a
possibly more efficient ex-ante joint distribution of firm productivity and capital in booms.
Comparing the 9.08% gain from higher reallocation alone to the full 17.01% difference in
efficient-reallocation output indicates that about half of the output difference comes soley
from the higher amount of reallocation in booms.
For comparison, we apply the method in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) to data on US public
manufacturing firms over the business cycle. We refer readers to that paper for all estimation
equations. We compute the efficiency loss from misallocation at each date using Equation
(15) in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and the associated Online Errata.24 The efficiency loss from
misallocation is the ratio between the hypothetical output generated if all firms were able to
equalize their marginal products of capital (Yeff ), and actual output (Y ), or Yeff /Y − 1. Thus,
this misallocation measure is a transformation of the dispersion in firms’ marginal products.
On average, for US publicly traded manufacturing firms, we find that the estimated
average efficiency gain is 21.24%, which is close to, but slightly smaller than, the estimate
using US Census data reported in Hsieh and Klenow (2009). The average efficiency gain in
boom years is 21.34% and in recession years it is 21.14%. The efficiency gain time series has
no significant cyclical correlation with GDP. These results seem to imply that misallocation
does not contribute significantly to output losses in recessions. However, this finding is
unsurprising, given that the dispersion measures discussed in Section 2 are closely related to
the efficiency gain measure, and those measures also display no significant correlation with
GDP at the cyclical frequency. More precise measurement of TFP dispersion, as in Kehrig
(2015), which finds countercyclical TFP dispersion using Census data, may help to uncover
the true loss from misallocation using this method.
In summary, we argue that incorporating flow data on capital reallocation can help to
measure misallocation frictions. Quantity data on flows is model-free, and the amount of
reallocation is likely indicative of the cost. Reallocation may also be more precisely measured
than marginal products of capital. On the other hand, more work needs to be done to
incorporate reallocation data into measures of the aggregate misallocation loss in TFP that
can be computed analytically, or that do not rely on the assumption that all reallocation is
24

See http://klenow.com/MMTFPAppendix.pdf

22

efficient.

5

Conclusion

Capital reallocation represents 28% of total investment, and about 2% of firms total assets are
reallocated annually. Reallocation of corporate capital varies substantially over the business
cycle, with about 50% more reallocation taking place in booms vs. recessions. Capital
reallocation is highly procyclical despite the fact that simple measures of the benefits to
capital reallocation do not display significant business cycle correlations.
Some progress has been made in understanding the drivers of capital reallocation over
the business cycle, and the frictions which appear to inhibit reallocation in downturns. Explanations include financial frictions, adverse selection, search and technological constraints.
In a simple static equilibrium model of capital reallocation, we show that financial frictions
and capital liquidity costs are useful in generating variation in capital reallocation. Our
model also shows that the effects of both of these reallocation frictions are amplified when
productivity dispersion is higher. In this model, greater productivity dispersion robustly
increases the quantity of reallocation, however the effect on the price of used capital depends
on whether the right or left tail of the distribution drives dispersion. Similarly, whether buyers or sellers pay the costs of reallocation determines whether relaxed constraints or lower
costs lead to higher prices, or lower prices. Future work can help to disentangle what changes
in reallocation frictions and productivity dispersion are most consistent with empirical observations.
Finally, we explore the implications of lower capital reallocation in recessions for capital misallocation and associated output losses. A measure incorporating both dispersion
in firms’ marginal products of capital, and the amount of reallocation in booms and recessions, suggests that the greater misallocation of capital in recessions due to lower capital
reallocation can lead to average output losses in recessions of 8%.

23

References
Hengjie Ai, Kai Li, and Fang Yang. Financial intermediation and capital reallocation. Working Paper, 2016.
Ivan Alfaro, Nicholas Bloom, and Xiaoji Lin. The finance-uncertainty multiplier. Working
Paper, 2016.
Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Patrick J Kehoe. Financial frictions and fluctuations in
volatility. Working Paper, 2016.
John Asker, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Jan De Loecker. Dynamic inputs and resource (mis)
allocation. Journal of Political Economy, 122(5):1013–1063, 2014.
Rüdiger Bachmann and Christian Bayer. Investment dispersion and the business cycle.
American Economic Review, 104(4):1392–1416, April 2014.
Nicholas Bloom. The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica, 77(3):623–685, 2009.
William C. Brainard and James Tobin. Pitfalls in financial model building. The American
Economic Review, 58(2):99–122, 1968.
Francisco J. Buera and Benjamin Moll. Aggregate implications of a credit crunch. American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(3):1–42, 2015.
Francisco J. Buera and Yongseok Shin. Financial frictions and the persistence of history: A
quantitative exploration. Journal of Political Economy, 121(2):221–272, 2013.
Francisco J. Buera, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin. Entrepreneurship and financial
frictions: A macrodevelopment perspective. Annnual Review of Economics, 7(1):409–436,
2015.
Ricardo Caballero and Mohamad Hammour. Institutions, restructuring and macroeconomic
performance. In IEA Conference Volume Series, volume 133, pages 171–193. Springer,
2001.
Ricardo J Caballero. Specificity and the Macroeconomics of Restructuring. MIT Press, 2007.
Ricardo J. Caballero and Mohamad L. Hammour. The macroeconomics of specificity. Journal
of political Economy, 106(4):724–767, 1998.
Melanie Cao and Shouyong Shi. Endogenously procyclical liquidity, capital reallocation, and
q. Working Paper, 2014.
Briana Chang. A search theory of sectoral reallocation. 2011.
Varadarajan V. Chari, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. Business cycle accounting.
Econometrica, 75(3):781–836, 2007.

24

Kaiji Chen and Zheng Song. Financial frictions on capital allocation: A transmission mechanism of tfp fluctuations. Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(6):683–703, 2013.
Lawrence J. Christiano, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. Risk shocks. The American
Economic Review, 104(1):27–65, 2014.
Charles W. Cobb and Paul H. Douglas. A theory of production. American Economic Review,
1928.
Russell W. Cooper and Immo Schott. Capital reallocation and aggregate productivity. Working Paper, 2013.
Francisco Covas and Wouter J. Den Haan. The cyclical behavior of debt and equity finance.
American Economic Review, 101(2):877–99, April 2011.
Wei Cui. Macroeconomic effects of delayed capital liquidation. Working Paper, 2017.
Wei Cui and Sören Radde. Money and asset liquidity in frictional capital markets. American
Economic Review, 106(5):496–502, May 2016.
Joel M. David. The aggregate implications of mergers and acquisitions. Working Paper,
2011.
Joel M. David and Venky Venkateswaran. Capital misallocation: Frictions or distortions?
Working Paper, 2017.
Joel M. David, Hugo A Hopenhayn, and Venky Venkateswaran. Information, misallocation,
and aggregate productivity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2):943–1005, 2016.
Joel M. David, Lukas Schmid, and David Zeke. Risk-adjusted capital allocation and misallocation. Working Paper, 2018.
Steven J. Davis and John Haltiwanger. Gross job creation, gross job destruction, and employment reallocation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3):819–863, 1992.
Steven J. Davis, John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh. Job creation and destruction. MIT
Press Books, 1998.
Feng Dong, Pengfei Wang, and Yi Wen. A searched-based framework of capital reallocation.
Working Paper, 2017.
Janice Eberly and Neng Wang. Capital reallocation and growth. The American Economic
Review, 99(2):560–566, 2009.
Andrea L. Eisfeldt. Endogenous liquidity in asset markets. The Journal of Finance, 59(1):
1–30, 2004.
Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Tyler Muir. Aggregate external financing and savings waves. Journal
of Monetary Economics, 84:116–133, 2016.

25

Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Adriano A Rampini. Capital reallocation and liquidity. Journal of
monetary Economics, 53(3):369–399, 2006.
Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Adriano A Rampini. New or used? investment with credit constraints.
Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(8):2656–2681, 2007.
Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Adriano A Rampini. Managerial incentives, capital reallocation, and
the business cycle. Journal of Financial Economics, 87(1):177–199, 2008.
Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Yu Shi. Online appendix to “capital reallocation”. Working Paper,
2017.
Lucia Foster, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. Reallocation, firm turnover, and efficiency: Selection on productivity or profitability? The American Economic Review, 98
(1):394–425, 2008.
William Fuchs, Brett Green, and Dimitris Papanikolaou. Adverse selection, slow-moving
capital, and misallocation. Journal of Financial Economics, 120(2):286–308, 2016.
Alessandro Gavazza. The role of trading frictions in real asset markets. The American
Economic Review, 101(4):1106–1143, 2011.
Mark Gertler and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. Financial intermediation and credit policy in business
cycle analysis. Handbook of Monetary Economics, 3(3):547–599, 2010.
Simon Gilchrist, Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajšek. Misallocation and financial market
frictions: Some direct evidence from the dispersion in borrowing costs. Review of Economic
Dynamics, 16(1):159–176, 2013.
Simon Gilchrist, Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajšek. Uncertainty, financial frictions, and
investment dynamics. Working Paper, 2014.
Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller. Capital and labor reallocation within firms. The
Journal of Finance, 70(4):1767–1804, 2015.
Gita Gopinath, Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina VillegasSanchez. Capital allocation and productivity in south europe. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Forthcoming.
Jarrad Harford. What drives merger waves? Journal of financial economics, 77(3):529–560,
2005.
Ana Maria Herrera, Marek Kolar, and Raoul Minetti. Credit reallocation. Journal of Monetary Economics, 58(6):551–563, 2011.
Robert J. Hodrick and Edward C. Prescott. Postwar us business cycles: an empirical investigation. Journal of Money, credit, and Banking, pages 1–16, 1997.
Hugo Hopenhayn and Richard Rogerson. Job turnover and policy evaluation: A general
equilibrium analysis. Journal of political Economy, 101(5):915–938, 1993.
26

Hugo A. Hopenhayn. Firms, misallocation, and aggregate productivity: A review. Annual
Review of Economics, 6(1):735–770, 2014.
Chang-Tai Hsieh and Peter J. Klenow. Misallocation and manufacturing tfp in china and
india. The Quarterly journal of economics, 124(4):1403–1448, 2009.
Chang-Tai Hsieh and Peter J. Klenow. The life cycle of plants in india and mexico. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3):1035–1084, 2014.
Urban Jermann and Vincenzo Quadrini. Macroeconomic effects of financial shocks. The
American Economic Review, 102(1):238–271, 2012.
Leif Johansen. Substitution versus fixed production coefficients in the thoery of economic
growth: a synthesis. Econometrica, 27:157–176, 1959.
Boyan Jovanovic and Peter L. Rousseau. The q-theory of mergers. The American Economic
Review, 92(2):198–204, 2002.
Matthias Kehrig. The cyclical nature of the productivity distribution. Working Paper, 2015.
Matthias Kehrig and Nicolas Vincent. Do firms mitigate or magnify capital misallocation?
evidence from planet-level data. Working Paper, 2017.
Aubhik Khan and Julia K. Thomas. Credit shocks and aggregate fluctuations in an economy
with production heterogeneity. Journal of Political Economy, 121(6):1055–1107, 2013.
Robert J. Kurtzman and David Zeke. Misallocation costs of digging deeper into the central
bank toolkit. Working Paper, 2017.
Andrea Lanteri. The market for used capital: Endogenous irreversibility and reallocation
over the business cycle. Working Paper, 2016.
Huiyu Li. Leverage and productivity. Working Paper, 2015.
Shaojin Li and Toni M. Whited. Capital reallocation and adverse selection. Working Paper,
2015.
Vojislav Maksimovic and Gordon Phillips. Asset efficiency and reallocation decisions of
bankrupt firms. The Journal of Finance, 53(5):1495–1532, 1998.
Vojislav Maksimovic and Gordon Phillips. The market for corporate assets: Who engages
in mergers and asset sales and are there efficiency gains? The Journal of Finance, 56(6):
2019–2065, 2001.
Virgiliu Midrigan and Daniel Yi Xu. Finance and misallocation: Evidence from plant-level
data. The American Economic Review, 104(2):422–58, 2014.
Benjamin Moll. Productivity losses from financial frictions: can self-financing undo capital
misallocation? The American Economic Review, 104(10):3186–3221, 2014.

27

Whitney K. Newey and Kenneth D. West. Hypothesis testing with efficient method of
moments estimation. International Economic Review, pages 777–787, 1987.
Pablo Ottonello. Capital unemployment. Working Paper, 2017.
Valerie A. Ramey and Matthew D. Shapiro. Capital churning. Working Paper, UCSD,
1998a.
Valerie A. Ramey and Matthew D. Shapiro. Costly capital reallocation and the effects of
government spending. Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 48:145–194,
1998b.
Diego Restuccia and Richard Rogerson. Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with
heterogeneous establishments. Review of Economic dynamics, 11(4):707–720, 2008.
Diego Restuccia and Richard Rogerson. Misallocation and productivity. Review of Economic
Dynamics, 2013.
Guillaume Rocheteau and Pierre-olivier Weill. Liquidity in frictional asset markets. Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, 43(s2):261–282, 2011.
Paul A. Samuelson. The transfer problem and transport costs, ii: Analyisis of effects of trade
impediments. Economic Journal, 64(254):264–289, June 1954.
Antoinette Schoar. Effects of corporate diversification on productivity. The Journal of
Finance, 57(6):2379–2403, 2002.
Robert M. Solow. Technical change and the aggregate production function. The review of
Economics and Statistics, pages 312–320, 1957.
David Sraer and David Thesmar. Aggregating estimates of firm-level capital distortions.
Working Paper, 2017.
Toni M. Whited and Jake Zhao. The misallocation of finance. Working Paper, 2016.
Randall Wright, Sylvia Xiaolin Xiao, and Yu Zhu. Frictional capital reallocation i: Ex ante
heterogeneity. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2018.
Lei Zhang. Financial leverage, job reallocation, and firm dynamics over the business cycle.
Working Paper, 2016.

28

A.

Appendix

Data Description
This section provides a brief description of the data we use in our study. The Online Appendix Eisfeldt and Shi (2017) contains further details, along with a link to data and codes
used in this paper. For the Hodrick and Prescott (1997) filter, we use an annual parameter, equal to 100. Annual GDP data is from the FRED database from 1963-2016. Capital
reallocation variables and market value weighted Tobin’s q are computed using the method
in Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) and Compustat data from 1971-2016 for reallocation, and
1963-2016 for Tobin’s q. Capital and reallocation series are deflated using annual CPI data
for all urban consumers are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and turnover rates use
lagged total assets in the denominator. Total investment is the sum of capital realloation
and capital expenditures. Annual gross job creation and annual gross job destruction are
from Census data for 1977-2015. Excess job reallocation is job reallocation (sum of creation
and destruction) minus the absolute value of the net change in employment. See Davis and
Haltiwanger (1992). For manufacturing industries, the (output-weighted) standard deviation of total factor productivity growth rates and capacity utilization across industries at
the three digit NAICS code level is computed using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(for multifactor productivity and the value of sectoral production) and the Federal Reserve
Board (for capacity utilization) covering the period 1988-2015. Financing Variables are defined following Eisfeldt and Muir (2016). VIX is the CBOE S&P 500 Volatility Index from
1990-2016. The uncertainty shock estimation follows Gilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajšek (2014)
using CRSP data 1971-2016.

A..1

Misallocation Production Function Estimation

We construct annual estimates of firm-level marginal products of capital using firm-level
Compustat data on publicly traded manufacturing firms from 1985-2015.25 We assume that
each firm i at time t produces output using capital and labor in a Cobb-Douglas production
function:
αi βi
yi,t = ai,t ki,t
ni,t ,

(17)

where ki,t and ni,t are capital and labor respectively, αi and βi are constant firm-level capital
and labor shares, and ai,t is the productivity level of the firm. We use sales to measure
output, PP&E to measure capital, and employees times wages to measure labor. Because
wage coverage is limited in Compustat data, we use six-digit NAICS industry wage data
from the Census distributed by the NBER. To study business cycles, we allow firms to
have different expected productivities in boom years and recession years, defined by HP
filtered GDP relative to trend. We run the following time series regression for each public
25

Historical NAICS codes, which we use for industry-level wage data, become available in Compustat in
1985.

29

manufacturing firm to estimate firm-level Solow residuals:
log yi,t = ci + ψi dt + αi log ki,t + βi log ni,t + i,t ,

(18)

where the dummy variable dt is set to be 1 if t is a boom year, and 0 if t is a recession year, as
defined by HP filtered GDP relative to trend.26 We get TFP for each firm-year by collecting
the estimated intercept, dummy and residual terms from the regression in Equation (18).27
ai,t = exp(ci + ψi dt + i,t ).

(19)

We then calculate the ex-ante, prior to reallocation, marginal product of capital as:
αi −1 βi
mpkpre,i,t = ai,t αi ki,t−1
ni,t

(20)

where ki,t−1 is the beginning of the period, pre-reallocation capital stock of firm i. This
procedure yields a panel of marginal products with 19,627 firm-year observations.28 The
median capital share estimate α is 0.32, and the median labor share estimate β is 0.58.
To apply the method in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) to data on US public manufacturing
firms over the business cycle requires estimates of capital and labor share parameters.
For
P Yi
α
for
each
production function parameter estimates, we use the output weighted αs =
Ys i
3 digit NAICS manufacturing industry s, where αi is from the estimate in Equation (18).
Labor share is (1 − αs ). As in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) we use industry level wage data (3
digit NAICS industry wage data from the Census, distributed by the NBER) and firm-level
data on number of employees to measure the labor input. We measure capital as the average
of beginning and end of period PP&E, and we use number of employees to measure the
quantity of labor.

Figures

26

Firms with αi or βi less than 0 or greater than 1 are dropped to ensure decreasing returns to scale in
capital and labor for production.
27
In related measurement exercises, Chen and Song (2013) and Ai, Li, and Yang (2016) use the ratio
of Operating Income before Depreciation to one-year-lag net Plant, Property and Equipment to measure
capital productivity.
28
To alleviate the effect of outliers, we winsorize ai,t for each year at the 5% and 95% percentiles, and
we drop firms with ex-ante marginal products of capital in the top and bottom 1%. We trim, rather than
winsorize the marginal products to alleviate the effect of the skewed firm size distribution, which can generate
extreme estimates of marginal products for large firms.

30

2.5

1.5

2016

2015

2014

2013

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

-0.5

1985

0.5

-1.5

-2.5
GDP

Reallocation Turnover

Acquisition Turnover

PPE Sales Turnover

Figure 1: Capital Reallocation Turnover Rates: Capital reallocation is procyclical. This
figure plots the cyclical components of the turnover rates for capital reallocation, along with the
cyclical component of GDP. Each Series is HP filtered to extract the business cycle component
and normalized by the standard deviations of its respective HP filtered series.

3.5

2.5

1.5

2015

2014

2013

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

-0.5

1985

0.5

-1.5

-2.5
GDP

q Dispersion

Capacity Utilization Dispersion

TFP Growth Dispersion

Figure 2: Benefits to Capital Reallocation: Productivity dispersion measures are acyclical.
This figure plots the cyclical components of several measures of the benefits to capital reallocation, along with the cyclical component of GDP. Series are HP filtered to extract the
business cycle component. Each Series is HP filtered to extract the business cycle component
and normalized by the standard deviations of its respective HP filtered series

31

k̂i

45◦

Sell
1

P θ−1
( θa
)
i

Buy

ki pdf
0

1
P θ−1
)
( θa
i

km

ki

Figure 3: Trading Regions for a Fixed Level of Productivity: Frictionless Model

k̂i

45◦

(1 + ξ)ki

Sell
1

P
( θai (1+γ)
) θ−1
1

P θ−1
)
( θa
i

Buy

Inaction

ki pdf
0

km

1
1
( P ) θ−1
1+ξ θai

1

1

P
P θ−1
) θ−1
( θa
) ( θai (1+γ)
i

Figure 4: Trading Regions for a Fixed Level of Productivity: Model with Frictions

32

ki

Tables
Table 1: Cyclical Properties of Reallocation and Productivity Dispersion: Deviations from trend
are computed using an annual Hodrick and Prescott (1997) filter. Standard errors are corrected using
generalized method of moments, correcting for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation of the residuals
according to Newey and West (1987). Asterisks denote significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10%
(*) levels. Statistical significance for differences in boom and recession means is indicated next to the
reported boom mean. See the Appendix for a detailed data description.

Correlation
with GDP

Unconditional
Mean

Boom Mean

Recession
Mean

1.96%

2.30%∗∗∗

1.61%

0.40%

0.43%∗∗

0.36%

1.56%

1.87%∗∗∗

1.25%

-0.0580
(0.2250)
-0.1463
(0.3003)
-0.4948∗∗∗
(0.1650)

0.77

0.77

0.77

3.79

3.56

3.99

5.20

4.69

5.64

0.6180∗∗∗
(0.1540)
-0.3760
(0.2391)
-0.1030
(0.3153)

16.69%

17.65%

15.68%

14.71%

14.51%

14.93%

14.42%

14.51%

14.32%

Panel A: Capital Reallocation Turnover Rate
Total Reallocation Turnover
Sales of Property, Plant and
Equipment Turnover
Acquisition Turnover

0.5752∗∗∗
(0.1454)
0.3455∗
(0.1680)
0.5861∗∗∗
(0.1413)

Panel B: Benefits to Reallocation
Standard deviation of Tobin’s q
(firm level, 0 ≤ q ≤ 5)
Standard deviation of TFP
growth rates (3 digit NAICS level)
Standard deviation of capacity
utilization (3 digit NAICS level)
Panel C: Labor Reallocation
Job Creation Rate
Job Destruction Rate
Excess Job Reallocation Rate

33

Table 2: Reallocation vs. Productivity Dispersion and Financial Flows: Deviations from trend are computed using
an annual Hodrick and Prescott (1997) filter. (F) denotes firm level, (I) denotes industry level. Standard errors are
corrected using GMM, correcting for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation of the residuals according to Newey and
West (1987). Asterisks denote significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) levels. See the Appendix for a detailed
data description.

Total
Reallocation
Turnover

Sales of PPE
Turnover

Acquisition
Turnover

Panel A: Correlation with Benefit to Reallocation
Standard deviation of
Tobin’s q (F) (0 ≤ q ≤ 5)
Standard deviation of
TFP growth rates (I)
Standard deviation of
capacity utilization (I)

-0.0732
(0.2454)
0.1437
(0.3416)
-0.5646∗∗∗
(0.1218)

0.1464
(0.2951)
0.0261
(0.3047)
-0.2920
(0.1647)

-0.0922
(0.2363)
0.1488
(0.3490)
-0.5778∗∗∗
(0.1207)

0.4507∗
(0.2205)
0.0766
(0.3439)
0.4768∗∗
(0.2029)
0.2176
(0.2913)
0.3433
(0.2194)

0.6581∗∗∗
(0.1526)
-0.1876
(0.4180)
0.5122∗∗
(0.2144)
-0.1082
(0.3287)
0.1518
(0.3247)

Panel B: Correlation with Financial Variables
Debt Financing
Equity Financing
Total Financing
VIX
Uncertainty Shock

0.6590∗∗∗
(0.1530)
-0.1661
(0.4199)
0.5261∗∗
(0.2114)
-0.0691
(0.3377)
0.1744
(0.3183)

34

Table 3: Comparative Statics: Capital Price and Quantity of Reallocation

Aggregate
Productivity
(aagg ↑)

Productivity
Dispersion
(f ↑, disp. ↓)

Financial
Constraint
(ξ ↑)

−
−
−

+

−
−
−

+

Liquidity
Cost (γ ↓)

Panel A: Capital Price Sensitivity
Baseline Model
Collateral Constraint
Liquidity Cost

+
+
+

−

Panel B: Reallocation Sensitivity
Baseline Model
Collateral Constraint
Liquidity Cost

0
0
0

+

Table 4: Cross Comparative Statics: Capital Price and Quantity of Reallocation

Aggregate Productivity
(aagg ↑)
Panel A: Capital Price

∂P/∂f

∂P/∂ξ

Baseline Model
Collateral Constraint
Liquidity Cost

−
−
−

+

Panel B: Reallocation

∂R/∂f

∂R/∂ξ

Baseline Model
Collateral Constraint
Liquidity Cost

0
0
0

0

Productivity Dispersion
(β ↑, disp. ↓)

∂P/∂γ

∂P/∂ξ
−

−

+
∂R/∂γ

∂R/∂ξ

∂R/∂γ

−
0

35

∂P/∂γ

−

