                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE NEO-FISHER EFFECT:
      ECONOMETRIC EVIDENCE FROM EMPIRICAL AND OPTIMIZING MODELS

                                          Martín Uribe

                                      Working Paper 25089
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25089


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2018




Several sections of this paper are drawn from an earlier study, “The Neo-Fisher Effect in the US
and Japan.” I am indebted to Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé for many comments and discussions. I
also thank for comments Kosuke Aoki, Giovanni DellAriccia, and seminar participants at
Columbia University, the Bank of England, Queen Mary University, the 2018 Bank of Korea
International Conference, the 2018 China Meeting of the Econometric Society held in Shanghai,
and the 2018 NBER Japan Project Meeting held in Tokyo. Yoon-Joo Jo and Seungki Hong
provided excellent research assistance.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Martín Uribe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Neo-Fisher Effect: Econometric Evidence from Empirical and Optimizing Models
Martín Uribe
NBER Working Paper No. 25089
September 2018
JEL No. E52,E58

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper investigates whether permanent monetary tightenings increase inflation in the short
run. It estimates, using U.S. data, an empirical and a New-Keynesian model driven by transitory
and permanent monetary and real shocks. Temporary increases in the nominal interest-rate lead,
in accordance with conventional wisdom, to a decrease in inflation and output and an increase in
real rates. The main result of the paper is that permanent increases in the nominal interest rate
lead to an immediate increase in inflation and output and a decline in real rates. Permanent
monetary shocks explain more than 40 percent of inflation changes.


Martín Uribe
Department of Economics
Columbia University
International Affairs Building
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
martin.uribe@columbia.edu




A slides is available at http://www.columbia.edu/~mu2166/neoFisher/index.htm
1     Introduction

According to the neo-Fisher effect, a monetary tightening that is expected to be permanent
leads to an increase in inflation in the short run. In this paper, I investigate whether the neo-

Fisher effect is present in U.S. data. To this end, I estimate an empirical and an optimizing

New-Keynesian model, both driven by transitory and permanent monetary and real shocks.
I estimate both models on postwar quarterly data using Bayesian techniques.

    I find that both estimated models produce similar dynamics. In accordance with conven-
tional wisdom, they predict that a transitory increase in the nominal interest rate causes a

fall in inflation and a contraction in real activity. These effects take place in the context of

elevated real interest rates. The main result of the paper is that in response to a permanent
increase in the nominal interest rate, inflation increases immediately, reaching its higher

long-run level within a year. Furthermore, the adjustment to a permanent increase in the

nominal interest rate entails no output loss and is characterized by low real interest rates.
In both the empirical and optimizing models permanent monetary shocks are estimated to

be the main drivers of inflation, explaining 45 percent of the variance of changes in inflation.
By contrast, transitory monetary shocks are estimated to play a modest role in explaining

nominal and real variables.

    These results have policy, theoretical, and econometric implications. With regard to
policy, the results suggest that in countries suffering from below-target inflation and near-

zero nominal rates, a credible normalization of nominal rates can achieve reflation swiftly and
without a recession. In regard to how the findings inform monetary theory, the fact that the

empirical and optimizing models have similar dynamic properties together with the fact that

the empirical model is mute about how expectations are formed while the optimizing model
assumes rational expectations provides discipline to theories of the transmission of monetary

shocks that deviate from the assumption of model-consistent expectations. Finally, with

regard to the econometric implications, the results of this paper suggest that distinguishing
temporary and permanent monetary disturbances provides a resolution of the well-known

                                               1
price puzzle, according to which a transitory increase in the nominal interest rate is estimated
to cause a short-run increase in inflation.

   This paper is related to a number of theoretical and empirical contributions on the

effects of interest-rate policy on inflation and aggregate activity. De Michelis and Iacoviello
(2016) estimate an SVAR model with permanent monetary shocks to evaluate the Japanese

experience with Abenomics. They also study the effect of monetary shocks in the context

of a calibrated New Keynesian model. The present paper departs from their work in two
important dimensions. First, their SVAR model does not include the short-run policy rate.

The inclusion of this variable is key in the present paper, because the short-run comovement
of the policy rate with inflation is at the core of the neo-Fisher effect. Second, their theoretical

model is not estimated and does not include permanent monetary shocks. By contrast, I

allow permanent and transitory monetary shocks to compete in the econometric estimation
and, as pointed out above, I find that permanent monetary shocks are the main driver of

nominal variables, while the estimated transitory monetary shock plays a small role. King
and Watson (2012) find that in estimated New-Keynesian models postwar U.S. inflation is

explained mostly by variations in markups. In this paper, I show that once one allows for

permanent monetary shocks, almost half of the variance of inflation changes is explained by
monetary disturbances. Sims and Zha (2006) estimate a regime-switching model for U.S.

monetary policy and find that during the postwar period there were three policy regime

switches, but that they were too small to explain the observed increase in inflation of the
1970s or the later disinflation that started with the Volker chairmanship. The empirical

and optimizing models estimated in the present paper attribute much of the movements in
inflation in these two episodes to the permanent nominal shock. Cogley and Sargent (2005)

use an autoregressive framework to produce estimates of long-run inflationary expectations.

The predictions of both models estimated in the present paper are consistent with their
estimates. This paper is also related to a body of work that incorporates inflation target

shocks in the New-Keynesian model. In this regard, the contribution of the present paper is to


                                                 2
allow for a permanent component in this source of inflation dynamics. For example, Ireland
(2007) estimates a new-Keynesian model with a time-varying inflation target and shows

that, possibly as a consequence of the Fed’s attempt to accommodate supply-side shocks,

the inflaiton target increased significantly during the 1960s and 1970s and fell sharply in the
early 2000s. Using a similar framework as Ireland’s, Milani (2009) shows that movements

in the inflation target become less pronounced if one assumes that agents must learn about

the level of the inflation target.
   This paper is also related to recent theoretical developments on the neo-Fisher Effect.

Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2014 and 2017) show that the neo-Fisher effect obtains in the
context of standard dynamic optimizing models with flexible or rigid prices, respectively.

Specifically, they show that a credible permanent increase in the nominal interest rate gives

rise to an immediate increase in inflationary expectations. Cochrane (2017) shows that if the
monetary policy regime is passive, an increase in the nominal interest rate causes an increase

in the short-run rate of inflation. Erceg and Levin (2003) study a calibrated dynamic general
equilibrium model with nominal rigidity in which private agents have imperfect information

about the permanent and transitory components of monetary-policy shocks. They show

that imperfect information of this type can provide an adequate explanation of the observed
inflation persistence during disinflation episodes.

   The remainder of the paper is presented in 6 sections. Section 2 presents evidence consis-

tent with the long-run validity of the Fisher effect. Section 3 presents the proposed empirical
model and discusses the econometric estimation. The predictions of the empirical model are

presented in section 4. Section 5 presents the New-Keynesian model and discusses its econo-
metric estimation. Section 6 presents the predictions of the estimated New-Keynesian model

in regard to the neo-Fisher effect. Section 7 closes the paper with a discussion of actual

monetary policy in the ongoing low-inflation era from the perspective of the two estimated
models.




                                               3
2     Preliminaries: Evidence on the Fisher Effect

What is the effect of an increase in the nominal interest rate on inflation and output? One
can argue on theoretical grounds that the answer to this question depends on (a) whether

the increase in the interest rate is expected to be permanent or transitory; and (b) whether

the horizon of interest is the short run or the long run. Table 1 summarizes the answer
according to conventional wisdom.

          Table 1: Effect of an Increase in the Nominal Interest Rate on Inflation

                                              Long           Short
                                               Run            Run
                                              Effect         Effect
                             Transitory shock   0              ↓
                             Permanent shock    ↑              ↑?
            Note. Entry (2,1): The Fisher effect. Entry (2,2) : The Neo-Fisher effect.



    A transitory positive disturbance in the nominal interest rate causes a transitory increase

in the real interest rate, which in turn depresses aggregate demand and inflation, entry (1,2)

in the table (see, for example, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 2005, figure 1). A
property of virtually all modern models studied in monetary economics is that a transitory

increase in the nominal interest rate has no effect on inflation in the long ru, entry (1,1). By
contrast, if the increase in the nominal interest rate is permanent, sooner or later, inflation

will have to increase by roughly the same magnitude, since the real interest rate, given by

the difference between the nominal rate and expected inflation, is not determined by nominal
factors in the long run, entry (2,1) in the table. This one-to-one long-run relationship between

nominal rates and inflation is known as the Fisher effect. The neo-Fisher effect says that a

permanent increase in the nominal interest rate causes an increase in inflation not only in
the long run but also in the short run, entry (2,2) in the table. Ascertaining whether the

neo-Fisher effect is present in U.S. data is the focus of the present investigation.
    Before plunging into an econometric analysis of the neo-Fisher effect, I wish to briefly

                                                4
present evidence consistent with the Fisher effect. The rationale for doing so is that my
empirical analysis of the neo-Fisher effect assumes the empirical validity of the Fisher effect,

interpreted as a description of the long-run relationship between the nominal interest rate

and inflation. The Fisher equation takes the form


                                       it = Rt + Et πt+1


where it denotes the nominal interest rate, Rt denotes the real interest rate, πt denotes the
inflation rate, and Et denotes expectations conditional on information available in period t.

This expression says that the nominal interest rate incorporates two types of compensation

to lenders. One is a compensation for the loss of purchasing power of money due to expected
inflation during the investment period, and the other is a real cmpensation for postponing

consumption. Assuming that on average expected inflation equals actual inflation, we have
that

                                          i = R + π,

where variables without a subscript refer to long-run averages. Further assuming that the

average real interest rate is determined solely by non-monetary factors (such as technology,

demographics, distortionary taxes, or economic openness), the above expression delivers a
one-to-one long-run relationship between the nominal interest rate and the rate of inflation.

   The left panel of figure 1 displays times averages of inflation and nominal interest rates
across 99 countries. Each dot in the graph corresponds to one country. The typical sample

covers the period 1989 to 2012. The scatter plot is consistent with the Fisher effect in

the sense that increases in the nominal interest rate are roughly associated with one-for-
one increases in the rate of inflation. This is also the case for the subsample of OECD

countries (right panel), which are on average half as inflationary as the group of non-member

countries. Figure 2 presents empirical evidence consistent with the Fisher effect from the
time perspective. It plots inflation and the nominal interest rate in the United States over


                                               5
                         Figure 1: Average Inflation and Nominal Interest Rates: Cross-Country Evidence
                                      99 countries                                                        26 OECD countries
                        30

                        25
nominal interest rate




                                                                     nominal interest rate
                                                                                             15
  percent per year




                                                                       percent per year
                        20

                        15                                                                   10

                        10
                                                                                              5
                         5

                         0                                                                    0
                             0      10              20      30                                    0   5             10        15
                                      inflation rate                                                         inflation rate
                                    percent per year                                                       percent per year
             Notes. Each dot represents one country. For each country, averages are taken over the longest
             available noninterrupted sample. The average sample covers the period 1989 to 2012. The solid
             line is the 45-degree line. Source: World Development Indicators (data.worldbank.org/indicator).
             Inflation is the CPI inflation rate (code FP.CPI.TOTL.ZG). The nominal interest rate is the t-bill
             rate, computed as the difference between the lending interest rate (code FR.INR.LEND) and the
             risk premium on lending (lending rate minus treasury bill rate, code FR.INR.RISK). Countries for
             which one or more of these series were missing as well as outliers, defined as countries with average
             inflation or interest rate above 50 percent, were dropped from the sample.




                                                                 6
          Figure 2: Inflation and the Nominal Interest Rate in the United States
                                                                 United States
                                  18
                                                                                          inflation
                                                                                          nominal interest rate
                                  16


                                  14


                                  12


                                  10
               percent per year




                                   8


                                   6


                                   4


                                   2


                                   0


                                  −2
                                       1960      1970     1980              1990   2000         2010
                                                                     year

                                       Notes. Quarterly frequency. Source: See section 3.3.


the period 1954:Q4 to 2018:Q2. In spite of the fact that the data have a quarterly frequency,

it is possible to discern a positive long-run association between inflation and the nominal
rate. This relation becomes even more apparent if one removes the cyclical component of

both series as in Nicolini (2017). The high-inflations of the 1970s and 1980s coincided with

high levels of the interest rate. Symmetrically, the relatively low rates of inflation observed
since the early 1990s have been accompanied by low nominal rates.

   The Fisher effect, however, does not provide a prediction of when inflation should be

expected to catch up with a permanent increase in the nominal interest rate. It only states
that it must eventually do so. A natural question, therefore, is how quickly does inflation

adjust to a permanent increase in the nominal interest rate? The remainder of this paper is
devoted to addressing this question.




                                                                   7
3     The Empirical Model

The empirical model aims to capture the dynamics of three macroeconomic indicators,
namely, the logarithm of real output per capita, denoted yt, the inflation rate, denoted

πt and expressed in percent per year, and the nominal interest rate, denoted it and also

expressed in percent per year. I assume that yt, πt, and it are driven by four exogenous
shocks: a nonstationary (or permanent) monetary shock, denoted Xtm , a stationary (or tran-

sitory) monetary shock, denoted ztm , a nonstationary nonmonetary shock, denoted Xtn , and
a stationary nonmonetary shock, denoted ztn . The focus of my analysis is the short-run ef-

fects of permanent and transitory interest-rate shocks, embodied in the exogenous variables

Xtm and ztm . The shocks Xtn and ztn are meant to capture the nonstationary and stationary
components of combinations of nonmonetary disturbances of different natures, such as tech-

nology shocks, preference shocks, or markup shocks, which my analysis is not intended to

individually identify.
    I assume that output is cointegrated with Xtn and that inflation and the nominal interest

rate are both cointegrated with Xtm . I can then define the following vector containing
stationary variables                                   
                                   ybt   yt −    Xtn   
                                                       
                                   π                   .
                                   t  ≡  πt − Xt
                                                   m
                                    b                     
                                                       
                                    bit     it − Xtm

                                                             bt and bit as the cyclical com-
The variable ybt can be interpreted as detrended output, and π

ponents of inflation and the nominal interest rate, respectively. Because inflation and the
nominal interest rate share a common nonstationary component, they are cointegrated. In

other words, the Fisher effect holds, in the sense that shocks that cause a permanent change

in the nominal interest rate also cause the same permanent change in the inflation rate. But
the assumption that πt and it are cointegrated says nothing about the neo-Fisher effect, that

is, about the short-run effect on inflation and output of a permanent monetary shock.



                                                8
                                                                                    
      I assume that the law of motion of the vector                        bt bit
                                                                       ybt π             takes the autoregressive

form1                                                                               
                                                                        ∆Xtm
                                                                                    
                                ybt   L      ybt−i        
                                                               zm
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                     X                  
                                π
                                 b   =    B   π          +C
                                                              
                                                                  t                  
                                                                                                             (1)
                                t         i  bt−i                               
                                     i=1                   ∆Xtn                 
                                 bit            bit−i                               
                                                                 ztn

where ∆Xtm ≡ Xtm − Xt−1
                    m
                        and ∆Xtn ≡ Xtn − Xt−1
                                          n
                                              . denote changes in the nonstationary
shocks. The objects Bi , for i = 1, . . . , L, are 3-by-3 matrices of coefficients, C is a 3-by-4

matrix of coefficients, and L is a scalar denoting the lag length of the SVAR system.

      I assume that the driving forces follow univariate AR(1) laws of motion of the form

                                                                                
                                     m
                                   ∆Xt+1              ∆Xtm                   1t+1
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                zm             zm              2               
                                t+1            t               t+1              
                                           = ρ              +ψ                                          (2)
                                    n                          3                
                                ∆Xt+1          ∆Xtn            t+1             
                                                                                
                                   n
                                  zt+1             ztn              4t+1


where ρ and ψ are 4-by-4 diagonal matrices of coefficients, and it are i.i.d. disturbances
distributed N(0, 1).


3.1       Identification Restrictions

Thus far, I have introduced three identification assumptions, namely, that output is coin-
tegrated with Xtn and that inflation and the interest rate are cointegrated with Xtm . In

addition, to identify the transitory monetary shock, I adopt a methodology pioneered by
Uhlig (2005) and impose sign restrictions on the impact effect of these disturbances on en-

dogenous variables. Specifically, I assume that


                                           C12 ≤ 0 and C22 ≤ 0,
  1
      The presentation of the model omits intercepts. A detailed exposition is in the appendix.


                                                      9
where Cij denotes the (i, j) element of C. These two conditions restrict transitory exogenous
increases in the interest rate to have nonpositive impact effects on output and inflation.

Finally, without loss of generality, I introduce the normalizations C32 = C14 = 1.


3.2    Observables, Priors, and Estimation Method

All variables in the system (16)-(17) are unobservable. To estimate the parameters of the

matrices defining this system, I use observable variables for which the model has precise
predictions. Specifically, I use observations of output growth, the change in the nominal

interest rate, and the interest-rate-inflation differential, defined as


                                          rt ≡ i t − π t .


These three variables are stationary by the maintained long-run identification assumptions.

The following equations link the observables to variables included in the unobservable system
(16)-(17):


                                   ∆yt = ybt − ybt−1 + ∆Xtn

                                     rt = bit − b
                                                πt                                        (3)

                                   ∆it = bit − bit−1 + ∆Xtm


I assume that ∆yt, rt , and ∆it are observed with measurement error. Formally, letting ot be
the vector of variables observed in quarter t, I assume that
                                                    
                                             ∆yt 
                                                 
                                       ot =      
                                             rt  + µt                                   (4)
                                                 
                                              ∆it




                                                10
where µt is a 3-by-1 vector of measurement errors distributed i.i.d. N(∅, R), and R is a
diagonal variance-covariance matrix.

   To compute the likelihood function, it is convenient to use the state-space representation

of the model. Define the vector of endogenous variables Ybt ≡ [b  bt bit ]0 and the vector of
                                                               yt π
driving forces ut ≡ [∆Xtm ztm ∆Xtn ztn ]0 The state of the system is given by

                                                        
                                                   Ybt
                                                        
                                                        
                                              Ybt−1     
                                                        
                                                 ..     
                                        ξt ≡ 
                                                  .     .
                                                         
                                                        
                                              b         
                                              Yt−L+1    
                                                        
                                                 ut


Then the system composed of equations (16), (17), (18), and (19) can be written as follows:


                                       ξt+1 = F ξt + P t+1


                                         ot = H 0 ξt + µt ,

where the matrices F , P , and H are known functions of Bi , i = 1, . . . L, C, ρ, and ψ and
are presented in the appendix. This representation allows for the use of the Kalman filter to

evaluate the likelihood function, which facilitates estimation.
   I estimate the model on quarterly data using Bayesian techniques. I include 4 lags in

equation (16) (L = 4), which is a lag length commonly adopted in the related literature

(e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 2005). Table 2 displays the prior distributions
of the estimated coefficients. The prior distributions of all elements of Bi , for i = 1, . . . , L,

are assumed to be normal. In the spirit of the Minnesota prior (MP), I assume a prior

parameterization in which at the mean of the prior parameter distribution the elements of
Ybt follow univariate autoregressive processes. So when evaluated at their prior mean, only

the main diagonal of B1 takes nonzero values and all other elements of Bi for i = 1, . . . , L

                                                 11
                                      Table 2: Prior Distributions

         Parameter                                     Distribution           Mean.      Std. Dev.
         Main diagonal elements of B1                  Normal                 0.95       0.5
         All other elements of Bi , i = 1, . . . , L   Normal                 0          0.25
         C21 , C31                                     Normal                 -1         1
         −C12, −C22                                    Gamma                  1          1
         All other estimated elements of C             Normal                 0          1
         ψii , i = 1, 2, 3, 4                          Gamma                  1          1
         ρii , i = 1, 2, 3                             Beta                   0.3        0.2
         ρ44                                           Beta    h          i   0.7        0.2
         Rii                                           Uniform 0, var(ot)
                                                                     10
                                                                              var(ot )
                                                                               10×2
                                                                                         var√(ot)
                                                                                         10× 12




are nil. Because the system (16)-(17) is cast in terms of stationary variables, I deviate from

the random-walk assumption of the MP and instead impose an autoregressive coefficient of
0.95 in all equations, so that all elements along the main diagonal of B1 take a prior mean

of 0.95. I assign a prior standard deviation of 0.5 to the diagonal elements of B1, which
implies a coefficient of variation close to one half (0.5/0.95). As in the MP, I impose lower

prior standard deviations on all other elements of the matrices Bi for i = 1, . . . , L, and set

them to 0.25.
       The coefficient C21 takes a normal prior distribution with mean -1 and standard deviation

1. The value assigned to the mean of this distribution implies a prior belief that the impact

effect of a permanent interest rate shock on inflation, given by 1 + C21, can be positive or
negative with equal probability. I make the same assumption about the impact effect of per-

manent monetary shocks on the nominal interest rate itself, therefore assign to C31 a normal
prior distribution with mean -1 and standard deviation 1. All other unrestricted parameters

of the matrix C are assigned a normal prior distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation

1.2 The remaining 2 estimated elements of C are, as explained above, subject to inequality
   2
     One might wonder whether a rationale like the one I used to set the prior mean of C21 could apply to
C13 , the parameter governing the impact output effect of a nonstationary nonmonetary shock, Xtn , which
is given by 1 + C13 . To see why a prior mean of 0 for C13 might be more reasonable, consider the effect
of an innovation in the permanent component of TFP, which is perhaps the most common example of a
nonstationary nonmonetary shock in business-cycle analysis. Specifically, consider a model with the Cobb-



                                                       12
restrictions. Specifically, −C12 and −C22 are restricted to be nonnegative. I assume that
these objects have Gamma prior distributions with mean and standard deviations equal to

one. Thus, identification of the transitory monetary shock is achieved via restrictions of

prior distributions.
    The parameters ψii , for i = 1, . . . , 4, representing the standard deviations of the four

exogenous innovations in the AR(1) process (17) are all assigned Gamma prior distributions

with mean and standard deviation equal to one. I impose nonnegative serial correlations on
the four exogenous shocks (ρii ∈ (0, 1) for i = 1, . . . , 4), and adopt Beta prior distributions

for these parameters. I assume relatively small means of 0.3 for the prior serial correlations
of the two monetary shocks and the nonmonetary nonstationary shock and a relatively high

mean of 0.7 for the stationary nonmonetary shock. The small prior mean serial correlations

for the monetary shocks reflect the usual assumption in the related literature of serially
uncorrelated monetary shocks. The relatively small prior mean serial correlation for the

nonstationary nonmonetary shock reflects the fact that the growth rate of the stochastic
trend of output is typically estimated to have a small serial correlation. Similarly, the

relatively high prior mean of the serial correlation of the stationary nonmonetary shock

reflects the fact that typically these shocks (e.g., the stationary component of TFP) are
estimated to be persistent. The prior distributions of all serial correlations are assumed to

have a standard deviation of 0.2. The variances of all measurement errors are assumed to

have a uniform prior distribution with lower bound 0 and upper bound of 10 percent of the
sample variance of the corresponding observable indicator.

    Finally, to draw from the posterior distribution of the estimated parameters, I apply the
Douglas production function yt = Xtn + ztn + αkt + (1 − α)ht expressed in logarithms. Consider first a
situation in which capital and labor, denoted kt and ht , do not respond contemporaneously to changes in
Xtn . In this case, the contemporaneous effect of a unit increase in Xtn on output is unity, which implies that
a prior mean of 1 for 1 + C13, or equivalently a prior mean of 0 for C13 is the most appropriate. Now consider
the impact effect of changes in Xtn on kt and ht . It is reasonable to assume that the stock of capital, kt , is
fixed in the short run. The response of ht depends on substitution and wealth effects. The former tends to
cause an increase in employment, and the latter a reduction. Which effect will prevail is not clear, giving
credence to a prior of 0 for C13 . One could further think about the role of variable input utilization. An
increase in Xtn is likely to cause an increase in utilization, favoring a prior mean of 0 over one of -1 for C13.



                                                       13
Metropolis-Hastings sampler to construct a Monte-Carlo Markov chain of one million draws
after burning the initial 100 thousand draws. Posterior means and error bands around the

impulse responses shown in later sections are constructed from a random subsample of the

MCMC chain of length 100 thousand with replacement.


3.3     Data and Unit Root Tests

I estimate the SVAR model on quarterly U.S. data spanning the period 1954:Q3 to 2018:Q2.
The proxy for yt is the logarithm of real GDP seasonally adjusted in chained dollars of 2012

minus the logarithm of the civilian noninstitutional population 16 years old or older. The

proxy for πt is the growth rate of the implicit GDP deflator expressed in percent per year.
In turn, the implicit GDP deflator is constructed as the ratio of GDP in current dollars and

real GDP both seasonally adjusted. The proxy for it is the monthly Federal Funds Effective

rate converted to quarterly frequency by averaging and expressed in percent per year. The
source for nominal and real GDP is the Bureau of Economic Analysis (bea.gov), the source

for population is the Bureau of Labor Statistics (bls.gov) and the source for the Federal
Funds rate is the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (federalreserve.gov).

All series were downloaded in August 2018.

    Before plunging into the predictions of the SVAR model, I briefly report standard unit-
root tests based on univariate representations of the data. The augmented Dickey-Fuller

(ADF) test, which is a commonly used test of the null hypothesis of a unit root, fails to
reject the null hypothesis for yt , it , and πt, and rejects it for it − πt at standard confidence

levels of 10 percent or less.3 These results are in line with the assumption that the interest

rate, inflation, and output, all possess unit roots, and that the interest-inflation differential
is stationary.
    3
      Specifically, for a random variable xt , the ADF test considers the null hypothesis that xt = xt−1 + η0 +
PI
       ηi ∆xt−i + t , where t is white noise, against the alternative hypothesis that xt = δxt−1 + γt + η0 +
Pi=1
   I
   i=1 ηi ∆xt−i + t , with δ < 1. For it and πt , I restrict γ to be zero (no time trend), and for it − πt , I
restrict γ and η0 to be zero (no time trend or drift). I include 4 lags of ∆xt (I = 4). The p values for
xt = yt , it , πt , it − πt are, respectively, 0.604, 0.131, 0.135, and 0.0351.


                                                      14
4     The Neo-Fisher Effect in the Empirical Model

Figure 3 displays mean posterior estimates of the responses of inflation, output, and the
nominal interest rate to permanent (left panels) and temporary (right panels) interest-rate

shocks, along with asymmetric 95-percent error bands constructed using the method pro-

posed by Sims and Zha (1999). The size of the permanent interest-rate shock is set to ensure
that on average it leads to a 1 percent increase in the nominal interest rate in the long run,

where the average is taken over the posterior distribution of impulse responses. Because
inflation is cointegrated with the nominal interest rate, it also is expected to increase by 1

percent in the long run. The main result conveyed by figure 3 is that the adjustment of

inflation to its higher long-run level takes place in the short run. In fact, inflation increases
by 1 percent on impact and remains around that level thereafter.

    On the real side of the economy, the permanent increase in the nominal interest rate

does not cause a contraction in aggregate activity. Indeed, output exhibits a transitory
expansion. This effect could be the consequence of low real interest rates resulting from the

swift reflation of the economy following the permanent interest-rate shock. The left panel of
figure 4 displays with a solid line the response of the real interest rate, defined as it − Et πt+1,

to a permanent interest-rate shock. Because of the faster response of inflation relative to

that of the nominal interest rate, the real interest rate falls by almost 1 percent on impact
and converges to its steady-state level from below, implying that the entire adjustment to a

permanent interest-rate shock takes place in the context of low real interest rates.
    The responses of nominal and real variables to a transitory interest-rate shock, shown in

the right panels of figure 3 are quite conventional. Both inflation and output fall below trend

and remain low for a number of quarters. The real interest rate, whose impulse response is
shown with a broken line in figure 4, increases on impact and remains above its long-run

value during the transition, which is in line with the contractionary effect of the transitory

increase in the interest rate.
    Interestingly, the model does not suffer from the price puzzle, which plagues empiri-

                                                15
                                       Figure 3: Impulse Responses to Permanent and Temporary Interest-Rate Shocks: Empirical
                                       Model
                                                            Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                    Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
                                                        Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation                                                                      Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation
                                                   2                                                                                                                1
deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                         deviation from pre−shock level
 percentage points per year




                                                                                                          percentage points per year
                                                                                                                                                                                               Interest Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                               Inflation
                                                  1.5                                                                                                              0.5                          Inflation 95% band


                                                   1                                                                                                                0


                                                  0.5                         Interest Rate                                                                       −0.5
                                                                              Inflation
                                                                               Inflation 95% band
                                                   0                                                                                                               −1
                                                        0        5          10         15           20                                                                   0        5          10         15           20
                                                                 quarters after the shock                                                                                         quarters after the shock

                                                             Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                    Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
        percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                                         percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                 Response of Output                                                                                               Response of Output
                                                  1.5                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                       Output
                                                                                       95% band
                                                   1                                                                                                                0


                                                  0.5                                                                                                             −0.5


                                                   0                                                                                                               −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Output
                                                                                                                                                                                                        95% band
                                                 −0.5                                                                                                             −1.5
                                                        0        5          10         15           20                                                                   0        5          10         15           20
                                                                 quarters after the shock                                                                                         quarters after the shock
                                       Notes. Impulse responses are posterior mean estimates. Asymmetric error bands are computed
                                       using the Sims-Zha (1999) method.




                                                                                                      16
Figure 4: Response of the Real Interest Rate to Permanent and Transitory Interest-Rate
Shocks: SVAR Model
                                              1.5
                                                                                                Permanent shock
                                                                                                Transitory shock


                                               1
               Deviation from steady state




                                              0.5
               percent per year




                                               0




                                             −0.5




                                              −1
                                                0   2   4   6      8       10       12     14    16     18         20
                                                                quarters after the shock

Notes. Posterior mean estimates. The real interest rate is defined as it − Etπt+1 .


cal models with only stationary monetary shocks, pointing to the importance of explicitly

distinguishing between temporary and permanent shocks.
   What does the permanent component of U.S. inflation look like according to the estimated

empirical model? Figure 5 displays the actual rate of inflation along with its permanent com-
ponent, given by the nonstationary monetary shock, Xtm , over the sample period, 1954:Q4

to 2018: Q2. The path of Xtm resembles the estimate of long-run inflation expectations

reported in Cogley and Sargent (2005). The figure reveals a number of features of the pre-
dicted low-frequency drivers of postwar inflation in the United States. First, inflationary

factors began to build up much earlier than the oil crisis of the early 1970s. Indeed, the

period 1963 to 1972, corresponding to the last seven years in office of Fed Chairman William
M. Martin and the first three years of Chairman Arthur F. Burns, were characterized by a

continuous increase in the permanent component of inflation, with an accumulated increase
of about 3 percentage points. Second, the high inflation rates associated with the oil crisis


                                                                     17
             Figure 5: Inflation and Its Permanent Component: SVAR Model
                               14
                                                                                 Xtm
                                                                                 Inflation
                               12


                               10


                                8
                  % per year




                                6


                                4


                                2


                                0


                               −2
                                    1960   1970   1980           1990   2000   2010
                                                          year

Note. Quarterly frequency. The inferred path of the permanent component of inflation, Xtm , was
computed by Kalman smoothing and evaluating the SVAR model at the posterior mean of the
estimated parameter vector. The initial value of Xtm was normalized to make the average value of
Xtm equal to the average rate of inflation over the sample period, 1954:Q4 to 2018:Q2.


of the mid 1970s was not entirely due to nonmonetary shocks. The Fed itself contributed

by maintaining Xtm at the high level it had reached prior to the crisis. Third, the empirical

model says that the Volker disinflation was driven to a large extent by the permanent com-
ponent of monetary policy. This is suggested by the fact that after peaking around 1980, the

permanent component of inflation fell sharply until the end of that decade. Finally, figure 5
shows that the normalization of rates that began in 2015 and put an end to seven years of

near-zero nominal rates triggered by the global financial crisis, is interpreted by the SVAR

model as having a significant permanent component.
   How important are nonstationary monetary shocks? The relevance of the neo-Fisher

effect depends not only on whether it can be identified in actual data, which has been the

focus of this section thus far, but also on whether permanent monetary shocks play a signifi-
cant role in explaining short-run movements in the inflation rate. If nonstationary monetary

shocks played a marginal role in explaining cyclical movements in nominal variables, the



                                                         18
                      Table 3: Variance Decomposition: SVAR Model

                                                           ∆yt    ∆πt    ∆it
                Permanent Monetary Shock, ∆Xtm             9.1    44.6   21.9
                Transitory Monetary Shock, ztm             2.1    6.2    10.9
                Permanent Non-Monetary Shock, ∆Xtn         49.8   27.9   13.5
                Transitory Non-Monetary Shock, ztn         39.1   21.4   53.7

Note. Posterior means. The variables ∆yt , ∆πt, and ∆it denote output growth, the change in
inflation, and the change in the nominal interest rate, respectively.


Fisher effect would just be an interesting curiosity. To shed light on this question, table 3

displays the variance decomposition of the three variables of interest, output growth, the
change in inflation, and the change in the nominal interest rate, predicted by the estimated

SVAR model. The table shows that the nonstationary monetary shock, explains 45 percent

of the change in inflation, 22 percent of changes in the nominal interest rate, and 9 percent
of the growth rate of output. Thus, the SVAR model assigns a significant role to this type

of monetary disturbance, especially in explaining movements in nominal variables. In com-

parison, the stationary monetary shock explains a relatively small fraction of movements in
the three macroeconomic indicators included in the model. These results suggest that the

neo-Fisher effect emanates from a relevant driver of nominal variables. More generally, in
light of the fact that the majority of studies in Monetary Economics limits attention to the

study of stationary nominal shocks, the results reported in table 3 call for devoting more

attention to understanding the effects of nonstationary monetary disturbances.


4.1    Robustness

Between 2009 and 2015, the Federal Funds rate was technically nil, and interest-rate policy
was said to have hit the zero lower bound (ZLB). Theoretically, the zero lower bound on

nominal rates introduces nonlinearities in the equilibrium dynamics. The empirical model

I study is linear, which may be problematic for capturing the effects of monetary policy,
in a world in which occasionally the monetary authority’s actions are constrained by the


                                             19
                        Figure 6: Robustness Checks: Empirical Model

                 Truncatingthe Sample at the Beginning of the ZLB Period (2008:Q4)
     Permanent Shock                     Permanent Shock                 Temporary Shock                   TemporaryShock
 Interest Rate and Inflation                 Output                 Interest Rate and Inflation               Output
  2                                                                  1
                                1                                                                  0
                                                                   0.5
  1                            0.5                                                             −0.5
                                                                     0
                                0                                 −0.5                            −1
  0
      0       10        20           0        10         20              0     10         20           0        10          20
           quarters                         quarters                         quarters                         quarters


                             Estimation on Japanese Data (1955.Q3 to 2016.75)
      Permanent Shock                    Permanent Shock                 Temporary Shock                   TemporaryShock
  Interest Rate and Inflation                Output                 Interest Rate and Inflation               Output
 1.5                                                                 1                             1
                                 2
   1                                                                                               0
                                                                     0
 0.5                             1                                                                −1
   0                             0                                 −1                             −2
       0      10        20           0         10            20          0     10         20           0        10          20
           quarters                          quarters                        quarters                         quarters
Notes. Thick lines are posterior means. Thick broken lines correspond to the nominal interest rate.
Thin lines are 95% asymmetric error bands computed using the Sims-Zha (1999) method.




                                                        20
nonnegativity restriction on its policy instrument. Formulating and estimating a nonlinear
model is beyond the scope of this paper. As an imperfect alternative, I estimate the linear

model truncating the sample in 2008:Q4. The results are shown in the top panels of figure 6.

The impulse responses are qualitatively similar to those obtained with the longer sample.
    As a second robustness check, I estimate the model on Japanese data from 1955.Q3 to

2016.Q4. I rely on the results of the previous robustness check in deciding not to truncate

the zero-rate period that started in 1995. There are two additional benefits of keeping
the period 1995-2016. First, this period might provide valuable information on the effect

of permanent monetary shocks, as it involves more than two decades of highly stable rates.
Second, excluding the period 1995-2016 results in a relatively short sample of slightly over 20

years, which might make it difficult to distinguish the transitory and permanent components

of monetary disturbances. The estimated impulse responses appear in the bottom panel of
figure 6. The figure suggests that the main results obtained using U.S. data carry over to

employing Japanese data.
    Summarizing, the main result of this section is that the estimated SVAR model predicts

that a permanent increase in the nominal interest rate causes an immediate increase in

inflation and transitional dynamics characterized by low real interest rates, and no output
loss. The remainder of this paper is devoted to ascertaining whether these results carry over

to optimizing models.



5     A New-Keynesian Model

I assume that there is a representative household with preferences defined over streams

of consumption and labor effort and exhibiting external habit formation in consumption.
Specifically, the lifetime utility function of the household is given by
                                          h                           i1−σ    
                                                   et−1)(1 − e ht )
                                           (Ct − δ C          θt    χ
                                                                            − 1
                                                                               
                          X
                          ∞
                     E0         β t eξt                                            ,        (5)
                          t=0
                                          
                                                          1−σ               
                                                                             

                                                      21
                                          et denotes the cross sectional average of con-
where Ct denotes consumption in period t, C
sumption, ht denotes hours worked in period t, ξt and θt denote exogenous preference shocks,

Et denotes the expectations operator conditional on information available in period t, and

β, δ ∈ (0, 1) and σ, χ > 0 are parameters.
   The preference shocks are assumed to follow AR(1) processes of the form


                                       ξt+1 = ρξ ξt + σξ ξt+1


and

                                 θt+1 − θ = ρθ (θt − θ) + σθ θt+1 ,

where ξt and θt are i.i.d. innovations distributed N(0, 1), and ρξ , ρθ ∈ (−1, 1) and σξ , σθ > 0

are parameters.

   Households are subject to the budget constraint

                                      Bt+1
                            Pt Ct +          + Tt = Bt + Wtn ht + Φt ,                         (6)
                                      1 + It

where Pt denotes the nominal price of consumption, Bt+1 denotes a one-period, nominal
discount bond purchased in t and paying the nominal interest rate It in t + 1, Tt denotes

nominal lump-sum taxes, Wtn denotes the nominal wage rate, and Φt denotes nominal profits
received from firms.

   Households choose processes {Ct, ht , Bt+1 }∞
                                               t=0 to maximize the utility function (5) subject

to the budget constraint (6) and to some borrowing limit that prevents them from engaging
in Ponzi schemes. Letting β tΛt/Pt denote the Lagrange multiplier associated with the budget

constraint, the first-order conditions of the household’s optimization problem are


                                        et−1)−σ (1 − eθt ht)χ(1−σ) = Λt
                            eξt (Ct − δ C

                                      χeθt (Ct − δ Cet−1)
                                                          = Wt
                                           1 − eθt ht

                                                 22
and
                                                                           
                                                                     Λt+1
                               Λt = β(1 + It)Et                               ,
                                                                   1 + Πt+1

where Wt ≡ Wtn /Pt denotes the real wage, and Πt ≡ Pt /Pt−1 − 1 denotes the consumer-price
inflation rate.

   The consumption good Ct is assumed to be a composite of a continuum of varieties Cit

indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. The aggregation technology is assumed to be of the CES form

                                        Z       1                    1−1/η
                                                                         1

                                                      1−1/η
                                 Ct =                Cit    di                    ,
                                             0



where the parameter η > 0 denotes the elasticity of substitution across varieties. Given

Ct , the household chooses the consumption of varieties Cit to minimize total expenditure,
R1
 0
    Pit Cit di, subject to the aggregation technology, where Pit denotes the nominal price of

variety i. This problem delivers the following demand for individual varieties:

                                                                   −η
                                                              Pit
                                       Cit = Ct                           ,                (7)
                                                              Pt

where the price level Pt is given by

                                          Z         1                1−η
                                                                        1


                                   Pt ≡                  Pit1−η di            ,            (8)
                                                 0



and represents the minimum cost of one unit of composite consumption.

   The firm producing variety i operates in a monopolistically competitive market, and faces
quadratic price adjustment costs à la Rotemberg. The production technology uses labor and

is buffeted by stationary and nonstationary productivity shocks. Specifically, output of
variety i is given by

                                        Yit = ezt Xtn hαit ,                               (9)

where Yit denotes output of variety i in period t, hit denotes labor input used in the produc-


                                                         23
tion of variety i, and zt and Xtn denote the stationary and nonstationary productivity shocks,
respectively. The transitory productivity shock and the growth rate of the nonstationary

productivity shock, gt ≡ ln(Xtn /Xt−1
                                  n
                                      ), are assumed to follow AR(1) processes of the form


                                            zt+1 = ρz zt + σz zt+1


and

                                       gt − g = ρg (gt−1 − g) + σg gt ,

where zt and gt are exogenous disturbances distributed i.id. N(0, 1), and σz , σg > 0 and

ρz , ρg ∈ (0, 1) are parameters.
     The expected present discounted value of profits of the firm producing variety i is given

by                                                                              !2 
                         X
                         ∞
                                      Pit               φ             Pit
                    E0         qt        Cit − Wt hit − Xtn                   −1 ,     (10)
                                      Pt                2          etm Pit−1
                                                                   X
                         t=0


where the parameter φ > 0 governs the degree of price stickiness. The variable qt , defined as

                                                            Λt
                                                 qt ≡ β t      ,
                                                            Λ0

denotes a pricing kernel reflecting the assumption that profits belong to the representative
household.

     Note that the price adjustment cost in the profit equation (10) is multiplied by the
nonstationary technological factor Xtn . This keeps nominal rigidities from vanishing along
                                                                                  e m , which
the balanced growth path. Also, the model features price indexation to a variable Xt

is taken as exogenous by the firm. To ensure that the Fisher effect hold in equilibrium the
                  e m must be cointegrated with the permanent components of inflation and
indexation factor Xt

the interest rate, which I denote Xtm and will define more precisely later on. Failing to
incorporate this type of indexation would imply lack of cointegration between inflation and

the nominal interest rate. In this case, the model would be unable to capture the empirical

                                                      24
evidence on the long-run comovement between inflation and nominal rates presented in
section 2. Within the general class just described, however, indexation can take different

forms. Here, to allow for the possibility that in the short run firm-level inflation and Xtm be
                                                  e m is assumed to be of the form
decoupled, the evolution of the indexation factor Xt


                                                            1−γm
                                        e m = (X m )γm X
                                        X               em         ,                                    (11)
                                         t      t        t−1




where γm ∈ [0, 1) is smoothing parameter. The smaller γm is, the less responsive the index-
             e m will be to short-run movements in the permanent component of inflation.
ation factor Xt

In subsection 6.1 I generalize this formulation to allow firms to index to past inflation.

       The problem of the firm producing variety i is to choose process {Pit , Cit , Yit , hit }∞
                                                                                                t=0 to

maximize (10) subject to the demand equation (7), to the production technology (9), and

to the requirement that demand be satisfied at the price set by the firm,4


                                                      Yit ≥ Cit                                         (12)


       Letting qtPit /(Pt µt ) be the Lagrange multiplier on the demand constraint (12), the first-

order conditions associated with the firm’s profit maximization problem are

                                                          Pit /Pt
                                             µt =
                                                    Wt /(αezt Xtn hitα−1 )

                                                                  !                                   !
            η−1   1                     Pt              Pit              qt+1 e n Pit+1 Pt     Pit+1
ηCit            −          = −φXtn                              − 1 +φEt     X                        −1
             η    µt                 etm Pit−1
                                     X              etm Pit−1
                                                    X                     qt t+1 Xem P 2
                                                                                   t+1 it
                                                                                              e m Pit
                                                                                              X t+1

The first optimality condition says that the multiplier µt represents the markup of prices

over marginal cost. The second optimality condition says that, all other things equal, if the
   4
     Strictly speaking, the right-hand side of this constraint must include the demand for goods of variety i
by all firms for the purpose of generating the units of composite goods devoted to cover the price adjustment
costs. However, because price adjustment costs are quadratic in the transitory component of firm-level
inflation and because the latter is nil along the deterministic balanced growth path, this source of demand
for good i and all of its derivatives with respect to Pit are zero in equilibrium up to first order.




                                                          25
price markup is above its normal level, µt > η/(η − 1), the firm will increase prices at a rate
                           e m.
below normal, Pit /Pit−1 < Xt

   I assume that the monetary authority follows a Taylor-type interest-rate feedback rule

with policy smoothing, as follows

                                 α     αy    1−γI
                             1 + Πt π Yt        m                       m
                 1 + It = A     m        n
                                               Xt       (1 + It−1 )γI ezt ,
                              Xt        Xt

where Yt denotes aggregate output, ztm denotes a stationary monetary shock, Xtm represents
a permanent monetary shock, and A, απ , αy and γI ∈ [0, 1) are parameters.

   Let
                                                              
                                                        Xtm
                                       gtm   ≡ ln        m
                                                        Xt−1

denote the growth rate of the permanent monetary shock. I postulate AR(1) processes for

gtm and ztm ,
                                    gtm = ρgm gt−1
                                               m
                                                   + σgm gm
                                                          t



and

                                    ztm = ρzm zt−1
                                               m
                                                   + σzm zm
                                                          t ,


where gm
       t  and zm
               t  are exogenous i.i.d. innovations distributed N(0, 1), and ρgm , ρzm ∈ (0, 1)

and σgm , σzm > 0 are parameters.

   I assume that government consumption is nil at all times. Thus, the fiscal authority faces
the budget constraint
                                              Bt+1
                                       Tt +          = Bt .
                                              1 + It

Further, I assume that fiscal policy is Ricardian, in the sense that the government sets Tt to

ensure intertemporal solvency independently of the paths of the price level or the nominal
interest rate.

   Clearing of the labor market requires that the demand for labor by firms equal the



                                                26
household’s supply of labor, that is,

                                            Z    1
                                                     hit di = ht .                                   (13)
                                             0



   Because all households are identical, so are individual and aggregate consumption per

capita,
                                                      et .
                                                 Ct = C

   I focus attention on a symmetric equilibrium in which all firms charge the same nominal

price and employ the same amount of labor, that is, an equilibrium in which hit and Pit are

the same for all i ∈ [0, 1]. We then have from equations (7), (8), (9), and (13) that Pit = Pt ,
Cit = Ct , hit = ht, and Yit = ezt Xtn hαt , for all i. Output, measured in units of the final good
                       R           
                          1
is then given by Yt ≡ 0 Pit Yit di /Pt = ezt Xtn hαt. As long as the nominal wage is positive,

the firm will choose to satisfy the demand constraint (12) with equality. By virtue of this
condition, we have that in equilibrium


                                                 Yt = Ct.


   Finally, I express the model in terms of stationary variables by dividing all variables with

stochastic trends by their respective permanent components. Thus, I create the variables
ct ≡ Ct /Xtn , yt ≡ Yt /Xtn , wt ≡ Wt /Xtn , λt ≡ Λt/Xtn−σ , 1 + πt ≡ (1 + Πt)/Xtm , 1 + it ≡

(1 + It )/Xtm , and x
                    em    em m
                      t ≡ Xt /Xt .

                                                                                        em
   A competitive equilibrium is then a set of process {yt , ht, λt , πt, it, wt , mct , x t+1 } satisfying


                                        yt−1 −σ            χ(1−σ)
                             e ξ t yt − δ gt      1 − eθt ht         = λt
                                          e
                                                        
                                      χeθt yt − δ yet−1
                                                     gt
                                                          = wt
                                          1 − eθt ht
                                                                      
                                                  λt+1 −gt+1 m −σg
                             λt = β(1 + it)Et             e        t+1
                                                                         ,
                                                1 + πt+1

                                                       27
                                                  yt = ezt hαt

                                                          wt
                                               mct =
                                                       αe t htα−1
                                                         z

                                                                      
1 + πt       1 + πt              (1−σ)gt+1 λt+1 1 + πt+1    1 + πt+1              1
                    − 1 = βEte                                        −1 +              (µmct − 1) yt
  em
  x t          x
               etm
                                            λt    x m
                                                  et+1        x m
                                                              et+1             φ(µ − 1)
                                                                                                (14)
                                                                      γI
                                                   α 1−γI   1 + it−1       m
                         1 + it = A (1 + πt )απ yt y              g m      ezt ,
                                                                 et
                                                            m    m(1−γm )
                                          em
                                          x t = e
                                                  −(1−γm )gt
                                                             x
                                                             et−1

where mct ≡ 1/µt and µ ≡ η/(η − 1) denote, respectively, the equilibrium real marginal
cost and the steady-state product markup. Equation (14) is a Phillips curve and says that

all other things equal, current inflation is increasing in the marginal cost. A first-order

approximation of the Phillips curve around πt = π = 0 yields

                                           m                     m
                                 π    b
                                 bt − x    e t (b
                                      et = βE          b
                                                πt+1 − x
                                                       et+1 ) + κmc
                                                                 c t,                           (15)

                                                                          m
where βe ≡ βe(1−σ)g , κ ≡     (η−1)y
                                     ,   bt ≈ πt − π, mc
                                         π                               b
                                                      c t ≈ ln(mct /mc), x       em
                                                                         et ≈ ln x
                                φ                                                  t , and mc = 1/µ.

This is a familiar expression of a linear Phillips curve, except that it is cast in terms of

deviations of the cyclical component of inflation, π
                                                   bt from the cyclical component of the
                     m
                   b
indexation factor, x
                   et .


5.1      Data, Priors, and Estimation

As in much of the DSGE literature, I estimate a subset of the parameters of the model
and calibrate the remaining parameters of the model using standard values in business-

cycle analysis. The set of estimated parameters includes those that play a central role in
determining the model’s implied short-run dynamics.

   Table 4 displays the values assigned to each calibrated parameter. I set the subjective

discount factor, β, equal to 0.9982, which implies a growth-adjusted discount factor, βe−σg


                                                       28
                Table 4: Calibrated Parameters in the New Keynesian Model

                  Parameter       Value     Description
                      β          0.9982     subjective discount factor
                      σ             2       inverse of intertemp. elast. subst.
                      η             6       intratemporal elast. of subst.
                      α           0.75      labor semielast. of output
                      g         0.004131    mean output growth rate
                      θ          0.4055     preference parameter
                      χ           0.625     preference parameter
                               Note. The time unit is one quarter.



equal to 0.99; the reciprocal of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, σ, to 2; the

intratemporal elasticity of substitution across varieties of intermediate goods, η, to 6, which

implies a steady-state markup of price over marginal cost of 20 percent (Galı́, 2008); the
labor semi elasticity of the production function, α to 0.75, the unconditional mean of per

capita output growth, g, equal to 0.004131 (1.65 percent per year), which matches the average
growth rate of real GDP per capita in the United States over the estimation period (1954:Q4

to 2018:Q2); and the parameters θ and χ to ensure, given all other parameter values, that

in the steady state households allocate one third of their time to work, h = 1/3, and a unit
Frisch elasticity of labor supply, (1 − eθ h)/(eθ h) = 1, as in Galı́ (2008).

   I estimate the remaining parameters of the model using the same observables as in the

estimation of the empirical model of section 3, namely, per-capita output growth, the interest-
rate-inflation differential, and the change in the nominal interest rate. The data sources are

as described in subsection 3.3. As in the case of the empirical model, the econometric esti-
mation employs Bayesian techniques. Table 5 displays means, standard deviations, and 95%

intervals of the prior and posterior distributions of the estimated parameters. I impose loose

priors on all estimated parameters. I assume a Gamma prior distribution with a mean of 50
and a standard deviation of 20 for the parameter φ governing the degree of price stickiness.

The assumed mean prior value of φ ensures that given the calibrated values of η, α, and θ,
the value of κ in equation (15) is 0.043, as in Galı́ (2008). The speed of adjustment of the


                                                29
       Table 5: Prior and Posterior Parameter Distributions: New-Keynesian Model

                      Prior Distribution                      Posterior Distribution

 Parameter    Distribution    Mean        Std        Mean         Std        5%          95%
     φ        Gamma             50         20         159         31.3       111         214
    απ        Gamma             1.5       0.25        1.83        0.31       1.35        2.37
     αy       Gamma           0.125        0.1       0.687         0.2      0.386        1.03
    γm        Uniform           0.5      0.289       0.464       0.195      0.201       0.851
     γI       Uniform           0.5      0.289       0.579       0.108      0.366       0.722
     δ        Uniform           0.5      0.289       0.294      0.0508       0.21       0.378
     ρξ       Beta              0.7        0.2       0.902      0.0259      0.856       0.941
     ρθ       Beta              0.7        0.2       0.673       0.201      0.305       0.954
     ρz       Beta              0.7        0.2       0.667       0.206      0.289       0.954
     ρg       Beta              0.3        0.2       0.403      0.0915      0.236       0.538
    ρgm       Beta              0.3        0.2       0.331       0.176     0.0553       0.625
    ρzm       Beta              0.3        0.2       0.195       0.126     0.0346       0.432
     σξ       Gamma            0.01       0.01      0.0251      0.00393    0.0199       0.0325
     σθ       Gamma            0.01       0.01     0.00164       0.0013   0.000119     0.00417
     σz       Gamma            0.01       0.01     0.00124       0.001    9.22e-05     0.00318
     σg       Gamma            0.01       0.01     0.00626     0.000841    0.00492     0.00769
    σgm       Gamma           0.0025     0.0025    0.00103      0.00032   0.000567      0.0016
    σzm       Gamma           0.0025     0.0025    0.00155     0.000271    0.00107     0.00189
    R11       Gamma          3.78e-06   2.18e-06    4.3e-06    2.43e-06   1.17e-06     8.95e-06
    R22       Gamma          2.08e-06   1.2e-06    4.43e-06    4.99e-07   3.66e-06     5.29e-06
    R33       Gamma          2.36e-07   1.36e-07   2.24e-07    1.25e-07   6.29e-08     4.65e-07
Note. The time unit is one quarter. Growth rates and log-deviations from trend are expressed in
per one (1 percent is denoted 0.01).




                                              30
indexation factor, dictated by γm ∈ (0, 1), takes a uniform distribution with support [0, 1].
The parameters απ and αy have Gamma prior distributions with means equal to 1.5 and

0.5/4 (two commonly used values) and standard deviation equal to 0.25 and 0.1, respec-

tively. The parameter γI measuring the smoothness of monetary policy has a uniform prior
distribution with support [0, 1]. The degree of external habit formation, given by δ ∈ [0, 1),

adopts a uniform prior distribution with support [0, 1]. Echoing the priors imposed in the

empirical model, I assume that the serial correlations of the permanent nonstationary shock
and of the two monetary shocks (ρg , ρgm , and ρzm , respectively) have Beta distributions with

mean equal to 0.3 and standard deviation equal to 0.2, and that the serial correlations of all
stationary nonmonetary shocks (ρξ , ρθ , and ρz ) have Beta distributions with mean 0.7 and

standard deviation 0.2. Similarly, In line with the empirical model, I assume that the stan-

dard deviations of the two monetary shocks, σgm and σzm , take Gamma distributions with
mean and standard deviation equal to 1/400, that the standard deviation of the permanent

nonmonetary shock, σg , has a Gamma distribution with mean and standard deviation equal
to 1/100, and that the standard deviations of all stationary nonmonetary shocks (σξ , σθ , and

σz ) have Gamma distributions with mean and standard deviation equal to 1/100. Finally,

as in the empirical model, I introduce measurement error and assume that their variances
have uniform distributions with an upper bound equal to 10 percent of the variance. of the

observables.

   The last four columns of table 5 displays key features of the estimated posterior distri-
butions, based on a Random Walk Metropolis Hastings MCMC chain of length one million

after discarding 100 thousand burn-in draws. Most parameters are estimated with signifi-
cant uncertainty, a feature that is common in estimates of small-scale New Keynesian models

(Ireland, 2007). Nonetheless, the data speaks with a strong voice on the parameters φ and

δ, governing price stickiness and habit formation, which are key determinants of the prop-
agation of nominal and real shocks. Furthermore, it is reassuring, given the focus of this

paper, that the estimated path of the nonstationary monetary shock, the latent variable


                                              31
         Figure 7: Inflation and Its Permanent Component: New Keynesian Model
                               12
                                                                        Xtm New-Keynesian model
                                                                        Xtm Empirical model

                               10



                  % per year   8



                               6



                               4



                               2



                               0
                                    1960   1970   1980           1990    2000       2010
                                                          year

Note. Quarterly frequency. The inferred path of the permanent component of inflation, Xtm , was
computed by Kalman smoothing and evaluating the model at the posterior mean of the estimated
parameter vector. The initial value of Xtm was normalized to make the average value of Xtm equal
to the average rate of inflation over the sample period, 1954:Q4 to 2018:Q2.


Xtm , resembles its counterpart in the empirical model. This is shown in Figure 7, which

displays the inferred paths of Xtm from the New-Keynesian and empirical models. Overall,
the nonstationary monetary shock implied by the optimizing model tracks the one stemming

from the empirical model quite well. The sample correlation of the two series is 0.86. The
path of Xtm implied by the New-Keynesian model is more volatile than the one coming from

the SVAR model, perhaps due to the fact that the latter model has a richer lag structure.

   An additional measure of coherence between the predictions of the estimated empirical
and New-Keynesian models is a comparison of their implied variance decompositions. Ta-

ble 6 displays this information for the New Keynesian model. Comparing tables 3 and 6

shows that both the SVAR and New Keynesian models predict that the permanent mone-
tary shock explains more than 40 percent of changes in the rate of inflation. Thus, in both

models the nonstationary component of monetary disturbances plays a significant role in
explaining movements in nominal variables. Also, in both models the stationary monetary



                                                         32
                 Table 6: Variance Decomposition: New Keynesian Model

                                                         ∆yt    ∆πt ∆it
                   Permanent Monetary Shock, gtm         1.7    42.8 9.3
                   Transitory Monetary Shock, ztm        3.0    2.1 35.7
                   Permanent Productivity Shock, gt      84.7    2.2 4.8
                   Transitory Productivity Shock, zt     0.4    5.1 2.1
                   Preference Shock, ξt                  9.7    42.8 46.0
                   Labor-Supply Shock, θt                0.4    5.1 2.0

Note. Posterior means. The variables ∆yt , ∆πt, and ∆it denote output growth, the change in
inflation, and the change in the nominal interest rate, respectively.


shock accounts for a relatively small share of movements in the rate of inflation. Another
similarity between the empirical and optimizing models is that in both the nonstationary

nonmonetary shock explains a significant fraction of the variations in output growth, al-
though in the New Keynesian model this role is estimated to be much larger. Finally, in

both models nonmonetary stationary shocks explain almost half of changes in the nominal

interest rate. Thanks to its more structural nature, the optimizing model is able to say more
about which specific nonmonetary stationary sources of uncertainty are the most relevant.

Specifically, while the SVAR model encapsulates all stationary nonmonetary disturbances in

a single shock, ztn , the New Keynesian model can distinguish finer categories and suggests
that it is a demand shock, ξt , that has the largest impact on the nominal interest rate.



6    The Neo-Fisher Effect in the New-Keynesian Model

Figure 3 displays the impulse responses of inflation, the policy rate, and output to permanent

and transitory monetary shocks implied by the estimated New-Keynesian model. The main

message conveyed by the figure is that qualitatively the responses implied by the New-
Keynesian model concur with those implied by the empirical model of sections 3 and 4. An

increase in the nominal interest rate that is understood to be permanent by private agents
(left panels of the figure) causes an increase in inflation in the short run, without loss of


                                             33
                       Figure 8: Impulse Responses to Permanent and Temporary Interest-Rate Shocks: New-
                       Keynesian Model
                                                                   Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                    Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
                                                               Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation                                                                      Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation
                                                          2                                                                                                               0.8
deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                                deviation from pre−shock level
 percentage points per year




                                                                                                                 percentage points per year
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Interest Rate
                                                                                                                                                                          0.6                         Inflation
                                                         1.5                                                                                                                                           Inflation 95% band
                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                          0.2

                                                         0.5                         Interest Rate
                                                                                     Inflation                                                                             0
                                                                                      Inflation 95% band
                                                          0                                                                                                              −0.2
                                                               0        5          10         15           20                                                                   0        5          10         15           20
                                                                        quarters after the shock                                                                                         quarters after the shock

                                                                    Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                    Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
                percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                                                percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                        Response of Output                                                                                               Response of Output
                                                         0.4                                                                                                              0.1
                                                                                              Output
                                                                                              95% band
                                                         0.3                                                                                                               0


                                                         0.2                                                                                                             −0.1


                                                         0.1                                                                                                             −0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Output
                                                                                                                                                                                                               95% band
                                                          0                                                                                                              −0.3
                                                               0        5          10         15           20                                                                   0        5          10         15           20
                                                                        quarters after the shock                                                                                         quarters after the shock
                       Notes. Impulse responses are posterior mean estimates. Asymmetric error bands are computed
                       using the Sims-Zha (1999) method.




                                                                                                             34
Figure 9: Response of the Real Interest Rate to Permanent and Transitory Interest-Rate
Shocks: New-Keynesian Model
                                                1
                                                                                                      Permanent shock
                                                                                                      Transitory shock

                                               0.8




                                               0.6
                Deviation from steady state
                     percent per year




                                               0.4




                                               0.2




                                                0




                                              −0.2




                                              −0.4
                                                     0   2   4   6    8         10        12    14   16      18          20
                                                                     quarters after the shock

Notes. Posterior mean estimates. The real interest rate is defined as it − Etπt+1 .


aggregate activity. By contrast, an increase in the nominal interest rate that is interpreted

to be transitory (right panels of the figure) causes a fall in inflation and a contraction in
aggregate activity.

   Why does a permanent increase in the nominal interest rate cause no loss in aggregate

activity and a temporary tightening does? In the discussion of the predictions of the empirical
model, I suggested that the answer could be in the behavior of the real interest rate. This

conjecture is supported by the dynamics of the optimizing model. Figure 9 shows that in

response to a permanent increase in the nominal interest rate inflation not only begins to
increase immediately, but does so at a rate faster than the nominal interest rate. As a result,

the real interest rate falls. By contrast, a temporary increase in the nominal interest rate
causes a fall in inflation and an increase in the real interest rate. A natural question is why

inflation moves faster than the interest rate in the short run when the monetary shock is

expected to be permanent. The answer has to do with the presence of nominal rigidities
and with the way the central bank conducts monetary policy. In response to a permanent

                                                                         35
monetary shock that increases the nominal interest rate by one percent in the long run, the
central bank raises the short-run policy rate quickly but gradually. At the same time, firms

know that, by the Fisher effect, the price level will increase by one percent in the long run,

and that they too will have to increase their own price in the same proportion in the long
run to avoid making losses. Since firms face quadratic costs of adjusting prices, they find

it optimal to begin increasing the price immediately. Since all firms do the same, inflation

itself begins to increase as soon as the shock is announced.


6.1    Robustness

Figure 10 displays three tests. The top two panels are the counterparts of the robustness
checks applied on the empirical model (see figure 6). They show that the predictions of the

theoretical model are qualitatively stable to truncating the sample in 2008:Q4 to exclude the

period in which U.S. monetary policy could have been limited by the zero lower bound on
interest rate, and to estimating the model on Japanese data. The bottom panel considers

a variant of the New-Keynesian model in which firms can index prices to past aggregate
                                                                        e m takes the form
inflation. Specifically, this version assume that the indexation factor Xt


                                                   
                       e m = X m γmm (1 + Πt−1)1−γmm γm (X
                       X                                 e m )1−γm
                        t     t                           t−1




with the new parameter γmm ∈ [0, 1]. This formulation nests the baseline formula given

by (11). Reestimating the model on the baseline dataset (i.e., U.S. data over the period

1954:Q4 to 2018:Q2) yields a posterior mean value of γmm of 0.061 and a posterior standard
deviation of 0.058, suggesting that indexation to past inflation is relevant. The bottom panel

of figure 10 shows that this version of the model produces predictions that are qualitatively

in line with the baseline ones.




                                             36
                       Figure 10: Robustness Checks: Optimizing Model

                 Truncating the Sample at the Beginning of the ZLB Period (2008:Q4)
      Permanent Shock                     Permanent Shock                 Temporary Shock                   TemporaryShock
  Interest Rate and Inflation                 Output                 Interest Rate and Inflation               Output
                                                                                                    0
 1.5                          0.2                                   0.6
                             0.15                                   0.4                         −0.1
   1                          0.1                                   0.2
 0.5                         0.05                                     0                         −0.2

       0      10        20            0         10            20          0     10         20           0        10          20
           quarters                           quarters                        quarters                         quarters


                             Estimation on Japanese Data (1955.Q3 to 2016.75)
     Permanent Shock                      Permanent Shock                Temporary Shock                    TemporaryShock
 Interest Rate and Inflation                  Output                Interest Rate and Inflation                Output
  3                                                                  0                              0
                                 1
  2                                                                                                −1
                               0.5                                  −2
  1
                                                                                                   −2
                                 0                                  −4
      0       10        20           0         10         20             0      10         20           0        10          20
           quarters                          quarters                         quarters                         quarters


                                         Allowing for Indexation to Past Inflation
      Permanent Shock                     Permanent Shock                 Temporary Shock                   TemporaryShock
  Interest Rate and Inflation                 Output                 Interest Rate and Inflation               Output
                                0.4                                 0.6                             0
 1.5                                                                0.4                         −0.1
                                0.2                                 0.2
   1                                                                  0                         −0.2
 0.5                                                               −0.2
                                                                   −0.4                         −0.3
       0      10        20            0         10            20          0     10         20           0        10          20
           quarters                           quarters                        quarters                         quarters
Notes. Thick lines are posterior means. Thick broken lines correspond to the nominal interest rate.
Thin lines are 95% asymmetric error bands computed using the Sims-Zha (1999) method.




                                                         37
7     Conclusion

Discussions of how monetary policy can lift an economy out of chronic below-target inflation
are almost always based on the logic of how transitory interest-rate shocks affect real and

nominal variables. Nowadays, there is little theoretical or empirical controversy around

how this type of monetary shock transmits to the rest of the economy: An increase in
the nominal interest rate causes an increase in the real interest rate, which puts downward

pressure on both aggregate activity and price growth. Within this logic, a central bank
trying to reflate a low-inflation economy will tend to set interest rates as low as possible.

Soon enough these economies find themselves with zero or negative nominal rates and with

the low-inflation problem not going away. After some time, the Fisher effect kicks in, and the
situation perpetuates. The monetary authority keeps the interest rate low because inflation

is still below target (the temporary-interest-rate-shock logic) and inflation is low because the

interest rate has been low for a long period of time (the Fisher effect).
    In this paper I argue, based on econometric evidence drawn from an empirical and op-

timizing model that a gradual and permanent increase in the nominal interest rate causes
a fast adjustment of inflation to a permanently higher level, low real interest rates, and no

output loss. These findings are consistent with the prediction, sometimes referred to as neo-

Fisherian, that a credible announcement of a gradual return of the nominal interest rate to
normal levels can achieve a swift reflation of the economy with sustained levels of economic

activity.




                                              38
Appendix: Detailed Exposition of the Empirical Model

Let Yt be a vector collecting these three variables,
                                                          
                                                yt 
                                                   
                                          Yt ≡     
                                                t ,
                                                 π
                                                   
                                                 it


where yt denotes the logarithm of real output per capita, πt denotes the inflation rate ex-

pressed in percent per year, and it denotes the nominal interest rate expressed in percent
per year. Let Ỹt                                                 
                                        (yt −     Xtn )
                                                   × 100           
                                                                  
                                 Ỹt ≡ 
                                            πt − Xtm              ,
                                                                   
                                                                  
                                             it − Xtm

where Xtm is a permanent monetary shock, ztm is a transitory monetary shock, Xtn is a

nonstationary nonmonetary shock, and ztn is a stationary nonmonetary shock. Let Ŷt denote

the deviation of Ỹt from its unconditional mean, that is,
                                                 
                                         ŷt 
                                              
                                  Ŷt ≡ 
                                         π̂ t
                                                ≡ Ỹt − E Ỹt ,
                                               
                                              
                                          ît


where E denotes the unconditional expectations operator.

   The law of motion of Ŷt takes the autoregressive form

                                            L
                                            X
                                    Ŷt =         Bi Ŷt−i + Cut                      (16)
                                            i=1




                                                  39
where                                                     
                                                      xm
                                                       t
                                                          
                                                          
                                                  zm      
                                                  t       
                                            ut ≡          ,
                                                  n       
                                                  xt      
                                                          
                                                   ztn

                                          xm     m
                                           t ≡ ∆Xt − ∆X
                                                        m



and

                                   xnt ≡ (∆Xtn − ∆X n ) × 100.

with ∆ denoting the time-difference operator, ∆X m ≡ E∆Xtm , and ∆X n ≡ E∆Xtn . The

variables xm      n
           t and xt denote demeaned changes in the nonstationary shocks. The objects Bi ,

for i = 1, . . . , L, are 3-by-3 matrices of coefficients, C is a 3-by-4 matrix of coefficients, and

L is a scalar denoting the lag length of the empirical model. The vector ut is assumed to

follow an AR(1) law of motion of the form


                                          ut+1 = ρut + ψt+1,                                  (17)


where ρ and ψ are 4-by-4 diagonal matrices of coefficients, and t is a 4-by-1 i.i.d. disturbance
distributed N(∅, I).

   The observable variables used in the estimation of the empirical model are output growth

expressed in percent per quarter, the change in the nominal interest rate, and the interest-
rate-inflation differential, defined as


                                             rt ≡ i t − π t .


The following equations link the observables to variables included in the unobservable system




                                                   40
(16)-(17):


                         100 × ∆yt = 100 × ∆X n + ŷt − ŷt−1 + xnt

                                   rt = r + ît − π̂t                                      (18)

                                  ∆it = ∆X m + ît − ît−1 + xm
                                                              t




where r ≡ Ert represents the unconditional mean of the interest-rate-inflation differential.

The variables ∆yt, rt , and ∆it are assumed to be observed with measurement error. Let ot
be the vector of variables observed in quarter t. Then
                                                        
                                          ∆yt × 100     
                                                        
                                    ot = 
                                              rt         + µt
                                                                                          (19)
                                                        
                                             ∆it


where µt is a 3-by-1 vector of measurement errors distributed i.i.d. N(∅, R), and R is a

diagonal variance-covariance matrix.

   The state-space representation of the system composed of equations (16), (17), (18), and
(19) can be written as follows:

                                       ξt+1 = F ξt + P t+1

                                      ot = A0 + H 0 ξt + µt ,

where                                                   
                                                  Ŷt
                                                        
                                                        
                                              Ŷt−1     
                                                        
                                                  ..    
                                        ξt ≡ 
                                                   .    ,
                                                         
                                                        
                                                        
                                              Ŷt−L+1   
                                                        
                                                  ut

The matrices F , P , A, and H are known functions of Bi , i = 1, . . . L, C, ρ, ψ, ∆X n , ∆X m ,


                                                 41
and r. Specifically, let
                                       B ≡ [B1 · · · BL ],

and let Ij denote an identity matrix of order j, ∅j denote a square matrix of order j with all
entries equal to zero, and ∅i,j denote a matrix of order i by j with all entries equal to zero.

Also let L, S, and V denote, respectively, the number of lags, the number of shocks, and the

number of endogenous variables included in the SVAR model. Then, for L ≥ 2 we have
                                                                          
                              B              Cρ                 Cψ        
                                                                        
                 F =
                     IV (L−1) ∅V (L−1),V ∅V (L−1),S
                                                         ,P =  ∅
                                                               V (L−1),S
                                                                             ;
                                                                             
                                                                          
                            ∅S,V L             ρ                    ψ

                                      
                                   n
                       100 × ∆X                                  
                                      
                 A0 = 
                            r          , and H = M ∅
                                       
                                                0
                                                    ξ  V,V (L−2) Mu   ,
                                      
                           ∆X m

where, in the specification considered in the body of the paper (S = 4, V = 3, and a

particular ordering of the endogenous and exogenous variables in the vectors Ŷt and ut), the

matrices Mξ and Mu take the form

                                                                          
                      1 0 0 −1 0 0                         0 0 1 0 
                                                                   
                Mξ = 
                      0 −1 1 0 0 0
                                                  and Mu =  0 0 0 0  .
                                                                    
                                                                   
                       0 0 1 0 0 −1                           1 0 0 0


The case L = 1 is a special case of L = 2 in which B2 = ∅V .




                                               42
References

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, “Nominal Rigidities
   and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy

   113, 2005, 1-45.

Cochrane John H., “Michelson-Morley, Fisher, and Occam: The Radical Implications of
   Stable Quiet Inflation at the Zero Bound,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2017, volume

   32, edited by Martin S. Eichenbaum and Jonathan Parker.
Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent, “Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies and

   Outcomes in the Post WWII US.,” Review of Economic Dynamics 8, 2005, 262.302.

De Michelis, Andrea, and Matteo Iacoviello, “Raising an Inflation Target: The Japanese
   Experience with Abenomics,” European Economic Review 88, 2016, 67-87.

Erceg, Christopher J., and Andrew T.Levin, “Imperfect Credibility and Inflation Persis-

   tence?,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, May 2003, 915-944.
Galı́, Jordi, Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New

   Keynesian Framework, Princeton University Press: Princeton, New Jersey, 2008.
Ireland, Peter N., “Changes in the Federal Reserve’s Inflation Target: Causes and Conse-

   quences,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39, December 2007, 1851-1882.

King, Robert G. and Mark W. Watson, “Inflation and Unit Labor Cost,” Journal of Money,
   Credit and Banking 44, December 2012, 111-149.

Milani, Fabio, “Learning and the Evolution of the Feds Inflation Target,” manuscript,
   University of California, Irvine, July 2009.

Nicolini, Juan Pablo,   “Two Illustrations of the Quantity Theory of Money Reloaded,”

   manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 2017.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martı́n Uribe, “Liquidity Traps: An Interest-Rate-Based

   Exit Strategy,” Manchester School 82, S1, September 2014, 1-14.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martı́n Uribe, “Liquidity Traps And Jobless Recoveries,”
   American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9, January 2017, 165-204.

                                             43
Sims, Christopher, and Tao Zha, “Error Bands for Impulse Responses,” Econometrica 67,
   1999, 1113-1156.

Sims, Christopher A., and Tao Zha, “Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Pol-

   icy?,” American Economic Review 96, March 2006, 54-81.
Uhlig, Harald, “What Are the Effects of Monetary Policy on Output? Results from an

   Agnostic Identification Procedure,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 2005, 381-

   419.
Uribe, Martı́n, “The Neo-Fisher Effect in the United States and Japan,” NBER Working

   Paper 23977, October 2017.




                                         44
