                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                                       LAZY PRICES

                                       Lauren Cohen
                                     Christopher Malloy
                                       Quoc Nguyen

                                     Working Paper 25084
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25084

                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 2018, Revised March 2019

We would like to thank Christopher Anderson, Ulf Axelson, Nick Barberis, John Chalmers, Kent
Daniel (discussant), Karl Diether, Irem Dimerci, Joey Engelberg, Umit Gurun, Gerald Hoberg
(discussant), Xing Huang (discussant), Hunter Jones, Bryan Kelly, Jonathan Karpoff, Dana Kiku
(discussant), Patricia Ledesma, Dong Lou, Asaf Manela, Ernst Maug, Craig Merrill, Mike Minnis
(discussant), Toby Moskowitz, Peter Nyberg (discussant), Cesar Orosco (discussant), Chris
Parsons (discussant), Frank Partnoy, Mitchell Petersen, Christopher Polk, Taylor Nadauld,
Krishna Ramaswamy, Samantha Ross, Alexandra Niessen-Ruenzi, Stefan Ruenzi, Mark
Seasholes, Dick Thaler, Pietro Veronesi, Sunil Wahal, Daniel Weagley (discussant), Hongjun
Yan (discussant), Luigi Zingales, and seminar participants at Arizona State University, Brigham
Young University, University of California at San Diego, University of Chicago, DePaul
University, University of Edinburgh, Fuller and Thaler Asset Management, Hong Kong
University, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, University of Kansas, London
Business School, London School of Economics, University of Mannheim, McGill University,
Northwestern University, University of Oregon, University of San Diego, Shanghai Advanced
Institute of Finance (SAIF), University of South Carolina, Temple University, Tsinghua PBC
School of Finance, University of Washington, Washington State University, Yale University,
Yeshiva University, American Finance Association Meetings, Barclays Quantitative Investment
Conference, Ben Graham Centre for Value Investing at the Ivey Business School at Western
University Symposium on Intelligent Investing, Chicago Booth Asset Pricing Conference,
Chicago Quantitative Alliance (CQA), Macquarie Global Quantitative Conference, Conference
on Professional Asset Management at Rotterdam University, Geneva Finance Research Institute
(GFRI), Q Group Quantitative Investment Conference, Rodney White Conference on Financial
Decisions and Asset Markets, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, and the United
States Securities and Exchange Commission for incredibly helpful comments and discussions.
We are grateful for funding from the National Science Foundation. All errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Lauren Cohen, Christopher Malloy, and Quoc Nguyen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Lazy Prices
Lauren Cohen, Christopher Malloy, and Quoc Nguyen
NBER Working Paper No. 25084
September 2018, Revised March 2019
JEL No. G02,G12,G14

                                           ABSTRACT

Using the complete history of regular quarterly and annual filings by U.S. corporations from
1995-2014, we show that when firms make an active change in their reporting practices, this
conveys an important signal about future firm operations. Changes to the language and
construction of financial reports also have strong implications for firms’ future returns: a portfolio
that shorts “changers” and buys “non-changers” earns up to 188 basis points in monthly alphas
(over 22% per year) in the future. Changes in language referring to the executive (CEO and CFO)
team, regarding litigation, or in the risk factor section of the documents are especially informative
for future returns. We show that changes to the 10-Ks predict future earnings, profitability, future
news announcements, and even future firm-level bankruptcies; meanwhile firms that do not make
changes experience positive abnormal returns. Unlike typical underreaction patterns in asset
prices, we find no announcement effect associated with these changes–with returns only accruing
when the information is later revealed through news, events, or earnings–suggesting that
investors are inattentive to these simple changes across the universe of public firms.

Lauren Cohen                                      Quoc Nguyen
Harvard Business School                           University of Illinois Chicago
Baker Library 273                                 University Hall,
Soldiers Field                                    Department of Finance (MC 168)
Boston, MA 02163                                  601 S. Morgan St.
and NBER                                          Chicago, IL 60607
lcohen@hbs.edu                                    quoc@uic.edu

Christopher Malloy
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 277
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
cmalloy@hbs.edu




A internet appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25084/
In a Grossman and Stiglitz (1976) world, agents are compensated for the marginal value of
the information they collect, process, and impound into prices. While this model is static,
the dynamics of these underlying processes have drastically changed for investors over time.
Information production and dissemination have seen a drastic drop in cost over the past
three decades. With this drop in cost, there has been a paired rise in the amount of
information being produced, making the search and processing problem more complex. If
investors have not kept up with the increasing magnitude and complexity of these changes,
we might see simple instances of disclosed information going unattended to by even these
Grossman-Stiglitz investors.

        In this paper, we use the laboratory of firm annual statements to examine this
tension.    Prior literature has documented that while investors at one time responded
contemporaneously to financial statement releases that contained large changes, over time
this announcement effect has attenuated (Brown and Tucker, 2011 and Feldman et al.,
2010). This prior literature thus concluded that changes to 10-K documents have become
“less informative” over time.1 While we replicate this fact that there is no significant
announcement effect associated with changes to regular filings, we show that this misses a
large and critically important component of these changes’ impact on asset prices.

        Namely, the lack of announcement returns is not due to financial statements
becoming less useful over time. Instead, it is because investors are missing these subtle but
important signals from annual reports at the time of the releases, perhaps due to their
increased complexity and length.2 When you isolate changes to corporate reports using our
approach, one can see that document changes do impact stock prices in a large and
significant way, but this happens with a lag: investors only gradually realize the
implications of the news hinted at by document changes, but this news eventually does get
impounded into future stock prices and future firm operations. Thus the message from our


1
  Note that while Feldman et al. (2010) find a modest contemporaneous and predictive effect of changes in
sentiment in the MD&A section on stock returns, Brown and Tucker (2011) subsequently argue that
announcement effects related to document changes have diminished over time, consistent with a decline in
the informativeness of corporate filings.
2
  Also note that Loughran and McDonald (2017) point out that the average publicly traded firm has their
annual report downloaded from the SEC’s website only 28.4 times by investors immediately after 10-K filings,
suggesting that most investors may not be carefully examining the filings to begin with. Of course, investors
may be accessing this information from other sources (Bloomberg, CapIQ, etc.), rather than solely through
the SEC’s website.

                                         Lazy Prices — Page 1
paper is quite different, in that our results point to a large amount of rich information that
is being hidden in the 10-Ks, and that investors are missing (and continue to miss, even
today), rather than the conclusion that corporate documents are becoming less informative
and less useful to investors in today’s capital markets. Indeed the findings in this paper
indicate an extreme, broad-based form of investor inattention to an item that is
foundational to the corporate reporting process–the quarterly and annual reports--and
which leads to large return predictability.

        As two motivating empirical facts for the increasing difficulty a Grossman-Stiglitz
investor faces in the collection and processing of value-sensitive information, consider
Figure 1. Figure 1 plots the simple average size of a firm’s annual financial statement (10-
K) as measured by the number of text words — so stripping out tables, ASCII embedded
information, .jpeg files, etc.; and just focusing solely on actual text - over our sample period.
From Panel A of Figure 1, one can see that over the last roughly 20 years, the length of
the average 10-K has grown drastically — with the present-day 10-K being roughly 6 times
as long as that in 1995.3 Panel B shows that over this same time period, the number of
textual changes4 has also grown substantially (by over 12 times). Thus, not only are 10-
Ks becoming longer over time (containing more text), but they also contain significantly
more changes year-to-year. We use this laboratory to explore how investors have respond
to these changes in information delivery — and how this information eventually translates
into stock prices and firm operations.

        To better understand our approach, consider the example of Baxter International,
Inc. Baxter is a bioscience and medical products firm headquartered in Deerfield, IL. The
firm was founded in 1931, trades on the NYSE (ticker: BAX), and is a member of the S&P
500 Index. The company had historically had Annual Reports (10-K’s) that were very
similar across time, but something changed in 2009. This can be seen in Figure 2, which
shows the similarity between Baxter’s 10-K from year to year.
        What caused Baxter’s 2009 10-K to veer from the prior year in terms of the language
used and information given? Figure 3 shows a number of news headlines that flooded the

3
  Note that Li (2008) also documents this regularity.
4
  Here the number of textual changes is defined simply as the number of instances that a piece of text was
removed, added, or modified as captured by Microsoft Word’s “Compare Documents” function (Microsoft
Word Tools menu, point to Track Changes, and then click Compare Documents). This figure shows that
average number of changes per firm per year.

                                        Lazy Prices — Page 2
media in the months following the release of the 10-K (Baxter’s 2009 10-K was publicly
released on February 23, 2010). For instance, a New York Times article published on April
24, 2010 reported that the FDA was clamping down on medical devices — in particular, on
automated IV pumps used to deliver food and drugs. From the article: “The biggest makers
of infusion pumps include Baxter Healthcare of Deerfield, Ill.; Hospira of Lake Forest, Ill.;
and CareFusion of San Diego.” The article went on to quote an FDA official commenting
that the new, tighter regulations would slow down the FDA approval process for automated
pumps. Then, on May 4th (just 10 days later) the New York Times reported that the FDA
had imposed a large recall on Baxter: “Baxter International is recalling its Colleague
infusion pumps from the American market under an agreement with federal regulators that
sought to fix problems like battery failures and software errors.”5
        Moreover, the stock returns of Baxter International moved substantially surrounding
the New York Times articles. In the two-week period around the articles, Baxter’s price
burned down more than -20%. This is shown in Figure 4, which also shows that the price
remained depressed, not reverting over the subsequent 6-month period. In contrast, we see
no significant reaction to Baxter’s own disclosure of its 10-K on February 23, 2010, nearly
two months before the news articles were published.
        The question then is whether these two information releases were at all linked — i.e.,
could something about the changes to the 10-K from Figure 2 (and reported 2 months
before) have hinted at the portending news regarding the automated pump issue. Figure
5 gives some suggestive evidence in this direction by showing the incidence of keywords in
Baxter’s 10-Ks over time related to the FDA’s clamp-down, and the recall of Baxter’s
Colleague Pump. Figure 5 shows that Baxter’s usage of these words spiked in their 2010
report relative to previous years. In particular Baxter’s 2009 filing showed a 71% increase
in mentions of the “FDA,” a 50% increase in the usage of the term “Recall,” and a 182%
increase in the mentions of “Colleague Pump.” Figure 6 then shows more detailed,
suggestive evidence on this point. It shows a number of parallel passages: the 2009 version
of the passage vs. the 2008 version, showing examples of Baxter’s increased mentioning of
these items.6

5
  The link to Baxter’s 2009 full 10-K and accompanying exhibits, along with links to the full-length articles
and excerpts, are included in Figure 2.
6
  See also Figure A-1 in the Appendix, for additional text passages related to this Baxter example. In
addition, Appendix Figure A-2 presents selected text passages from successive 10-Ks from another example

                                         Lazy Prices — Page 3
       From Figure 6, for instance, one can see that Baxter changed the passage:
“It is possible that additional charges related to COLLEAGUE may be required in future
periods.” [2008]
       to:
“It is possible that substantial additional charges, including significant asset impairments,
related to COLLEAGUE may be required in future periods.” [2009]
Along with adding this passage to their 2009 10-K:
“The sales and marketing of our products and our relationships with healthcare providers
are under increasing scrutiny by federal, state and foreign government agencies. The FDA,
the OIG, the Department of Justice (DOJ) and the Federal Trade Commission have each
increased their enforcement efforts...”
       Circling back, would being attentive to the changes in the 10-K have made a
difference to investors in Baxter? Going back to Figure 4, the answer appears to be yes.
Not only did the price of Baxter not move at all around the public filing of the 10-K
(February 23, 2010), but the price did not move for the next 2 months — until the news
was reported in the New York Times on April 23. Reading and reacting to these negative
changes by shorting Baxter at any point in the two months leading up to the NYT article
would have allowed an investor to capture over 30% in returns in the month following the
news’ release.
       We demonstrate that this pattern of behavior, investor response, subsequent events,
and return evolution are systematic across the entire cross-section of U.S. publicly traded
firms from 1995 to 2014.

       Our key finding is that a portfolio that goes long “non-changers” and short
“changers” earns a statistically significant 34-58 basis points per month — up to 7% per
year (t=3.59) - in value-weighted abnormal returns over the following year. These returns
continue to accrue out to 18 months, and do not reverse, implying that far from
overreaction, these changes imply true, fundamental information for firms that only gets
gradually incorporated into asset prices in the months after the reporting change. As all
publicly traded firms are mandated to file 10-Ks (and 10-Qs), the sample over which we
show these abnormal returns is truly the universe of firms (not a small, illiquid or otherwise


company (Herbalife).

                                    Lazy Prices — Page 4
selected subset).

       We show that these findings cannot be explained by traditional risk factors, well-
known predictors of future returns, unexpected earnings surprises, or news releases that
coincide with the timing of these firm disclosures. Moreover, we find an economically and
statistically zero announcement day return (much like Baxter) in the full sample. This is
in contrast to a gradual information diffusion type explanation that is consistent with the
empirical pattern of many other regularities (e.g., post-earnings announcement drift,
momentum, etc.), in which there is an immediate large response followed by a much more
modest — but persistent — drift in the same direction. Instead, the pattern we document is
more consistent with investors simply failing to account for — or be attentive — to the
systematic and rich information contained in simple changes to a firm’s annual reports.
Their stock prices exhibit little to no reaction at the time of public filing by the firm, even
though there is a robust and systematic relationship (whereby changes predict future
negative returns and negative real operational realizations) — with the information only
being impounded into price in the future.

       Next, we explore the mechanism at work behind these return results. We show that
firms’ reporting changes are concentrated in the management discussion (MD&A) section,
which is the section of the reports where management has the most discretion and flexibility
in terms of content. However, in terms of return-rich content, we find that while changes
in MD&A section wording do predict large and significant abnormal returns, changes in
text in the Risk Factors section are even more informative for stock returns. For instance,
the 5-factor alpha on (Non-Changers — Changers) particularly in this risk factors section is
over 188 basis points per month (t=2.76), or over 22% per year. Further, we find that
changes in language referring to the executive (CEO and CFO) team, and about litigation
and lawsuits, are especially informative for future returns, as is the increased usage of so-
called “negative sentiment” words. For instance, changes focused on litigation and lawsuits
underperform the non-changers by over 71 basis points per month, or over 8.5% per year
(t=3.29).

       We then turn to measures of real activity and show that changes to the 10-Ks predict
future earnings, profitability, future news announcements, and even future firm-level
bankruptcies.       Moreover, much like return realizations, these appear to be largely

                                    Lazy Prices — Page 5
unanticipated, as the real operational changes are not taken into account by analysts
covering the firm — resulting in the 10-K changes significantly predicting future negative
earnings surprises and negative cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) around these events.

       Note that theory does not predict that changes must lead to negative returns. It
may be just as plausible, ex ante, that firms make positive changes in their 10-K text which
are ignored by investors, and then lead to positive realizations in returns and firm outcomes.
Thus, the loading on unsigned text “changes” would be ambiguous. We have two pieces
of evidence speaking to the strong observed negative relationship we document in the data
with respect to returns and future outcomes.         First, when we use natural language
processing (NLP) textual signing of the underlying text of the changes, we note that 86%
of changes consist of “negative” sentiment changes. When we segregate out the 14% of
changes that are “positive” changes, we do find that they predict significantly positive
returns in the future. Second, and perhaps causing part of the disproportionate (86-14)
ratio of negative (bad news portending) changes, is that class-action lawsuits have been
dominated by claims of the omission of negative news to existing shareholders (i.e., short-
sellers have had more success suing firms for not properly disclosing material positive
information in a timely fashion). This would asymmetrically increase the risk of failing to
report negative information, leading to the asymmetric realizations of changes observed.

       In addition, we perform a number of robustness checks across firm size, time,
industry, firm-events, etc. The effect that we document is not driven by any of these
factors. In particular, it is not something about special firm events (e.g., we exclude periods
of M&A, SEOs, or other large firm events that might necessitate changing of the 10-K) or
about certain industries, types, or characteristics of firms. In addition, this does not appear
to be a function of transaction costs or limits to arbitrage. The return results we document
have the following characteristics: they accrue over months following the release of the 10-
K (so no high frequency trading is needed); the portfolios have very modest turnover
(around the infrequent reporting dates); the effects show up in value-weighted returns
across the universe of all publicly traded firms (and so are not concentrated in small firms);
the average “changer” firm (to be shorted) is actually larger than the average long at $3.5
B market cap (vs. $2.5 B), and the average changer firm has relatively modest shorting
fees — again actually less costly to short than the average stock in the long portfolio.


                                    Lazy Prices — Page 6
          Our findings are also not driven solely by changes in the length of these documents.
As mentioned above, while 10-Ks have seen a large increase in length over time, when we
control for document length and document length changes, the impact of the changes we
measure in the filings is a large and significant predictor of returns. In sum, controlling for
these along with other characteristics and events (e.g., issuance, accruals, etc.), the act of
substantively altering a firm’s 10-K remains an economically large and statistically robust
predictor of future returns and real firm operating changes.

          Stepping back, these results in some manner require a differential “laziness” of
investors with respect to text compared with numerical financial statement entries. In
particular, nearly every table in financial statements is shown with the current year’s
numbers along with a series of past years’ comparable reported numbers. For instance, a
sales revenue figure of 1.5 billion dollars would mean little without the context of comparing
it prior years’ sales revenues. In contrast, investors do not appear to be doing the same
comparison of this year’s text to last year’s.                 That simple comparison, as we show
throughout the paper, contains rich information for the future of a firm’s operations.

          In order to parameterize and examine the actions of investors in even more depth,
we would ideally like to measure times at which investors allocate more attention to a
firm’s 10-Ks, and in particular changes to 10-Ks. While this has historically been difficult
(to impossible) to measure, we attempt to do so using novel data from the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC). Namely, we filed a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
request with the SEC in order to obtain data documenting: i.) every downloaded filing from
the SEC website’s EDGAR downloadable service, ii.) the exact time-stamp of when the
filing was downloaded, and iii.) the downloader’s (partially masked for anonymity) IP
address.7 From this, we construct a panel dataset of 10-K downloading activity (which
filings and when) by each investor over time. We use this data to identify 10-K releases
(e.g., Apple in 2011) in which a large percentage of investors download not only the current
year’s 10-K, but where these same investors also download the prior year’s 10-K in tandem.
These investors plausibly have a higher likelihood of wanting to compare the two — given
their joint downloading - than situations in which the majority of investors are simply
downloading this year’s 10-K filing alone. We find that when more investors are potentially

7
    Note that this data is now publicly available on an ongoing basis.

                                            Lazy Prices — Page 7
comparing 10-Ks, and possibly “paying attention” to changes — downloading both this
year’s and last year’s 10-K — this attenuates the key return predictability effects we
document in this paper, consistent with inattention being a mechanism behind our
documented findings.8 Finally, we investigate the nature of this inattention and show that
investors have an easier time digesting qualitative changes when they are explicitly drawn
to these changes through comparative statements included in the text (e.g., with statements
such as “relative to prior year EBITDA” or “compared to last year”). In this sense, our
paper documents new, granular evidence on the origins and characteristics of investor
inattention by pinpointing which specific phrases and language patterns can help investors
improve their ability to process textual information.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I provides a brief
background and literature review. Section II describes the data we use and explores the
particular construction of firms’ annual and quarterly reports. Section III examines the
impact of these choices, and Section IV explores the mechanism driving our results in more
detail. Section V concludes.



                               I. Background and Related Literature

       Our paper contributes to several growing literatures, including (but not limited to):
a) the broad topic of underreaction in stock prices and the impact of investor inattention;
b) the use of textual analysis in finance and accounting; and c) the information content of
firms’ disclosure choices.

       The magnitude and nature of our return predictability results add new evidence and
much-needed granularity to the existing stock price underreaction and inattention
literature. As described in Tetlock (2014)’s review article, several papers document that
underreaction is strongest when investors fail to pay attention to informative content. See,
for example, Tetlock (2011), who constructs measures of “stale” news stories and
demonstrates that investors overreact to stale information (and correspondingly, underreact


8
  Note, however, that in these situations where investors are presumably being more attentive (by
simultaneously downloading and comparing year-on-year documents), we do find that the short-run
announcement effects are more pronounced, likely because investors immediately detect the changes to the
reports and quickly impound these changes into stock prices.

                                       Lazy Prices — Page 8
to novel information). In addition, Da, Engelberg, and Gao (2011) use Google search
activity to pinpoint retail investor attention, while Ben-Raphael, Da, and Israelson (2017)
measure institutional attention using Bloomberg search activity; the latter shows that stock
price drift is most pronounced for stocks with the least amount of institutional attention.
Another novel measure of attention is employed in Engelberg, Sasseville, and Williams
(2012), who show that spikes in TV ratings (presumably driven by retail investors) during
the Jim Cramer “Mad Money” show are linked to overreaction in stock prices for the
companies recommended during the show. By contrast, what we document in this paper
is an acute form of investor inattention that impacts a large cross-section of firms, is
centered on the most important corporate disclosure that firms make, and which leads to
large return predictability.        Further, we use novel data from the SEC log files to
demonstrate that variation in attention to this exact same item (the annual report)
produces variation in these return predictability patterns. And finally, we dig into the
nature of this inattention and show that investors have an easier time digesting qualitative
changes (i.e., changes in text, as opposed to numbers) when they are explicitly drawn to
these changes through comparative statements included in the text; but when such
comparisons are not included, investors simply cannot decipher meaningful changes to these
documents.      So it is not merely the difference between quantitative and qualitative
information that matters for investors (as in Engelberg (2008)), but also the way in which
that qualitative information is constructed and presented.9 In these ways, our paper helps
to micro-found some of the more general evidence on inattention and underreaction in stock
prices by clarifying exactly what it is that investors fail to recognize.

        In attempting to pinpoint textual changes at the document level, our paper also
contributes to the large and fast-growing field of textual analysis. As a result of increased
computing power and advances in the field of natural language processing, many recent
papers have tried to employ automated forms of textual analysis to answer important
questions in finance and accounting; Loughran and McDonald (2016) provide a helpful
survey of some of these papers. Most relevant to our study are the articles that analyze
the link between textual information in firm disclosures (such as the 10-Ks and 10-Qs that


9
 Note that we also explicitly show (in Tables V, VI and Appendix Table A-9) that our document similarity
measure is distinct from previously used textual metrics that focus on sentiment and/or negative words (such
as those in Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky, and Macskassy (2008), or Loughran and McDonald (2011)).

                                         Lazy Prices — Page 9
feature in our analysis) and firm behavior and performance.10 For example, Li (2008)
employs a form of textual analysis and finds that the annual reports of firms with lower
earnings (as well as those with positive but less persistent earnings) are harder to interpret.
Li (2010a) also finds that firms’ tone in forward-looking statements in the MD&A section
can be used to predict future earnings surprises. Meanwhile, Nelson and Pritchard (2007)
explore the use of cautionary language designed to invoke the safe harbor provision under
the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, and find that firms that are subject
to greater litigation risk change their cautionary language to a larger degree relative to the
previous year; but after a decrease in litigation risk, they fail to remove the previous
cautionary language. In addition, Feldman et al. (2010) find that a positive tone in the
MD&A section is associated with modestly higher contemporaneous and future returns,
and that an increasingly negative tone is associated with lower contemporaneous returns.11
In our paper, we show that the document similarity measure we employ predicts future
returns even controlling for any impact of disclosure sentiment.

      Finally, a handful of additional papers explore other aspects of firm-level annual
reports, in studying the impact of different types of corporate disclosure. For instance, Lee
(2012) finds that less of the earnings-related information is incorporated into a firm’s stock
price during the three days following the 10-Q filings for firms with longer or less readable
10-Q. Meanwhile Dyer, Lang, and Stice-Lawrence (2017) show that 10-Ks have become
longer and more complex, and examine some of the reasons behind these trends. And
closest to our paper is perhaps Brown and Tucker (2011), who focus on year-on-year
changes in the text of the MD&A section, and find that changes in the MD&A section are
related to future operating changes in the business (e.g., accounting-based measures of
performance, as well as liquidity measures); they also find that contemporaneous returns
around 10-K filing dates are increasing in changes to MD&A. Importantly, Brown and
Tucker (2011) report that “While MD&A disclosures have become longer over time, they
have become more like what investors saw in the previous year... Moreover, we find that

10
   Note that before the advent of advanced computing techniques, several papers focused on hand-coded
analysis of disclosure content, for example in the management discussion (MD&A) section of annual reports
(see Bryan, 1997, and Rogers and Grant, 1997). Others used survey rankings in order to quantify the level
of disclosure (see Clarkson, Kao, and Richardson, 1999, and Barron, Kile, and O’Keefe, 1999) in the MD&A
sections. See Cole and Jones (2005) and Feldman et al. (2010) for a survey of the earlier evidence.
11
   See also Muslu et al. (2015), Li (2011), Loughran and McDonald (2016), and Das (2014) for a survey of
various textual analysis approaches.

                                       Lazy Prices — Page 10
the price responses to MD&A modifications have weakened over time... suggesting a decline
in MD&A usefulness.” What we show in this paper, however, is that changes in 10-Ks are
actually remarkably useful for investors, as they predict large negative returns in the future.
So while we confirm their finding from recent years that announcement effects associated
with document changes are close to zero,12 this is not because they have become less useful.
Rather, it is because investors are missing these subtle but important signals from annual
reports at the time of the releases, perhaps due to their increased complexity and length.
Isolating changes using our approach, these changes have powerful predictability for future
asset prices. Far from them becoming less informative as past literature has posed, our
results point to a large and significant role of 10-Ks and 10-Qs through the present day.
And yet the rich information in these documents — and the changes to the information
conveyed — appears to be largely missed by investors. Instead price revelation occurs only
gradually over time, with both asset prices and real activity reacting slowly over the next
6-12 months to the document changes.



                                 II. Data and Summary Statistics

       We draw from a variety of data sources to construct the sample we use in this paper.
We download all complete 10-K, 10-K405, 10-KSB and 10-Q filings from the SEC’s
Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval (EDGAR) website13 from 1995 to 2014.
All complete 10-K and 10-Q filings are in HTML text format and contain an aggregation
of all information that are submitted with each firm’s file, such as exhibits, graphics, XBRL
files, PDF files, and Excel files. Similar to Loughran and McDonald (2011), we concentrate
our analysis on the textual content of the document. We only extract the main 10-K and
10-Q texts in each document and remove all tables (if their numeric character content is
greater than 15%), HTML tags, XBRL tables, exhibits, ASCII-encoded PDFs, graphics,
XLS, and other binary files.14



12
   Note that our results pertain to the entire 10-K, but we can confirm that the announcement effects
associated with changes to the various sub-sections (including the MD&A) are also statistically
indistinguishable from zero.
13
   (https://www.sec.gov/edgar/)
14
    Bill McDonald provides a very detailed description on how to strip 10-K/Q down to text files:
http://sraf.nd.edu/data/stage-one-10-x-parse-data/

                                      Lazy Prices — Page 11
             We use monthly stock returns from the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP) and firms’ book value of equity and earnings per share from Compustat. We also
obtain analyst data from the Institutional Brokers Estimate System (I/B/E/S), and
sentiment category identifiers from Loughran and McDonald (2011)’s Master Dictionary.15

             We measure the quarter-on-quarter similarities between 10-Q and 10-K filings using
four different similarity measures taken from the literature in linguistics, textual similarity,
and natural-language processing (NLP): i.) cosine similarity, ii.) Jaccard similarity, iii.)
minimum edit distance, and iv.) simple similarity. We describe each measure, and its
respective calculation, below.

             The first measure is called the cosine similarity, which has also been used in the
finance literature by Hanley and Hoberg (2010). It is computed between two documents -
       and         - as follows. Let          and        be the set of terms occurring in                       and        ,
respectively. Define            as the union of        and       , and let                be the     element of . Define
the term frequency vectors of                and       as:

                                    ,         ,…,        ;                            ,            ,…,

where                is the number of occurrences of term                    in       . The cosine similarity
between two documents is then defined as:
                                                                     ∙
                                              _
                                                             |   |       |        |

where the dot product, ∙, is the scalar product and norm, | | , is the Euclidean norm.
For a textual and numerical example, consider these three short texts:
                                             : We expect demand to increase.
                                        : We expect worldwide demand to increase.
                                              : We expect weakness in sales.
It is easy to see that            is very similar to         and that             is more similar to          than it is
to       .   The cosine similarity of       and       is computed as follow. First, the union                      ,
is:
                            ,      = [we, expect, worldwide, demand, to, increase]
The term frequency vectors of                and       are:


15
     http://sraf.nd.edu/textual-analysis/resources/

                                             Lazy Prices — Page 12
                                                             1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1 ;                            1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1
The cosine similarity score of                                 and                   is therefore
                                                  1       1          1       1        0       1        1       1    1       1    1     1
     _                 ,                                                                                                                                       0.91
                                        √1        1          1           1           1                √1       1        1        1     1           1
Similarly, the cosine similarity of                                      and                 is computed as follow. The union                                         ,
of       and          is:
                                ,           [we, expect, demand, to, increase, weakness, in, sales]
The term frequency vectors of DA and DC:
                                                      1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0 ;                             1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1
The cosine similarity score of                                 and DC is therefore:
                                            1     1      1       1           1        0       1       0    1        0       0    1    0        1       0   1
         _                  ,                                                                                                                                         0.40
                                                  √1             1           1           1        1            √1       1        1         1       1
Clearly,             is more similar to                        than to                       and the cosine similarity measures captures
this difference in similarity. The Jaccard similarity measure uses the same term frequency
vectors/sets as in the cosine similarity measure, and is defined as:
                                                                                                           ∩
                                                                     _
                                                                                                  |        ∪        |
In other words, the Jaccard similarity is the size of the intersection divided by the size of
the union of the two term frequency sets; also note that the Jaccard measure is binary
(each word is counted only once in a given set) while the cosine similarity measure
includes frequency (and hence includes counts of each word).
In the same textual examples                               ,         , and                   as above, the Jaccard similarities are:
                                                            | we, expect, demand, to, increase |                                                   5
                 _                      ,                                                                                                                      0.83
                                                      | we, expect, worldwide, demand, to, increase |                                              6
                                                                   | we, expect |                                                                          2
             _                      ,                                                                                                                               0.25
                                                | we, expect, demand, to, increase, weakness, in, sales |                                                  8
             The third similarity measure we employ is called                                                               _                  and is computed by
counting the smallest number of operations required to transform one document into the
other. In the same textual examples                                              ,        , and            as above, transforming                              to         only
requires adding the word “worldwide,” while transforming                                                                    to       requires deleting 3 words
“demand,” “to,” and “increase” and adding 3 words “weakness,” “in,” and “sales”.
             Finally, the fourth similarity measure we use is called                                                             _              , and uses a simple
side-by-side comparison method. We utilize the function “Track Changes” in Microsoft

                                                                 Lazy Prices — Page 13
Word or the function “diff” in Unix/Linux terminal to compare the old document D1 with
the new document D2. We first identify the changes, additions, and deletions while
comparing the old document with the new document. We first count the number of words
in those changes, additions, and deletions and normalize the total count by the average size
of the old document      and the new document      .
                   c=[                                     ]/[                 ]
      In order to obtain a similarity measure that has values between 0, 1 , where 1 means
the two documents are identical, as in the prior three similarity measures, we then
normalize by feature scaling   to compute      _           as follows:
                                   _                   /
      Note that every annual 10-K report contains 15 schedules and every quarterly 10-Q
report contains 10 schedules. The common schedules for both 10-K and 10-Q reports are:
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,
Risk Factors, Legal Proceedings, Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure about Market
Risks, Control and Procedures, and Other information. These schedules (or “Items”) of 10-
K and 10-Q reports are listed in Figure 8. We identify the textual content of each schedule
by capturing regular expressions that contain the word “item” and the schedule name.
Since the labels for schedules are very inconsistent across filings, we process all 10-K and
10-Q filings many times to capture those exceptions. First, we use regular expressions to
capture the most common structure for schedule titles: lines that start with “Item” + “a
number” + “title name.” Then we start capturing exceptions to the common rule, for
example, lines that only has “Item” + “a number,” lines with only “number” + “title
names,” etc., while also making sure that each schedule is captured exactly once. We repeat
that process many times and incorporate new exceptions each time.
      Table I presents summary statistics from our final dataset, which consists of all 10-
Ks and 10-Qs downloaded from the SEC Edgar websites from 1995 to 2014. Document
Size refers to the number of words in each report, and the Size of Change refers to the
number of words that change relative to a prior report (in the case of a 10-K, the change
is measured relative to last year’s 10-K, and in the case of a 10-Q, the change is measured
relative to the same quarter’s 10-Q in the prior year). Panel A of Table I shows that the
average 10-K contains 44,430 words, while the average 10-Q contains roughly one-third as
many characters (15,724).

                                  Lazy Prices — Page 14
           For some of our tests of the mechanism, we also draw sentiment category identifiers
and word lists (e.g., measures of negative words, uncertainty, litigiousness, etc.) from
Loughran and McDonald (2011)’s Master Dictionary.16                       In Panel A, the Sentiment of
Change refers to the number of negative words normalized by the size of the change. The
Uncertainty of Change and the Litigiousness of Change are the number of words categorized
by “uncertainty” and “litigiousness,” respectively, normalized by the size of the change.
Finally, we also parse 10-K/Q documents for mentions of CEO or CFO turnover and define
two indicator variables Change CEO and Change CFO as indicator variables set equal to
one if the 10-K or 10-Q mentions a change in CEO or change in CFO, respectively. More
specifically, we search for instances where a word from the set {appoint, elect, hire, new,
search} and a word from the set {CEO, CFO, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial
Officer} appear within 10 words of each other. Table I shows that CEO and CFO changes
are mentioned in roughly 2-5% of the reports, on average.

           Panel B of Table I presents summary statistics of the four similarity measures. Each
of the measures ranges from 0 to 1, but the ranges differ across the measures. For example,
the distribution of the             _           measure is fairly narrow, with a mean of 0.87 and a
standard deviation of 0.20, while the distribution of the                 _           measure is centered at
a much lower level, with a mean of 0.15 and a standard deviation of 0.10. Recall that
higher values indicate a higher degree of document similarity across years between the 10-
Ks (or 10-Qs), while lower values indicate more changes across documents. Also note that
we winsorize any outliers of these measures (at the 1st and 99th percentiles) before including
them in our subsequent analyses.

           Panel C of Table I reports the correlations between the measures. All four measures
are strongly positively correlated with each other, although the                        _        measure is
correlated only 0.19 with the               _         measure; all of the other pairwise correlations
between the four measures exceed 0.5.




16
     These words are available at: https://sraf.nd.edu/textual-analysis/resources/.


                                           Lazy Prices — Page 15
                      III. The Implications of Changes in Reporting Behavior

        In this section we examine the implications of firms’ decisions to change the language
and construction of their SEC filings. In particular, we explore the nature of these changes
and their implications for firms’ future actions and outcomes.

        We begin by analyzing the future stock returns associated with firms who change
their reports substantially, versus those who do not. First, we compute standard calendar-
time portfolios, and then we control for additional determinants of returns by employing
Fama-MacBeth monthly cross-sectional regressions.



A. Calendar-Time Portfolio Returns

        For each of the four similarity measures described in the previous section, we
compute quintiles each month based on the prior month’s distribution of similarity scores
across all stocks. For firms with a fiscal year-end in December, we use the following reports:
for calendar quarter Q1, we use the release of a firm’s 10-Q, which generally occurs in April
or May; for calendar quarter Q2, we use another release of a firm’s 10-Q, which generally
occurs in July or August; for calendar quarter Q3, we use another release of a firm’s 10-Q,
which generally occurs in October or November; and finally for the year-end results we use
the release of the full-year 10-K, which typically occurs in February of March.17 Similarity
scores are computed relative to the prior year report that lines up in calendar time with
the report in question (such that 2005 Q1 10-Qs are compared with 2004 Q1 10-Qs, for
example).18 Stocks enter the portfolio in the month after the public release of one of their
reports, which induces a lag in our portfolio construction. Note that in all of our tests,
firms are held in the portfolio for 3 months. Portfolios are rebalanced monthly, and the


17
   See Appendix Figure A-4 for a depiction of the average clustering of release dates, by month, for the 10-
Ks and 10-Qs in our sample. Also note that for firms with “off-cycle” fiscal year-ends we simply use their
reports in an analogous way to that presented here, but incorporating the different timing. E.g., firms with
a fiscal-year end in June typically release their annual 10-Ks in August and September; and for the other 3
calendar quarters we would analyze their 10-Qs instead.
18
   Note that due to seasonality in sales and operations (and the associated discussion of those seasonal patterns
in the company filings), the most comparable report for a given 10-K is the prior year 10-K (as opposed to
the prior quarter 10-Q), and the most comparable report for a given 10-Q is the prior year 10-Q in that same
quarter. As shown in Appendix Table A-13, when we restrict our sample to only look at year-on-year changes
in the text of 10-Ks (and hence remove all the 10-Q changes), or look only at year-on-year changes in the
text of 10-Qs (and hence remove all the 10-K changes), our main portfolio result from Table II is similar.

                                          Lazy Prices — Page 16
average monthly returns are reported in Table II.

     Panel A of Table II presents equal-weighted calendar-time portfolio returns. Quintile
1 (Q1) refers to firms that have the least similarity between their document this year and
the one last year; hence this portfolio consists of the “big changers.” Quintile 5 (Q5) refers
to firms that have the most similarity in their documents across years, and hence this
portfolio represents the “little to no changers.” Q5-Q1 represents the long-short (L/S)
portfolio that goes long Q5 and short Q1 each month.

     Panel A shows that this L/S portfolio earns a large and significant abnormal return,
ranging in magnitude between 18-45 basis points per month. This result is unaffected by
controlling for the 3 Fama-French factors (market, size, and value), or for two additional
momentum and liquidity factors. This suggests that the return spreads we see between
these portfolios are not driven by systematic loadings on commonly known risk factors.
Notably, all 4 measures of similarity deliver this pattern, suggesting moreover that our
results are not driven by the particular way we compute year-over-year changes in the
documents.    This finding indicates that firms that make significant changes to their
disclosures in a given year experience lower future returns. Firms that do not make changes
are also associated with positive abnormal returns. Later in the paper we explore the
possible mechanisms behind this return result.

       Panel B of Table II then presents value-weight portfolio returns, computed as in
Panel A except that each stock in the portfolio is weighted by its (lagged) market
capitalization.   Panel B shows that the value-weight portfolio returns are similar but
somewhat larger in magnitude to the equal-weight results, with the value-weight L/S
portfolio earning up to 58 basis points per month (t=3.59), depending on the similarity
measure employed. The portfolio return spread shows up on both sides, with “changers”
(Q1) experiencing negative future returns, and “non-changers” (Q5) experiencing positive
future returns. Importantly, Appendix Figure A-3 plots the annual time-series of excess
returns documented in Table II; this figure shows that the number of positive excess return
years is distributed quite evenly throughout the sample period, reaffirming the conclusion
that the abnormal returns documented in this paper are not concentrated in just a few




                                   Lazy Prices — Page 17
quarters or years.19

        We explore the evolution of both the long and short legs of this portfolio using event-
time returns in Figure 7. As seen from the event-time returns in Figure 7, any positive
alpha on the Q5 long side (the “little to no changers”) quickly reverts to zero, while the
negative alpha persists and increases up to 6 months out — never reversing. In particular,
Figure 7-A explores the longer-term returns by computing the average cumulative abnormal
return for each quintile portfolio sorted based on firms’ similarity scores (here the
Sim_Jaccard measure is used), for 1 month out to 6 months after portfolio formation.
Figure 7-A shows that L/S returns accrue gradually over the course of the subsequent 6
months, and do not reverse. Additionally, the long-term poor performance of Q1 (the
“changers”) is particularly strong and persistent in this figure.

        Figure 7-B then takes an even more granular look at the L/S return effect, by
exploring the event-time announcement returns around the public release of these filings
(from t-10 days out to t+10 days). Figure 7-B shows that — like the example of Baxter
International, Inc. - there is no statistically or economically detectable effect around the
announcement of these filings, but rather that the return effect we document in this paper
accrues gradually over the course of the following 6 months and does not revert. Taken as
a whole, Figure 7 suggests that the information contained in a firm’s decision to
significantly change its reporting practices has a long-lasting impact on firm value that
does not accrue upon release of reports, but instead only gradually through price revelation
over time.



B. Characteristics of Quintile Portfolios

        The finding that a significant portion of the return spread documented in Table II
and Figure 7 comes from the short side begs the question of the composition and
characteristics of both sides of this L/S portfolio. For example, it could be the case that
the short side simply contains a set of smaller firms that are difficult (and expensive) to
short. Or perhaps, there is not significant turnover of small or illiquid stocks to trade.

19
   To further confirm that our results are not driven by a few special years of quarters, we also exclude the
years 2000, 2001, 2008, and 2009 in our portfolio tests, and find that the abnormal returns documented in
Table II are still large and significant.

                                         Lazy Prices — Page 18
Both of these might make the returns we document fall within simple limits of arbitrage.
Table III presents the average size, turnover, shorting costs (in basis points), and sentiment
(as defined in Table I) for all five quintile portfolios. As Table III shows, there is little
evidence that the short side contains an unusual set of firms on average; if anything, the
firms in Q1 appear to be slightly larger, and have lower average shorting costs. The only
notable difference appears to be in the sentiment of the text of the firms’ filings, a finding
we explore in greater depth below. Moreover, given that turnover is so modest, that VW
returns are actually a bit larger than EW, that our sample is the entire universe of publicly
traded firms (i.e., we are not restricted to a small set of firms or industries as every publicly
traded firm is mandated to file 10-Ks and 10-Qs) resulting in large diversified portfolios for
each quintile, and that returns only accrue slowly over the following 6 months, we do not
believe limits to arbitrage are a significant contributor to the return regularities we see.



C. Fama-MacBeth Regressions

       We next run monthly Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions of future individual
firm-level stock returns on a host of known return predictors, plus our 4 similarity measures.
As Table IV shows, each similarity measure is a positive and significant predictor of future
stock returns, implying that firms who make large changes to their reports experience lower
future returns. This result holds when we include a variety of additional return predictors
as well, including the following: last month’s (or last quarter’s) standardized unexpected
earnings surprise (SUE); Size, the log market value of equity; log(BM), the log book value
of equity over market value of equity; Ret(-1,0), the previous month’s return; and Ret(-12,
-2), the cumulative stock return from month t-12 to month t-2.           SUE is defined as the
Compustat-based standardized unexpected earnings, and is computed as in Livnat and
Mendenhall (2006), where Compustat-based Earnings Surprise is based on the assumption
that EPS follows a seasonal random walk, where the best expectation of the EPS in quarter
t is the firm’s reported EPS in the same quarter of the previous fiscal year. In terms of
magnitude, the coefficient on Sim_Simple in column 12 (=0.0292, t=2.11), for example,
implies that for a one-standard deviation decline in a stock’s document similarity across




                                    Lazy Prices — Page 19
years, returns are 36 basis points lower per month in the future.



                                            IV.   Mechanism

        In this section we explore the mechanism at work behind our key return results.

A. Explaining Changes in Reporting Behavior

        We begin by regressing our similarity measures on a host of characteristics of the
documents in question. The goal of this exercise is to better understand what helps explain
changes in similarity across years for a given firm’s document.

        We construct a variety of measures based on specific words, as well as sentiment-
type measures based on available word dictionaries. As noted above in our discussion of
the summary statistics in Table I, we use sentiment category identifiers and word lists (e.g.,
measures of negative words, uncertainty, litigiousness, etc.) from Loughran and McDonald
(2011)’s Master Dictionary. Specifically, the variable Sentiment of Change refers to the
number of negative words normalized by the size of the change; Uncertainty of Change and
the Litigiousness of Change refer to the number of words categorized by “uncertainty” and
“litigiousness,” respectively, normalized by the size of the change; and Change CEO and
Change CFO are indicator variables set equal to one if the 10-K or 10-Q mentions a change
in CEO or change in CFO, respectively.

        Table V shows the results of panel regressions of document similarity (here measured
as Sim_Simple)20 on these characteristics of the document, with firm and time fixed effects
included, and clustering done at the firm level. Table V shows that lower similarity (i.e.,
more changes) across documents is associated with more (negative) sentiment, higher
uncertainty, more litigiousness, and more frequent mentions of CEO and CFO changes.21
Each of these findings is highly statistically significant and suggests that the changes in
reporting practices that we identify are associated with significant changes in the operations




20
  The results for the other three measures of similarity yield the same conclusions.
21
   This is consistent with Tetlock (2007) and Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky, and Macskassy (2008), who show
that investors pay special attention to negative words used in media reports. Also see Appendix Table A-12
for the portfolio returns for double-sorts on similarity and (negative) sentiment.

                                        Lazy Prices — Page 20
or prospects of the firm in question.

        In Table VI we also explore the extent to which our return results are driven by
other aspects of the filings, as opposed to our specific measure of changes in the similarity
of year-over-year documents. For example, low sentiment itself, or just the length of the
document, or just changes in the length of the document might be more important
predictors of returns than our measure of (dis)similarity, or might drive out the forecasting
power of our measure.          We also construct a measure entitled Sentiment of Change is
Positive to focus on the sentiment of the changes we document, and to separate out the
positive and negative components. As Table VI shows, however, that even after controlling
for these document-level characteristics (in a Fama-MacBeth monthly return predictability
set-up as in Table V) that similarity remains a large and significant predictor of future
returns (t=3.82). Decreases in sentiment alone do predict negative returns, as do increases
in the length of the filings, but neither of these measures drives out the predictability of
year-over-year changes in document similarity.22



B. Isolating Key Sections of Reports

        Next, we try to isolate the particular sections of the quarterly and annual reports
that are associated with the largest declines in similarity across years for a given firm.

        Figure 8 lists the standard sections that are present in firms’ annual (10-K) and
quarterly (10-Q) reports, respectively. Figure 9‐A then plots the average similarity score
for different items in firms’ 10-Ks and shows that Item 7 (Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations–commonly known as the
MD&A section) displays a significantly lower average similarity across years than the other
categories. Notably, this is the section of the 10-K where management presumably has the
most discretion over the content. Similarly, Figure 9‐B reports the average similarity score
for different items of firms’ 10-Qs, and again shows that the MD&A section (here Item 2)
displays the lowest average similarity to the other items in the report (although a number

22
   Note that in Appendix Table A-2 we also explore interactions of similarity with document-level
characteristics such as Sentiment, and find even stronger return predictability results. See also Appendix
Table A-9, which shows that tone/sentiment changes measured across the entire 10-K predict stock returns:
negative tone changes predicts negative returns, and positive tone changes predicts positive returns; but that
the return predictability of our document similarity measure is unaffected by the inclusion of these variables.

                                         Lazy Prices — Page 21
of 10-Q Items are closer in changes year-to-year).



C. Return Predictability of Key Sections of Reports

      We then take the item/section categories listed in Figure 8 and examine the return
predictability associated with changes to each section. To do so we construct similarity
measures for each item of the 10-K using only the textual portion contained within that
specific item. As before, for each of the four similarity measures, we compute quintiles
based on the prior year’s distribution of similarity scores across all stocks. We report the
key sections where the return predictability is most pronounced, and report these calendar-
time portfolio returns in Table VII.

      Table VII provides a set of interesting findings, although there is some variation in
the consistency of these results across the different specifications in Panels A and B. As a
result, we view these results as providing suggestive but not definitive evidence on where
our return results are most pronounced. For instance, Table VII indicates that changes in
the MD&A section are associated with significant future return predictability, although
interestingly the magnitude of this effect (ranging between 11-22 basis per month) is often
smaller than the effects associated with the “Legal Proceedings” category (Item 3 in the
10-K), the “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” category (Item
7a), and particularly the “Risk Factors” section (Item 1A). Changes concentrated in the
Risk Factors section, for example, yield L/S portfolio return alphas (Non-Changers minus
Changers) of up to 188 basis points per month (t=2.76) in Panel A of Table VII, or over
22% in risk-adjusted abnormal returns per year. These results suggest that changes to
some sections may be quite subtle, and difficult for the market to detect, even though they
may have large implications for future returns.

      Given the potential structural break in reporting about risk-related items in the
wake of Sarbanes-Oxley (see Li, 2010b), we also re-run our analysis for the Risk Factors
section in the post-Sarbanes-Oxley period (2003-2014). Appendix Table A-1 shows that
we continue to find large and significant return predictability associated with changes in
the Risk Factors section in this most recent time period. Finally, in Figure 10 we plot the
value-weighted portfolio alphas by document section in a bar chart, which again highlights


                                  Lazy Prices — Page 22
the large predictability of the risk factor section.



D. Interacting with Investor Attention

       Next, we explore our mechanism in even greater depth by trying to isolate cases
where we believe investors are paying more attention to these filings, meaning that our
return effects should be muted in such instances if we believe our return predictability
results are primarily a result of investor inattention. To identify variation in investor
attention, we exploit a new database that captures investor behavior at a very granular
level: the SEC Edgar traffic log download file.        This database contains records of all
downloads of corporate filings, matched to the IP addresses of the downloading
agent/entity (see Loughran and McDonald, 2017 and Chen, Cohen, Gurun, Lou, and
Malloy, 2017 for details). As in Loughran and McDonald (2017), we first remove the
impact of “robot requests” which consist of mass downloads by large institutional investors
(often quantitative investment firms), and try to test the hypothesis that firms with more
“attentive” investor bases see a more muted return predictability effect.

       To test this hypothesis, we run Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions of
individual firm-level stock returns on our similarity measures plus interactions of these
similarity measures with a measure of investor attention computed from the SEC log file.
Specifically, we construct a variable called IPAccessMultipleYear, which is a proxy for
having an attentive investor base: it is measured as the number of unique IP addresses that
access both the current 10-K/10-Q and the previous year’s 10-K/10-Q of the same firm
(normalized by the total unique IP addresses that access the current 10-K/10-Q). The idea
behind this variable is that if many investors are downloading simultaneously both this
year’s and last year’s filings, we conjecture that it is more likely that they would pick up
on the document changes driving our return results; as a result, we would expect them to
impound this information into prices more quickly upon the release of the current year’s
filing, resulting in lower future return predictability.

       Table VIII shows that this pattern exists in the data. The interaction term on
IPAccessMultipleYear x Similarity is consistently negative, and significant at the 5% level
for 2 of the 4 similarity measures. For example, in Column 8 of Table VIII, the coefficient


                                    Lazy Prices — Page 23
on this interaction term is negative and significant (=-0.0953, t=2.05), implying a reduction
of -0.0136 (or 22% less) in the predictability of Similarity for a 1 standard deviation increase
in the number of unique IP addresses that check the changes in 10-Ks/10-Qs. We view
these results as providing suggestive evidence that when investor attention to year-over-
year corporate filings is higher, the return predictability results we document in this paper
are somewhat weaker.23

        In Table IX we dig even deeper into the nature of the investor inattention by trying
to pinpoint the precise manner in which markets fail to incorporate changes in “qualitative”
information as opposed to quantitative information. To do so, we attempt to isolate those
firms who make explicitly comparative statements in the text of their annual and quarterly
filings, and compare them to firms who do not. For instance, we isolate all the cases where
firms include text and phrases like “compared to last year (quarter)” or “relative to last
year (quarter)” as well as references to the prior year (e.g., for a 2017 annual report, we
isolate mentions such as “compared to 2016” or “relative to prior year”); the list of
comparative phrases we employ is shown in Panel B of Table IX. This procedure indicates
that roughly 1/3 of the sample contains reports that make explicit comparative textual
statements in their filings, while 2/3 of firm-filings do not. We then further divide this
comparative sample into the firms that make explicit textual comparisons to specific
accounting variables (e.g., “relative to prior year EBITDA”, etc.), with those who do not.

        We find that our primary return predictability results are driven by the firms who
do not make explicit textual comparisons in their filings to prior time periods. Our results
are consistent with the behavioral interpretation that firms that explicitly draw attention
to prior years in their text and actively facilitate superior information processing on the
part of investors are less likely to have changes in their reports go un-noticed by the
markets; indeed, in Table IX we show that our basic return predictability portfolio result
from Table II is concentrated among the firms who do not make these kinds of explicit


23
   We also look at filing dates when investors are potentially distracted (as in Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh
(2006)), by examining filing dates with over 100 earnings announcements on that same date (which we view
as high distraction, hence low attention days), relative to filing dates with fewer than 100 earnings
announcements. We show in Appendix Table A-10 that the return predictability associated with these high-
distraction filing dates (the L/S portfolio spread is equal to 47 basis points per month, t=2.75); and is indeed
higher than the return predictability associated with low distraction filing dates (where the L/S portfolio
spread average 30 basis points, t=1.43); again these results are consistent with investor inattention serving
as an important driver of our findings.

                                          Lazy Prices — Page 24
comparisons.

       In addition, we also find that the short-run announcement effect of document
changes is significantly more pronounced for those firms that have investors who do make
the multi-year downloads on the SEC server (see Appendix Table A-8). Recall that we
previously showed that the longer-term predictability results were weaker for these firms,
but a natural implication of these findings is that the short-run announcement effects
should plausibly then be stronger.       More precisely, while we find that there is no
announcement effect overall in our sample associated with document changes, and no
announcement effect for the firms where investors are not downloading multi-year filings;
we find that there is a significant short-run announcement effect associated with document
changes for the firms where investors are executing multi-year downloads. Since these firms
plausibly have an investor base that is more attentive to the year-on-year document
changes (as proxied for by our multi-year SEC download measure), it is sensible that the
immediate announcement effects associated with document changes would be more
pronounced for these firms, as investors (and prices) quickly respond to these changes.



E. Real Effects

       To explore the drivers of the return predictability results at the heart of our paper,
we also examine the extent to which changes in document similarity predict declines in
future operating performance at the firms in question.         In Table X, we explore the
predictability of a firm’s similarity score for future operating income, net income, and sales.
All the future accounting variables are measured 2-quarters ahead. Specifically, we define
the following real measures of performance: (Oibdpq/L1atq) as operating income before
depreciation (Oidbpq) divided by lagged total assets (L1atq); (Niq/L1atq) as net income
(Niq) divided by lagged total assets (L1atq); and (Saleq/L1atq) as sales (Saleq) divided by
lagged total assets (L1atq). All of these accounting variables are winsorized at the 1% level
throughout the table, and these regressions include month, industry, and firm fixed effects.
We also adjust the standard errors for clustering at the monthly level.

       Consistent with the idea that the return effects we document in this paper are driven
by future real declines in operating performance at the firms in question, Table X shows


                                   Lazy Prices — Page 25
that all four similarity measures significantly predict these three measures of operating
performance (profitability, operating profitability, and sales). For example, focusing on the
Sim_Jaccard measure in the first row of Table X, we see that decreased similarity (i.e.,
more changes in the filings) is a significant predictor of lower future operating income,
lower net income, and lower sales. These findings highlight the fact that the subtle changes
to the filings that we identify in this paper are associated with fundamental changes at
these firms.



F. Other Sorts and Tests of the Mechanism

        We also run a slew of additional tests that we now tabulate in the Appendix of this
paper. For example, we run additional double-sorts of our portfolio tests, such as for
samples of high and low levels of Sentiment, Uncertainty, and Litigiousness, where “low”
and “high” are defined as less than the median and higher than median, respectively. For
each pair of Low and High samples, we compute quintile portfolios similar to Table II.
Appendix Table A-2 shows that the return results documented earlier are concentrated in
the Low Sentiment, High Uncertainty, and High Litigiousness subsamples.24 For instance,
the L/S 5-factor alpha for the Jaccard similarity measure is 71 basis points per month
(t=3.29) in the High Litigiousness subsample, and 72 basis points per month (t=3.51) in
the High Uncertainty subsample, or over 8% in abnormal returns per year.

        Moreover, in Appendix Table A-4 we drop all instances of special events from the
data (e.g., years of M&A, joint ventures, divestitures, or strategic alliances). These are
cases in which mechanically there would be changes in 10-Ks and 10-Qs, and we do not
want to be capturing a continuation of any return impacts of these special events. From
Appendix Table A-4, our results remain strong, robust, and statistically significant upon
dropping these special events from the sample.

        We also examine if document changes predict a wide variety of other types of
changes for the firms in question, ranging from future news releases, changes in investor
behavior, to other notable events at these companies. In particular, Appendix Table A-7

24
   Appendix Table A-3 also examines the impact of specific law firms that corporations employ to file their
10-Ks, and provides suggestive evidence that in-house lawyers are associated with more year-on-year changes
in filings.

                                        Lazy Prices — Page 26
reports the predictability of a firm’s similarity score on a firm’s future 8-K releases, short
interest, earnings surprises (SUEs), and future bankruptcy events. We find suggestive
evidence that decreases in year-over-year similarity predict: increases in the number of
future 8-Ks; increases in future short interest; negative earnings surprises in the future; and
increases in the number of future bankruptcies. Collectively, these results suggest that
document changes have some ability to forecast future (bad) news at the firms in question.

        Next we investigate the idea that textual similarity may be related to the life cycle
of the firm. To measure the life cycle of a firm, we follow Spence (1979), Kotler (1980), and
Anthony and Ramesh (1992) and use these four variables as proxies for a firm life cycle
stage: (1) annual dividend as a percentage of income, (2) percent sales growth, (3) capital
expenditure normalize by total asset, and (4) age of the firm. We then run a regression of
our Jaccard similarity on the lagged five-year average of depreciation rate, sales growth,
capital expenditure, and age. The regression is run over the entire sample from 1994 to
2014, and the results are shown in Appendix Table A-11. We find that depreciation rate
and age of a firm are negatively related to Jaccard similarity and sales growth and capital
expenditure are positively related to Jaccard similarity. This suggests that firms
increasingly modify their financial disclosures as they mature.25



G. Additional Robustness Checks

        Lastly, we perform a series of robustness checks to ensure that our key findings are
not simply repackaging a set of previously known return predictors. To do so, we re-run
the Fama-MacBeth regressions from Table IV, but include a series of additional firm-level
characteristics, such as accruals (to ensure that the accruals anomaly (see Sloan (1996)) is
not driving our findings), investment, gross profitability, and free cash flow. Table XI
indicates that none of these variables drive out the return predictability associated with
changes to a firm’s reporting practices (as captured by our similarity scores).26

      We then also directly examine the impact of industry concentration in the results we

25
   We also decompose the Jaccard similarity measure into the expected and unexpected components based on
the above predictors for a firm’s life cycle. We find that the unexpected component of Jaccard similarity is
slightly stronger, both in terms of magnitude and statistical significance, in predicting future stock returns.
26
   In addition, to examine omitted variable biases — and their potential impacts on our estimation — in more
depth we follow Oster (2016) and Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005) to evaluate the robustness to omitted

                                         Lazy Prices — Page 27
document. In particular, we test whether the results we document are concentrated in any
specific industry (or industries) which are driving the results for the whole sample. For
instance, if all “changers” were coming from a certain industry, and “non-changers” from
another, we’d simply be longing and shorting different industries. To control for this, we
run an industry-adjusted version of the calendar-time portfolios of Table II. Namely, within
each industry, we sort that industry into Q1-Q5 based on changes in documents. We then
aggregate each industry’s Q1 —Q5 portfolios together into market wide Q1-Q5, now
equivalently representing each industry by construction. Appendix Table A-5 shows that
the results are strong and significant after making the industry adjustment, suggesting the
changes in documents results we find are not linked to specific industries.

      We confirm that our results are not affected by including so-called “stop words” (see
Loughran and McDonald (2011)), or by our particular filtering of the SEC filings; for
example, when we remove stop words and use the cleaned 10-K/10-Q publicly available
database provided by Loughran and McDonald (2011),27 we show in Appendix Table A-14
that our main portfolio results are even larger and more significant than those reported in
Table II.

      Collectively our findings indicate that these subtle changes in firms’ reporting behavior
have substantial predictability for future returns in a manner that has not previously been
documented in the literature.



                                             V.    Conclusion

        In this paper we show that the most comprehensive annual information windows
that firms provide to the markets — in the form of their mandated, annual reports — have
changed dramatically over time: these reports have become significantly longer and more
complex. Moreover, while past literature has found a diminishing announcement effect to
these statements, concluding that they have become less informative over time, our
evidence points to a different conclusion. Namely, we find that observing simple changes


variable bias by observing coefficient and R-squared movements after inclusion of controls. We show this in
Appendix Table A-6, which shows that the predictability between changes in documents and future returns
(Similarity) are unlikely to be significantly impacted by omitted variable concerns.
27
   http://sraf.nd.edu/textual-analysis/resources/

                                        Lazy Prices — Page 28
in reports yields a powerful, and robust indicator of future firm performance, from future
short sales, to profitability, to probability of bankruptcy. When firms break from their
routine phrasing and content - breaking from former language, sections, etc. in their annual
and quarterly reports — this action contains rich, important information for future firm
outcomes.

       However, investors are inattentive to the valuable information in these simple
changes.    A portfolio that shorts “changers” and buys “non-changers” in annual and
quarterly financial reports earns 30-50 basis points per month over the following year. The
returns continue to accrue out to 18 months, and do not reverse; this finding suggests that
these return movements are not overreactions, but instead reflect true, fundamental
changes to firms that only get gradually incorporated into asset prices over the 12-18
months after the reporting change. Importantly, these return patterns are found across the
entire universe of publicly traded firms (since public companies are mandated to file annual
reports), exist in large firms, inexpensive to short firms, and take place over months, and
so are unlikely to be driven by a limit to arbitrage. Moreover, unlike other traditional drift
regularities (e.g., return momentum, industry momentum, PEAD), these document changes
are not accompanied by any significant announcement returns, and so are inconsistent with
a standard underreaction story (as there is no initial reaction). Instead, they are more
consistent with a setting where investors are inattentive to this rich information, which is
then only impounded into prices with a significant delay. Indeed, when we measure
investors’ propensity to “compare” this year’s filings to prior years–and hence explicitly
overcome the laziness/inattention mechanism that we propose in this paper–we find that
the returns are significantly attenuated.

       Technological advancements reducing the cost of information production and
dissemination have made the job of a Grossman Stiglitz investor more complex. And while
technology could also aid in the collection and processing of this same information, we show
that far from needing complicated state-of-the-art solutions, simple changes in documents
from year-to-year contain powerful information that is seemingly being ignored by the
capital markets. This insight likely applies more broadly to other forms of transmitted firm
information. Documents such as bond covenants, lease arrangements, securities offering
documents, M&A prospectuses — i.e., documents for which there is a regular cadence and


                                   Lazy Prices — Page 29
repeated use — may be rich places for researchers to explore further. More broadly, the
implications of breaks from repeated behaviors in the corporate setting provide a critical,
yet understudied area, in both corporate finance and asset pricing.




                                  Lazy Prices — Page 30
References


Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber, 2005, Selection on Observed
and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools, Journal of
Political Economy 113, 151—184.

Barron, Orie E., Charles O. Kile, and Terrence B. O’Keefe, 1999, MD&A Quality as
Measured by the SEC and Analysts’ Earnings Forecasts, Contemporary Accounting
Research 16, 75—109.

Ben-Raphael, Azi, Zhi Da, and Ryan Israelson, 2017, It depends on where you search:
Institutional investor attention and underreaction to news, Review of Financial Studies 30,
3009-3047.

Brown, Stephen V., and Jennifer Wu Tucker, 2011, Large-Sample Evidence on Firms’
Year-over-Year MD&A Modifications, Journal of Accounting Research 49, 309—346.

Bryan, Stephen H., 1997, Incremental information content of required disclosures
contained in management discussion and analysis, Accounting Review 72, 285—301.

Chen, Huaizhi, Lauren Cohen, Dong Lou, and Christopher J Malloy, 2017, IQ from IP:
Simplifying Search in Portfolio Choice, Working Paper, Harvard Business School.

Clarkson, Peter M, Jennifer L. Kao, and Gordon D. Richardson, 1999, Evidence That
Management Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) is a Part of a Firm’s Overall Disclosure
Package, Contemporary Accounting Research 16, 111—134.

Cole, C. J., and C. L. Jones, 2005, Management Discussion and Analysis: A review and
Implications for Future Research, Journal of Accounting Literature 24, 135—174.

Da, Zhi, Joey Engelberg, and Pengjie Gao, 2011, In search of attention, Journal of
Finance 66, 1461-1499.

Das, S. R. (2014). Text and Context: Language Analytics in Finance. Foundations and
Trends in Finance, 8(3), 145-261.

Dyer, Travis, Mark Lang, and Lorien Stice-Lawrence, 2017, The evolution of 10-K textual
disclosure: Evidence from Latent Dirichlet Allocation, Journal of Accounting and
Economics 64, 221-245.

Engelberg, Joey, 2008, Costly information processing: Evidence from earnings
announcements, Working Paper, University of California at San Diego.

Engelberg, Joey, Caroline Sasseville, and Jared Williams, 2012, Market madness? The
case of Mad Money, Management Science 58, 351-364.



                                  Lazy Prices — Page 31
Feldman, Ronen, Suresh Govindaraj, Joshua Livnat, and Benjamin Segal, 2010,
Management’s Tone Change, Post Earnings Announcement Drift and Accruals, Review of
Accounting Studies 15, 915—953.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1976, Information and Competitive Price
Systems, American Economic Review 66, 246—253.

Hanley, Kathleen W., and Gerard Hoberg, 2010, The information content of IPO
prospectuses, Review of Financial Studies 23, 2821-2864.

Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Seongyeon Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2009, Driven to
distraction: Extraneous events and underreaction to earnings news, Journal of Finance
64, 2289-2325.

Lee, Yen-Jung, 2012, The effect of quarterly report readability on information efficiency
of stock prices, Contemporary Accounting Research 29, 1137-1170.

Li, Feng, 2008, Annual Report Readability, Current Earnings, and Earnings Persistence,
Journal of Accounting and Economics 45, 221—247.

Li, Feng, 2010a, The Information Content of Forward-Looking Statements in Corporate
Filings - A Naïve Bayesian Machine Learning Approach, Journal of Accounting Research
48, 1049—1102.

Li, Feng, 2010b, Do Stock Market Investors Understand the Risk Sentiment of Corporate
Annual Reports? Working Paper, Shanghai Jiaotong University.

Li, Feng, 2011, Textual Analysis of Corporate Disclosures: A Survey of the Literature,
Journal of Accounting Literature 29, 143-165.

Livnat, Joshua and Richard Mendenhall, 2006, Comparing the post-earnings
announcement drift for surprises calculated from analyst and time series forecasts,
Journal of Accounting Research 44, 177-205.

Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald, 2011, When Is a Liability Not a Liability? Textual
Analysis, Dictionaries, and 10-Ks, Journal of Finance 66, 35—65.

Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald, 2016, Textual analysis in accounting and finance: A
survey, Journal of Accounting Research 54, 1187-1230.

Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald, 2017, The Use of EDGAR Filings by Investors,
Journal of Behavioral Finance 18, 231—248.

Muslu, Volkan, Suresh Radhakrishnan, K. R. Subramanyam, and Dongkuk Lim, 2015,
Forward-Looking MD&A Disclosures and the Information Environment, Management
Science 61, 931—948.



                                  Lazy Prices — Page 32
Nelson, Karen K., and Adam C. Pritchard, 2007, Litigation Risk and Voluntary
Disclosure: The Use of Meaningful Cautionary Language, Working Paper, Texas
Christian University.

Oster, Emily, 2017, Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and
Evidence, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 0, 1-18.

Rogers, Rodney K., and Julia Grant, 1997, Content Analysis of Information Cited in
Reports of Sell-Side Financial Analysts, Journal of Financial Statement Analysis 3, 17-30.

Sloan, Richard G, 1996, Do Stock Prices Fully Reflect Information in Accruals and Cash
Flows About Future Earnings? The Accounting Review 71, 289—315.

Tetlock, Paul C., 2007, Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the
stock market, Journal of Finance 62, 1139-1168.

Tetlock, Paul C., Maytal Saar-Tsechansky, and Sofus Macskassy, 2008, More than words:
Quantifying language to measure firms’ fundamentals, Journal of Finance 63, 1437-1467.

Tetlock, Paul C., 2011, All the news that’s fit to reprint: Do investors react to stale
information?, Review of Financial Studies 24, 1481-1512.

Tetlock, Paul C., 2014, Information transmission in finance, Annual Review of Financial
Economics 6, 365-384.




                                   Lazy Prices — Page 33
                             Table I: Summary Statistics on Firms 10‐Ks and 10‐Qs
Panel A reports the summary statistics of 10‐Ks and 10‐Qs from 1995 to 2014. Document Size is the number of
words in each document. Sentiment of Change is the number of negative words in Change normalized by the
number of words of the Change, where Change is additions, deletions, and changes identified by the function
“diff” in Unix/Linux, or the function “Track Changes” in Microsoft Word. Uncertainty of Change and Litigiousness
of Change are the number of words categorized as uncertainty and litigiousness, respectively, normalized by
the size of the Change. Change CEO and Change CFO are indicator variables that equal to one if the 10‐K or 10‐
Q mentions a change in CEO or CFO, respectively. Sentiment category identifiers (e.g., negative, uncertainty,
litigious) are taken from Loughran and McDonald (2011)’s Master Dictionary. Panel B reports the summary
statistics of four different measures of document similarity. Panel C reports the correlation between the four
similarity measures used in this paper. Sim_Cosine is the cosine similarity measure, Sim_Jaccard is the Jaccard
similarity measure, Sim_MinEdit is the minimum edit distance similarity measure, and Sim_Simple is the simple
side‐by‐side comparison. Details on how we compute the four similarity measures can be found in the Data
section.

                                       Count        Mean               SD          1%           50%         99%
 Document Size – 10-K             86,965        44508.81         36479           7573         35787      180388
 Document Size – 10-Q            258,271          15805.9    20542.78            1327         10674       97521
 Sentiment of Change             345639            .07736    .0179074               0       .000146     .003503
 Uncertainty of Change           345639         .0005234     .0110212               0     .0001286    .0026464
 Litigiousness of Change         345639         .0009594       .016019              0     .0000668    .0051982
 Change CEO                      345639         .0556158     .2291785               0             0           1
 Change CFO                      345639         .0242542     .1538377               0             0           1



                              Panel B: Summary Statistics on Similarity Measures
                              Count       Mean         SD   1%                   50%         99%
          Sim_Cosine          327130      .8721032 .1910398 .1367042              .947125    .9951641
          Sim_Jaccard         327130      .3948525 .190596 .0364943              .4108108     .765858
          Sim_MinEdit         327130      .3763384 .1714118 .0516403             .3927964    .7649283
          Sim_Simple          327130      .1464663 .0927251 .0427717             .1171773    .4283921



                                                Panel C: Correlation
                                      Sim_Cosine    Sim_Jaccard    Sim_MinEdit     Sim_Simple
                 Sim_Cosine            1.0000
                 Sim_Jaccard           0.6049          1.0000
                 Sim_MinEdit           0.5031          0.7921           1.0000
                 Sim_Simple            0.2076          0.4815           0.5834          1.0000
                                                            Table II: Main Results – Calendar Time Portfolio Returns
           This Table reports the calendar‐time portfolio returns. Portfolio returns are multiplied by 100. Sim_Cosine is the cosine similarity measure, Sim_Jaccard
           is the Jaccard similarity measure, Sim_MinEdit is the minimum edit distance similarity measure, and Sim_Simple is the simple side‐by‐side comparison.
           For each of the four similarity measures, we compute quintiles based on the prior year’s distribution of similarity measures across all stocks. Stocks then
           enter the quintile portfolios in the month after the public release of one of their 10‐K or 10‐Q reports. Stocks are held in the portfolio for 3 months. We
           report Excess Returns (return minus risk free rate), Fama‐French 3‐factor Alphas (market, size, and value), and 5‐factor Alphas (market, size, value,
           momentum, and liquidity). Panel A reports equal‐weight portfolio returns, and Panel B reports value‐weight portfolio returns. t‐statistics are shown below
           the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                           Panel A: Equally Weighted
                                  Sim_Cosine                                                                                   Sim_Jaccard
             Q1          Q2           Q3         Q4          Q5        Q5 – Q1                      Q1             Q2         Q3         Q4             Q5               Q5 – Q1
Excess     0.63*       0.72*       0.72**      0.85**      0.92***     0.31***          Excess            0.59       0.67*      0.69*       0.82**        0.98***          0.38***
Return     (1.68)      (1.96)       (2.11)     (2.59)      (2.80)       (3.13)          Return           (1.48)     (1.74)     (1.89)       (2.35)         (3.01)           (2.65)

3‐Factor   ‐0.15**      ‐0.08       ‐0.05       0.09       0.18***      0.34***         3‐Factor       ‐0.16**       ‐0.10      ‐0.06         0.08         0.28***         0.44***
Alpha      (‐2.19)     (‐1.10)     (‐0.72)     (1.21)      (2.66)       (4.45)          Alpha          (‐1.99)      (‐1.22)    (‐0.81)       (1.05)        (3.47)          (4.56)

5‐Factor   ‐0.12*       ‐0.05       ‐0.04       0.10       0.21***      0.32***         5‐Factor         ‐0.14*      ‐0.07      ‐0.06         0.09         0.28***         0.42***
Alpha      (‐1.75)     (‐0.74)     (‐0.53)     (1.29)      (3.28)       (4.21)          Alpha            (‐1.84)    (‐0.93)    (‐0.86)       (1.19)        (3.57)          (4.31)
                                 Sim_MinEdit                                                                                    Sim_Simple
             Q1          Q2          Q3          Q4          Q5        Q5 – Q1                      Q1             Q2         Q3          Q4            Q5               Q5 – Q1
Excess      0.61       0.66*        0.70*      0.86**      0.99***     0.36***          Excess           0.72*      0.79**     0.82**       0.90***       0.90***            0.18
Return     (1.60)      (1.78)      (1.94)      (2.58)      (3.36)       (2.69)          Return           (1.87)     (2.12)     (2.34)        (2.73)        (3.04)           (1.20)

3‐Factor   ‐0.19**     ‐0.14*       ‐0.10       0.10       0.30***      0.48***         3‐Factor          ‐0.08      ‐0.02       0.03        0.14**        0.20**          0.28***
Alpha      (‐2.56)     (‐1.91)     (‐1.52)     (1.37)      (4.00)       (5.96)          Alpha            (‐1.09)    (‐0.21)     (0.38)       (2.01)        (2.57)          (3.22)

5‐Factor   ‐0.15**      ‐0.11       ‐0.08      0.12*       0.30***      0.45***         5‐Factor          ‐0.06      0.03        0.04        0.16**        0.21***         0.27***
Alpha      (‐2.14)     (‐1.59)     (‐1.31)     (1.70)      (4.11)       (5.46)          Alpha            (‐0.89)    (0.37)      (0.63)       (2.30)        (2.68)          (3.01)
                                                                 Panel B: Value Weighted
                               Sim_Cosine                                                                       Sim_Jaccard
             Q1        Q2          Q3          Q4       Q5      Q5 ‐ Q1                      Q1         Q2          Q3          Q4       Q5     Q5 ‐ Q1
Excess      0.43      0.47       0.55*       0.73**   0.78**    0.34**        Excess        0.23       0.32        0.48       0.61*    0.79**   0.56***
Return     (1.32)    (1.45)      (1.74)      (2.35)   (2.40)    (2.53)        Return       (0.64)     (0.88)      (1.33)      (1.84)   (2.47)   (3.75)


3‐Factor   ‐0.15*    ‐0.15*       ‐0.04       0.10    0.20*     0.35***       3‐Factor     ‐0.32***    ‐0.21      ‐0.09        0.07    0.23**   0.54***
Alpha      (‐1.84)   (‐1.79)     (‐0.49)     (1.17)   (1.97)    (2.63)        Alpha         (‐2.97)   (‐1.30)    (‐0.73)      (0.60)   (2.01)   (4.08)


5‐Factor    ‐0.12    ‐0.19**      ‐0.06       0.12    0.23**    0.34**        5‐Factor     ‐0.23**     ‐0.17      ‐0.07        0.13    0.23**   0.46***
Alpha      (‐1.38)   (‐2.13)     (‐0.64)     (1.36)   (2.23)    (2.53)        Alpha        (‐2.20)    (‐1.04)    (‐0.59)      (1.18)   (2.11)   (3.44)
                               Sim_MinEdit                                                                      Sim_Simple
             Q1        Q2          Q3          Q4       Q5      Q5 ‐ Q1                      Q1        Q2           Q3          Q4       Q5     Q5 ‐ Q1
Excess      0.42      0.45        0.62*      0.76**   0.83***   0.39**        Excess        0.24      0.61*       0.77**      0.78**   0.74**   0.50***
Return     (1.25)    (1.38)      (1.88)      (2.42)   (2.92)    (2.31)        Return       (0.69)     (1.88)      (2.45)      (2.53)   (2.48)   (2.69)


3‐Factor   ‐0.18**   ‐0.16*       ‐0.01      0.17*    0.28**    0.46***       3‐Factor     ‐0.39***    0.02       0.18*       0.19*     0.19    0.58***
Alpha      (‐2.29)   (‐1.91)     (‐0.14)     (1.74)   (2.49)    (3.06)        Alpha         (‐3.89)   (0.18)      (1.87)      (1.88)   (1.45)   (3.59)


5‐Factor   ‐0.17**   ‐0.14*       0.00       0.17*    0.21*     0.37**        5‐Factor     ‐0.36***    0.05       0.18*       0.18*     0.15    0.51***
Alpha      (‐2.02)   (‐1.67)     (0.04)      (1.78)   (1.84)    (2.45)        Alpha         (‐3.49)   (0.66)      (1.78)      (1.71)   (1.15)   (3.14)
                               Table III: Characteristics of Quintile Portfolios
This table reports mean Market Value of Equity (determined at the end of the months when the quintile cut‐
off points are determined, in $1000 dollars), Monthly turnover, Shorting fees, and Sentiment of Change, of the
five quintile portfolios.

                                          Q1          Q2           Q3          Q4           Q5
            Market Value of Equity    3507587      3219430      2829955     2504717      2464603
            Monthly turnover            0.0663      0.0850       0.0804      0.0867       0.0706
            Shorting fees (bps)        71.6958     80.6361      92.0500      87.0690     73.5453
            Sentiment of Change        0.0016       0.0008       0.0006      0.0005       0.0004
                                                    Table IV: Main Results – Fama MacBeth Regressions
   This Table reports the Fama‐MacBeth cross‐sectional regressions of individual firm‐level stock returns on our four similarity measures and a host of
   known return predictors. Return, the dependent variable, is multiplied by 100. Sim_Cosine is the cosine similarity measure, Sim_Jaccard is the Jaccard
   similarity measure, Sim_MinEdit is the minimum edit distance similarity measure, and Sim_Simple is the simple side‐by‐side comparison. Size is log of
   market value of equity, log(BM) is log book value of equity over market value of equity, Ret(‐1,0) is previous month’s return, and Ret(‐12, ‐1) is the
   cumulative return from month ‐12 to month ‐1. SUE is the standardized unexpected earnings and computed as actual earnings per share minus average
   analyst forecast earnings per share, divided by the standard deviation of forecasts. t‐statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance
   at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                 (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)             (7)       (8)         (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)
                                                                                         Ret
Sim_Cosine     0.45***      0.31**       0.37**
               (2.65)       (2.51)       (2.18)
Sim_Jaccard                                          0.82***     0.66***      0.59***
                                                     (3.26)       (3.82)       (3.41)
Sim_MinEdit                                                                                    0.54**   0.41***      0.29**
                                                                                               (2.54)   (2.78)       (2.00)
Sim_Simple                                                                                                                       0.04**       0.03**       0.03**
                                                                                                                                 (2.10)       (2.25)       (2.11)
Size                         0.00         0.00                     0.01         0.01                     0.01         0.01                     0.01         0.00
                            (0.11)       (0.05)                   (0.25)       (0.11)                   (0.26)       (0.10)                   (0.24)       (0.05)
log(BM)                     0.17*        0.16*                    0.17*        0.16*                    0.17*        0.16*                    0.17*        0.16*
                            (1.89)       (1.71)                   (1.88)       (1.70)                    (1.90)      (1.72)                   (1.87)       (1.70)
Ret(‐1,0)                  ‐0.03***     ‐0.02***                 ‐0.03***     ‐0.02***                  ‐0.03***    ‐0.02***                 ‐0.03***     ‐0.02***
                            (‐3.93)      (‐3.68)                  (‐3.97)      (‐3.70)                   (‐3.97)     (‐3.69)                  (‐3.99)      (‐3.71)
Ret(‐12,‐1)                 0.64**        0.36                    0.64**        0.36                     0.64**       0.36                    0.64**        0.37
                            (2.34)      (1.25)                    (2.34)      (1.25)                    (2.34)      (1.24)                    (2.35)      (1.29)
SUE                                     0.07***                               0.07***                               0.07***                               0.07***
                                        (6.56)                                (6.54)                                (6.56)                                (6.60)
Cons            0.58         0.58        0.67         0.64         0.46        0.69            0.76**    0.57        0.84         ‐0.02        ‐0.02       ‐0.01
               (1.45)       (0.67)      (0.57)       (1.64)       (0.52)      (0.58)           (1.98)   (0.64)      (0.71)       (‐1.31)      (‐1.02)     (‐0.71)

R‐Squared       0.00        0.04         0.05         0.00        0.04         0.05             0.00     0.04        0.05         0.00        0.04         0.05
N              713451      713451       496084       713451      713451       496084           713451   713451      496084       713680      713680       495931
                                         Table V: Potential Mechanism
This Table explores the potential mechanism behind our results. We regress our similarity measure on a host
of characteristics of the document in question. Sim_Simple, the dependent variable, is multiplied by 100.
Sentiment of Change is the number of negative words in Change normalized by the number of words of the
Change, where Change is computed as the number of additions, deletions, and changes identified from the
function “diff” in Unix/Linux, or the function “Track Changes” in Microsoft Word. Uncertainty of Change and
Litigiousness of Change are the number of words categorized as uncertainty and litigiousness, respectively,
normalized by the size of the Change. Change CEO and Change CFO are indicator variables that equal to one if
the 10‐K or 10‐Q mentions a change in CEO or CFO, respectively. Sentiment category identifiers (e.g., negative,
uncertainty, and litigious) are taken from Loughran and McDonald (2011)’s Master Dictionary. All regressions
include firm fixed effects and month fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. t‐statistics are
shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **,
and *, respectively.



                                 (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)
                                                                  Sim_Simple
 Sentiment of Change          ‐2.49***
                               (‐37.83)
 Uncertainty of Change                           ‐3.57***
                                                 (‐34.15)
 Litigiousness of Change                                           ‐0.12**
                                                                    (‐2.11)
 Change CEO                                                                          ‐0.01***
                                                                                      (‐7.10)
 Change CFO                                                                                            ‐0.01***
                                                                                                        (‐5.75)
 Cons                          0.18***           0.19***           0.18***            0.18***           0.18***
                               (28.52)           (17.40)           (17.25)            (17.31)           (17.29)


 Firm Fixed Effect               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
 Time Fixed Effect               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
 R‐Squared                      0.06               0.07              0.07              0.07              0.06
 N                             338138            338138            338138            338138             338138




                                                            \
            Table VI: Fama MacBeth Regressions, Controlling for Sentiment and Document Size
This Table reports the Fama‐MacBeth cross‐sectional regressions of individual firm‐level stock returns on our
Sim_Jaccard similarity measures and a host of known return predictors. Return, the dependent variable, is
multiplied by 100. Sim_Jaccard is the Jaccard similarity measure. Sentiment of Change is Positive is the number
of positive words in the change, normalized by the size of the Change, where Change is additions, deletions, and
changes identified from the function “diff” in Unix/Linux, or the function “Track Changes” in Microsoft Word.
Size is log of market value of equity, log(BM) is log book value of equity over market value of equity, Ret(‐1,0)
is previous month’s return, and Ret(‐12, ‐1) is the cumulative return from month ‐12 to month ‐1. Log(Document
Size) is the logarithm of the number of words in a document. Δ Log(Document Size) is the quarter‐on‐quarter
change in Log(Document Size). t‐statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.


                                                              (1)              (2)               (3)
                                                                                Ret
      Sim_Jaccard                                           0.57***          0.58***           0.58***
                                                             (3.45)           (3.78)            (3.82)
      Sentiment of Change is Positive                       0.19***          0.21***           0.21***
                                                             (3.85)           (4.21)            (4.33)
      Log(Document Size)                                                       0.01             0.03
                                                                              (0.65)            (1.40)
      Δ Log(Document Size)                                                                     ‐0.41**
                                                                                               (‐2.30)
      Size                                                    0.00             0.00             ‐0.00
                                                             (0.10)           (0.07)           (‐0.01)
      log(BM)                                                 0.17             0.16             0.16
                                                             (1.64)          (1.5858)         (1.5471)
      Ret(‐1,0)                                             ‐0.03***         ‐0.03***          ‐0.03***
                                                            (‐4.15)           (‐4.19)          (‐4.20)
      Ret(‐12,‐1)                                           0.74***          0.74***           0.74***
                                                             (2.71)           (2.70)            (2.69)
      Cons                                                    0.55             0.41             0.25
                                                             (0.60)           (0.48)            (0.30)
      R‐Squared                                             0.0437            0.0445           0.0448
      N                                                     713451           713451            713451
                                                    Table VII: Portfolio Sorts ‐ By Document Section
This Table reports the calendar‐time portfolio returns for the common sections of firms’ 10‐K and 10‐Q financial reports: Management’s Discussion and
Analysis, Legal Proceedings, Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk, Risk Factors, and Other Information. Portfolio returns are
multiplied by 100. Similarity measures for each section are computed using only the textual portion in that section. For each of the four similarity
measures, we compute quintiles based on the prior year’s distribution of similarity measures across all stocks. Stocks then enter the quintile portfolio in
the month after the public release of one of their 10‐K or 10‐Q reports. Firms are held in the portfolio for 3 months. We report Excess Returns (return
minus risk free rate), Fama‐French 3‐factor Alphas (market, size, and value), and 5‐factor Alphas (market, size, value, momentum, and liquidity) of the
top minus bottom quintile portfolio (Q5 – Q1). Panel A reports equal‐weight portfolio returns, and Panel B reports value‐weight portfolio returns. t‐
statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
                                                                  Panel A: Equally Weighted
                                                              Sim_Cosine                                             Sim_Jaccard
                                        Excess Return       3‐Factor Alpha 5‐Factor Alpha       Excess Return      3‐Factor Alpha 5‐Factor Alpha
       Management’s Discussion and            0.13                0.11*             0.12*           0.21**              0.22***             0.20***
       Analysis                              (1.57)              (1.66)            (1.68)            (2.51)             (3.15)               (2.81)
                                            0.36**               0.37***           0.33***            0.28              0.30**               0.25*
       Legal Proceedings
                                             (2.24)              (3.09)            (2.70)            (1.57)             (2.36)               (1.93)
       Quant. and Qual. Disclosures         0.69***              0.68***           0.68***          0.20**              0.21***             0.19***
       About Market Risk                     (2.75)              (2.69)            (2.65)            (2.37)             (2.96)               (2.60)
                                              0.01                0.01              0.01            0.01**              0.01**              0.02***
       Risk Factors
                                             (1.61)              (1.63)            (1.64)            (2.13)             (2.45)               (2.76)
                                              0.20                0.27              0.36*            0.31*              0.37**               0.40**
       Other Information
                                             (1.08)              (1.47)            (1.92)            (1.78)             (2.19)               (2.30)
                                                             Sim_MinEdit                                              Sim_Simple
                                        Excess Return       3‐Factor Alpha 5‐Factor Alpha       Excess Return      3‐Factor Alpha 5‐Factor Alpha
       Management’s Discussion and           0.18*               0.22***           0.19***          0.19***             0.19**               0.17**
       Analysis                              (1.95)              (3.16)            (2.67)            (2.67)             (2.54)               (2.32)
                                              0.22               0.25**             0.22*             0.13                0.16                0.12
       Legal Proceedings
                                             (1.27)              (2.30)            (1.93)            (0.82)             (1.41)               (1.10)
       Quant. and Qual. Disclosures           0.16                0.23*             0.22*             0.13                0.11                0.07
       About Market Risk                     (1.18)              (1.74)            (1.67)            (0.16)             (0.13)               (0.08)
                                              0.01               0.02***           0.01**            0.01*              0.02**               0.02**
       Risk Factors
                                             (1.19)              (2.77)            (2.17)            (1.93)             (2.19)               (2.12)
                                              0.09                0.14              0.16              0.22              0.26**               0.22*
       Other Information
                                             (0.58)              (0.97)            (1.05)            (1.27)             (2.31)               (1.95)
                                                     Panel B: Value Weighted
                                                 Sim_Cosine                                     Sim_Jaccard
                               Excess Return   3‐Factor Alpha 5‐Factor Alpha   Excess Return   3‐Factor Alpha   5‐Factor Alpha
Management’s Discussion and        0.27*            0.28*             0.22        0.47***          0.43***          0.33**
Analysis                          (1.80)           (1.85)            (1.42)       (2.88)           (2.63)           (2.02)
                                   0.35*            0.32              0.32         0.18              0.10            0.05
Legal Proceedings
                                  (1.66)           (1.53)            (1.47)       (0.81)           (0.46)           (0.21)
Quant. and Qual. Disclosures       0.39             0.44              0.45        0.47***          0.42***          0.38**
About Market Risk                 (1.40)           (1.57)            (1.62)       (2.89)           (2.60)           (2.37)
                                   0.01*           0.02**            0.02**        0.01*         0.0165***         0.0156**
Risk Factors
                                  (1.96)           (2.69)            (2.05)       (1.90)           (2.75)           (2.57)
                                  0.73**           0.75**            0.80**        0.54              0.49            0.43
Other Information
                                  (2.13)           (2.21)            (2.30)       (1.56)           (1.42)           (1.20)
                                                Sim_MinEdit                                      Sim_Simple
                               Excess Return   3‐Factor Alpha 5‐Factor Alpha   Excess Return   3‐Factor Alpha   5‐Factor Alpha
Management’s Discussion and       0.47***          0.44***           0.33*        0.38**           0.37**            0.25
Analysis                          (2.67)           (2.64)            (1.97)       (2.06)           (2.12)           (1.42)
                                   0.14             0.05              0.07         0.30              0.24            0.27
Legal Proceedings
                                  (0.61)           (0.25)            (0.30)       (1.26)            (1.0$)          (1.16)
Quant. and Qual. Disclosures       0.00             0.14              0.12         0.13              0.11            0.07
About Market Risk                 (0.02)           (0.64)            (0.61)       (0.16)           (0.13)           (0.08)
                                   0.95            0.02**            0.01*         0.01            0.0133            0.85
Risk Factors
                                  (1.18)           (2.29)            (1.67)       (1.54)           (1.61)           (1.04)
                                   0.22             0.11              0.09         0.13              0.02            0.00
Other Information
                                  (0.63)           (0.33)            (0.25)       (0.38)           (0.07)           (0.02)
                                                      Table VIII: Interacting with Investor Attention

This Table reports the Fama‐MacBeth cross‐sectional regressions of individual firm‐level stock returns on our similarity measures and interactions of the
similarity measures with IPAccessMultipleYear. Return, the dependent variable, is multiplied by 100. IPAccessMultipleYear is a proxy for the investor
bases of firms that do check the changes in 10‐Ks/10‐Qs and is measured as the number of unique IP addresses that access both the current 10‐K/10‐Q
and previous year’s 10‐K/10‐Q of the same firm normalized by the total unique IP addresses that access the current 10‐K/10‐Q. We download EDGAR
traffic log file from the SEC and remove robot requests as in Loughran and McDonald (2015). t‐statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                              (1)                (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)             (7)           (8)
                                                                                   Dependent Variable: Return
                                                    Sim_Cosine               Sim_Jaccard                Sim_MinEdit                  Sim_Simple

 Similarity                                 0.44**          0.42**       0.78***      0.84***       0.65***       0.73***       0.06**         0.06**
                                            (2.56)          (2.37)       (2.90)        (3.08)       (2.70)        (2.94)        (2.13)         (2.30)
 IPAccessMultipleYear x Similarity                           ‐0.27                    ‐0.84**                     ‐0.79*                      ‐0.10**
                                                            (‐0.65)                   (‐2.08)                     (‐1.73)                     (‐2.05)
 IPAccessMultipleYear                                         0.11                      0.15                       0.11                        0.08**
                                                            (0.31)                     (0.86)                     (0.50)                       (2.05)
 Cons                                        0.52             0.54        0.59          0.57         0.65           0.63         ‐0.04         ‐0.04*
                                            (1.16)          (1.20)       (1.36)        (1.31)       (1.50)        (1.44)        (‐1.53)       (‐1.70)

 R‐Squared                                 0.0006          0.0014        0.0016       0.0024       0.0017        0.0025        0.0019         0.0027
 N                                         547918          547918        547918       547918       547918        547918        548912         548912
                                                                         Table IX: Real Effects
        This Table reports regressions of operating income, net income, and sales on a firm’s lagged similarity measures. Oibdpq/L1atq is operating income before
        depreciation (Oidbpq) divided by lagged total assets (L1atq). Niq/L1atq is net income (Niq) divided by lagged total assets (L1atq). Saleq/L1atq is sales
        (Saleq) divided by lagged total assets (L1atq). Dependent variables are multiplied by 100. All variables in the table are winsorized at the 1% level. All
        regressions include month, industry, and firm fixed effects. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the monthly level. t‐statistics calculated using
        the robust clustered standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *,
        respectively.


                       (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)               (7)     (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)           (12)
                                      Oibdpq/L1atq                                            Niq/L1atq                                       Saleq/L1atq

Sim_Cosine            0.50*                                                0.48                                              0.01*
                      (1.96)                                              (1.44)                                             (1.95)

Sim_Jaccard                       0.68***                                             0.89***                                            0.01***
                                  (10.68)                                             (10.48)                                             (7.83)

Sim_MinEdit                                    0.65***                                               0.75***                                          0.02***
                                               (12.48)                                               (10.89)                                          (14.48)

Sim_Simple                                                  0.51***                                             0.71***                                            0.01***
                                                            (7.80)                                              (8.41)                                             (6.85)

Cons                 -0.01***     -0.40***     ‐0.01***     ‐0.02***     -0.04***    -0.04***        ‐0.04***   ‐0.04***    0.21***      0.22***      0.22***      0.19***
                      (-4.71)      (-3.05)      (‐8.59)      (‐6.33)     (-11.17)    (-24.07)        (‐23.57)   (‐12.76)    (27.33)      (51.47)      (53.73)      (27.67)

Month FEs              Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes               Yes     Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
Industry FEs           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes               Yes     Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
Firm FEs               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes               Yes     Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes

R‐Squared             0.0585       0.0116      0.2858       0.0558       0.0581       0.0549         0.2859     0.0588       0.0596       0.0563       0.287       0.2864
N                     284151       284151      284151       325717       295031       295031         295031     338477       295031       295031      295031       338476
                                   Table X: Explicitly Comparative Statements
This Table reports calendar‐time portfolio value weighted 5‐factor alphas (market, size, value, momentum, and
liquidity) for separate samples of firms who make explicitly comparative statements in their annual and
quarterly filings, and firms who do not. Portfolio returns are multiplied by 100. We define firms who make
explicit comparisons when firms financial reports include phrases that has listed in Panel B. More specifically,
we search for instances where a word/phrase from Group A (financial variables) is within 10 words of a
word/phrase from Group B (comparative statements). For each subsample, we compute quintiles based on
the prior year’s distribution of similarity scores across all stocks. Stocks then enter quintile portfolios in the
month after the public release of one of their 10‐K or 10‐Q reports. Firms are held in quintile portfolios for 3
months. t‐statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels
is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.


                                                     Panel A
 Explicitly comparative statements                               5‐Factor Alpha, Jaccard Similarity
                                             Q1             Q2            Q3          Q4          Q5        Q 5 ‐ Q1
 Yes                                        0.22         ‐0.24           ‐0.06       0.22        0.31         0.09
                                           (1.04)       (‐0.84)         (‐0.29)      (1.11)      (1.54)      (0.34)


                                             Q1           Q2              Q3          Q4          Q5        Q 5 ‐ Q1
 No                                       ‐0.36***       ‐0.07           ‐0.07       0.06        0.17       0.53***
                                           (‐3.39)      (‐0.57)         (‐0.59)      (0.55)      (1.57)      (3.51)




                             Panel B: Example Phrases captured in 10‐Ks and 10‐Qs

                                Group A                 +                  Group B
                                  sales                                    last year
                                 ebitda                                   prior year
                                   roa                                  previous year
                            operating income                               increase
                              net income                                  decrease
                                earnings                                compared to
                               dividends                               compared with
                                revenue
                            Table XI: Robustness – Fama MacBeth with more controls
This Table reports Fama‐MacBeth cross‐sectional regressions of individual firm‐level monthly stock returns on our four
similarity measures and a host of known return predictors. Return, the dependent variable, is multiplied by 100. Size is log
of market value of equity, log(BM) is log book value of equity over market value of equity, Ret(‐1,0) is previous month’s
return. Ret(‐3, ‐1), Ret(‐6, ‐1), Ret(‐9, ‐1), and Ret(‐12, ‐1) are the cumulative return from month ‐3 to month ‐1, month ‐6 to
month ‐1, and month ‐12 to month ‐1, respectively. Invest is capx/ppent. GrossProfit is (revt‐cogs)/at. FreeCashFlow is (ni +
dp ‐ wcapch ‐ capx)/at. Accrual is (act ‐ chech ‐ lct + dct + txp ‐ dp) scaled by average assets (at/2 + lag(at)/2). SUE is
Compustat‐based standardized unexpected earnings, and is computed as in Livnat and Mendenhall (2006), where
Compustat‐based Earnings Surprise is based on the assumption that EPS follows a seasonal random walk, where the best
expectation of the EPS in quarter t is the firm’s reported EPS in the same quarter of the previous fiscal year. t‐statistics are
shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *,
respectively.

                                         (1)                     (2)                      (3)                     (4)
                                                                             Ret

 Sim_Cosine                            0.38***
                                       (3.19)
 Sim_Jaccard                                                   0.55***
                                                               (4.20)
 Sim_MinEdit                                                                           0.35***
                                                                                       (3.06)
 Sim_Simple                                                                                                     3.18**
                                                                                                                (2.39)
 Ret(‐1,0)                            ‐2.98***                 ‐3.00***                ‐3.01***                ‐2.95***
                                       (‐5.77)                  (‐5.81)                 (‐5.83)                 (‐5.58)
 Ret(‐3,‐1)                              0.00                    ‐0.01                    0.00                   ‐0.05
                                       (‐0.01)                  (‐0.01)                 (‐0.01)                 (‐0.11)
 Ret(‐6,‐1)                            (0.06)                   (0.05)                   ‐0.05                    0.01
                                       (0.17)                   (0.16)                  (0.15)                  (0.03)
 Ret(‐12,‐1)                           0.57**                   0.57**                  0.56**                  0.59**
                                       (2.41)                   (2.40)                  (2.40)                   ‐2.48
 Size                                   0.00                      0.01                    0.01                   ‐0.01
                                       (0.03)                   (0.14)                  (0.16)                  (‐0.19)
 log(BM)                               0.12**                   0.13**                  0.13**                   0.12*
                                       (2.02)                   (2.06)                  (2.07)                  (1.90)
 Invest                                 ‐0.26                    ‐0.24                   ‐0.25                   ‐0.23
                                       (‐0.81)                  (‐0.75)                 (‐0.77)                 (‐0.69)
 GrossProfit                            0.33*                    0.32*                   0.32*                     0.3
                                       (1.88)                   (1.84)                  (1.82)                  (1.63)
 Accrual                              ‐0.98***                 ‐0.98***                ‐0.98***                ‐1.07***
                                       (‐4.16)                  (‐4.18)                 (‐4.17)                 (‐4.62)
 FreeCashFlow                          0.84**                   0.80**                  0.81**                  0.86**
                                       (2.31)                   (2.22)                  (2.25)                  (2.33)
 SUE                                   0.11***                  0.11***                 0.11***                 0.11***
                                       (5.53)                   (5.55)                  (5.57)                  (4.88)
 Cons                                    0.55                     0.53                    0.60                   ‐2.06
                                       (0.71)                   (0.68)                  (0.78)                  (‐1.26)

 R‐Squared                            0.0649                   0.0651                  0.0651                   0.0674
 N                                    630081                   630081                  630081                   569180
        Figure 1: Length of 10‐Ks and Changes to 10‐Ks over Time


                    Panel A: Length of 10-Ks
                          (# of Words)
70000


60000


50000


40000


30000


20000


10000


    0




             Panel B: Textual Changes in 10-Ks
  700


  600


  500


  400


  300


  200


  100


    0
                Figure 2: Similarity of Baxter International Inc.
This figure plots the Jaccard Similarity of Baxter International Inc. (NYSE: BAX) 10‐K reports from
1997 to 2014, by year of filing/release date.
Figure 3: Main events and news articles regarding Baxter’s recall of Colleague pumps
                                      in 2010


         02/23/2010: Baxter filed its 2009 10‐K financial report with the SEC
        https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/10456/000095012310015380/0000950123‐10‐015380‐
                                              index.htm




         04/23/2010: The New York Times “F.D.A. Steps Up Oversight of Infusion Pumps"

         http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/24/business/24pump.html

         “Federal regulators say they are moving to tighten their oversight of medical devices, including
         one of the most ubiquitous and problematic pieces of medical equipment — automated pumps
         that intravenously deliver drugs, food and other solutions to patients.”

         “The biggest makers of infusion pumps include Baxter Healthcare of Deerfield, Ill.; Hospira of Lake
         Forest, Ill.; and CareFusion of San Diego.”

         “Dr. Shuren said he expected that the new requirements would initially slow down the rate of the
         agency’s approval for new pumps that manufacturers are seeking to market.”




         05/04/2010: The New York Times “F.D.A. Deal Leads to Recall of Infusion Pumps"

         http://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/04/business/04baxter.html

         “Baxter International is recalling its Colleague infusion pumps from the American market under
         an agreement with federal regulators that sought to fix problems like battery failures and software
         errors.”


         “Baxter expects to record a pretax charge of $400 million to $600 million in the first quarter
         related to the recall, the company said Monday in a statement. The company isn’t otherwise
         revising its 2010 forecast.”
                                     Figure 4: Baxter Stock return

This figure reports the daily returns and the cumulative returns of Baxter International Inc. (NYSE: BAX) in
the months folling the release of Baxter’s 2009 10‐K report.




                                    Figure 5: Important Keywords
This table reports the count of keywords that are related to events related to the recall of Baxtrer’s Colleague
pumps in 2010.


  Word counts                                    2007 10‐K             2008 10‐K             2009 10‐K

  FDA                                                  33                    28                    48
  Recall                                               16                    20                    30
  Colleague Pump                                       29                    28                    79
 Figure 6: Example Passages and the changes made to them from Baxter’s 10‐Ks in
                                 2008 and 2009
                                2008:                                                            2009:
With respect to COLLEAGUE, the company remains in active           The company remains in active dialogue with the FDA regarding
dialogue with the FDA about various matters, including the         various matters with respect to the company’s COLLEAGUE
company’s remediation plan and reviews of the Company’s            infusion pumps, including the company’s remediation plan and
facilities, processes and quality controls by the company’s        reviews of the company’s facilities, processes and quality
outside expert pursuant to the requirements of the company’s       controls by the company’s outside expert pursuant to the
Consent Decree. The outcome of these discussions with the FDA      requirements of the company’s Consent Decree. The outcome of
is uncertain and may impact the nature and timing of the           these discussions with the FDA is uncertain and may impact the
company’s actions and decisions with respect to the COLLEAGUE      nature and timing of the company’s actions and decisions with
pump. The company’s estimates of the costs related to these        respect to the COLLEAGUE pump. The company’s estimates of
matters are based on the current remediation plan and              the costs related to these matters are based on the current
information currently available. It is possible that additional    remediation plan and information currently available. It is
charges related to COLLEAGUE may be required in future             possible that substantial additional charges, including significant
periods, based on new information, changes in estimates, and       asset impairments, related to COLLEAGUE may be required in
modifications to the current remediation plan as a result of       future periods, based on new information, changes in estimates,
ongoing dialogue with the FDA.                                     and modifications to the current remediation plan.




                               2008:                                                               2009:
In the third quarter of 2008, as a result of the company’s         In the third quarter of 2008, as a result of the company’s decision
decision to upgrade the global pump base to a standard software    to upgrade the global pump base to a standard software platform
platform and other changes in the estimated costs to execute the   and other changes in the estimated costs to execute the
remediation plan, the company recorded a charge of $72 million.    remediation plan, the company recorded a charge of $72 million.
This charge consisted of $46 million for cash costs and $26        This charge consisted of $46 million for cash costs and $26
million principally relating to asset impairments and inventory    million principally relating to asset impairments and inventory
used in the remediation plan. The reserve for cash costs           used in the remediation plan. The reserve for cash costs primarily
primarily consisted of costs associated with the deployment of     consisted of costs associated with the deployment of the new
the new software and additional repair and warranty costs.         software and additional repair and warranty costs.

The following summarizes cash activity in the company’s              In 2009, the company recorded a charge of $27 million related
COLLEAGUE and SYNDEO infusion pump reserves through                to planned retirement costs associated with SYNDEO and
December 31, 2008.                                                 additional costs related to the COLLEAGUE infusion pump. This
                                                                   charge consisted of $14 million for cash costs and $13 million
                                                                   related to asset impairments. The reserve for cash costs primarily
                                                                   related to customer accommodations and additional warranty
                                                                   costs. The charges were recorded in cost of sales in the company’s
                                                                   consolidated statements of income, and were included in the
                                                                   Medication Delivery segment’s pre‐tax income.

                                                                    The following summarizes cash activity in the company’s
                                                                   COLLEAGUE and SYNDEO infusion pump reserves through
                                                                   December 31, 2009.
                                Figure 7: Event Time Returns
This figure plots the weighted average cumulative abnormal return for the top (highest similarity) and
bottom (lowest similarity) quintile portfolios. We compute quintiles based on the prior year’s
distribution of Jaccard Similarity across all stocks. Abnormal return is return adjusted for market
return. Events are dates of public release of a 10‐K or a 10‐Q. Figure 7‐A shows the weighted average
monthly cumulative abnormal returns for month one to six. Figure 7‐B shows the average weighted
daily cumulative abnormal returns for 10‐day‐before to 10‐day‐after the public release of a 10‐K or a
10‐Q event.

                                         Figure 7‐A
Figure 7‐B
                          Figure 8: Section Definitions in 10‐Ks and 10‐Qs

                                                       Form 10‐K
Item 1     Business
Item 1A    Risk Factors
Item 2     Properties
Item 3     Legal Proceedings
Item 4     Mine Safety Disclosures
Item 5     Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity
           Securities
Item 6     Selected Financial Data
Item 7     Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Item 7A    Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Item 8     Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Item 9     Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
Item 9A    Controls and Procedures
Item 9B    Other Information
Item 10    Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Item 11    Executive Compensation
Item 12    Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
Item 13    Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
Item 14    Principal Accounting Fees and Services


                                                       Form 10‐Q
Item 1     Financial Statements
Item 2     Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Item 3     Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Item 4     Controls and Procedures
Item 21    Legal Proceedings
Item 21A   Risk Factors
Item 22    Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds
Item 23    Defaults Upon Senior Securities
Item 24    Mine Safety Disclosures
Item 25    Other Information
                                      Figure 9: Change by Section
Figure 9A reports the average Jaccard Similarity for different sections of a firm’s 10‐K. Section definitions can
be found in Figure 8. Figure 9B reports the average Jaccard similarity for different sections of a firm’s 1Q‐K.

                                     Figure 9‐A: Change by Section – 10‐K




                                     Figure 9‐B: Change by Section – 10‐Q
Figure 10: 5‐factor Alphas for Portfolio Sort ‐ by Important Common Sections for 10‐
                                    Ks and 10‐Qs
This Figure reports the 5‐factor alphas (market, size, value, momentum, and liquidity) of the top (highest
similarity) minus bottom (lowest similarity) quintile portfolio (Q5 – Q1) for the common sections of a firm’s
10‐K and 10‐Q financial report: Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Legal Proceedings, Quantitative and
Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk, Risk Factors, and Other Information:

10‐K/Item7+10‐Q/Item2: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations
10‐K/Item3+10‐Q/Item2.1: Legal Proceedings
10‐K/Item7A+ 10‐Q/Item3: Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure About Market Risk
10‐K/Item1A+10‐Q/Item2.1A: Risk Factors
10‐K/Item9B+10‐Q/Item2.5: Other Information

Similarity measures for each section are computed using only the textual portion in that section. For each of
the four similarity measures, we compute quintiles based on the prior year’s distribution of similarity measures
across all stocks. Stocks then enter the quintile portfolio in the month after the public release of one of their
10‐K or 10‐Q reports. Firms are held in the portfolio for 3 months.
                                 Internet Appendix for
                                     “Lazy Prices”1




1
 Citation format: Cohen, Lauren, Christopher Malloy, and Quoc Nguyen, 20[XX], Internet Appendix to
“Lazy Prices,” Journal of Finance [], [], http://www.afajof.org/IA/[].asp. Please note: WileyBlackwell is
not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors.
Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the authors of the article.
                              Full List of Variable Definitions:

Document characteristics:
 Document Size              Total number of words in each document.
 Sentiment of Change        Total number of negative words in changes ("deletions", "additions", and
                            "changes") normalized by the total number of words in "deletions", "additions",
                            and "changes".
 Uncertainty of Change      Total number of words categorized as uncertainty in Changes ("deletions",
                            "additions", and "changes") normalized by the total number of words in
                            "deletion", "addition", and "change".
 Litigiousness of Change    Total number of words categorized as litigiousness in Changes ("deletions",
                            "additions", and "changes") normalized by the total number of words in
                            "deletion", "addition", and "change".
 Change CEO
                            Indicator variables that equal to one if the 10‐K or 10‐Q mentions a change in CEO
 Change CFO                 Indicator variables that equal to one if the 10‐K or 10‐Q mentions a change in CFO


Similarity measures:
  Sim_Cosine                Let     and    be the set of terms occurring in document     and . Define                   as
                            the union of    and     , and let be the      element of . Define the term
                            frequency vectors of    and      as:
                                                ,         ,…,         ;                               ,       ,…,
                            where           is the number of occurrences of term                 in       .

                                                                                       ∙
                                                          _
                                                                          |        |        |     |

                            where the dot product, ∙, is the scalar product and norm, | | , is the Euclidean
                            norm.

 Sim_Jaccard                This is the size of the intersection divided by the size of the union of the two term
                            frequency sets; note that Jaccard measure is binary (each word is counted only
                            once in a given set) while the cosine similarity measure includes frequency (and
                            hence includes counts of each word).

                                                                              |        ∩         |
                                                              _
                                                                               |       ∪          |


 Sim_MinEdit                The smallest number of operations required to transform one document into the
                            other.

 Sim_Simple                 We use “Track Changes” in Microsoft Word or the function “diff” in Unix/Linux
                            terminal to identify instances of changes, additions, and deletions. We first count
                            the number of words in those changes, additions, and deletions and normalize the
                            total count by the average size of the old document      and the new document .

                                      c=[                                                  ]/[                      ]

                            In order to obtain a similarity measure that has values between 0, 1 , where 1
                            means the two documents are identical, as in the prior three similarity measures,
                            we then normalize by feature scaling to compute          _       as follows:

                                                          _                                 /
Firm characteristics:
 Size                     Log of market value of equity.
 Market Value of Equity   Market value of equity
 log(BM)                  Log book value of equity over market value of equity
 Ret(‐1,0)                Previous month’s return

 Ret(‐3, ‐1)              Cumulative return from month ‐3 to month ‐1

 Ret(‐6, ‐1)              Cumulative return from month ‐6 to month ‐1

 Ret(‐12,‐1)              Cumulative return from month ‐12 to month ‐1

 SUE                      Standardized unexpected earnings and computed as actual earnings per
                          share minus average analyst forecast earnings per share, divided by the
                          standard deviation of forecasts.

 Oibdpq/L1atq             Operating income before depreciation (Oidbpq) divided by lagged total
                          assets (L1atq)
 Niq/L1atq                Net income (niq) divided by lagged total assets (L1atq)
 Saleq/L1atq              Sales (saleq) divided by lagged total assets (L1atq)
 Invest                   capx/ppent
 GrossProfit              (revt‐cogs)/at
 FreeCashFlow             (ni + dp ‐ wcapch ‐ capx)/at
 Accrual                  (act ‐ chech ‐ lct + dct + txp ‐ dp) scaled by average assets (at/2 +
                          lag(at)/2).
 IPAccessMultipleYear     The number of unique IP addresses that access both the current 10K/10‐Q
                          and previous year’s 10‐K/10K of the same firm normalized by the total
                          unique IP addresses that access the current 10‐K/10‐Q. We download
                          EDGAR traffic log file from the SEC and remove robot requests as in
                          Loughran and McDonald (2015)
                                                 Table A‐1: Post Sarbanes Oxley (2003 ‐ 2014) for the Risk Factors Section.
This Table reports the calendar‐time portfolio returns and the risk factors post Sarbanes Oxley (2003‐2014). Portfolio returns are multiplied by 100. For each of the
four similarity measures, we compute quintiles based on the prior year’s distribution of similarity scores across all stocks. Stocks then enter the quintile portfolio in the
month after the public release of one of their 10‐K or 10‐Q reports. Firms are held in the portfolio for 3 months. We report Excess Return (return minus risk free rate),
Fama‐French 3‐factor Alphas (market, size, and value), and 5‐factor Alphas (market, size, value, momentum, and liquidity) and risk‐factor loadings of the top minus bottom
quintile portfolio (Q5 – Q1). t‐statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                              Equally Weighted                                                                   Value Weighted
                  Sim_Cosine         Sim_Jaccard       Sim_MinEdit            Sim_Simple             Sim_Cosine         Sim_Jaccard       Sim_MinEdit            Sim_Simple
                                               Excess Return                                                                      Excess Return
  Constant        0.44               1.11***           0.62*                  0.60**                 0.91**             0.86**            0.64                   0.41
                  (1.27)             (3.15)            (1.80)                 (1.98)                 (2.39)             (2.12)            (1.63)                 (1.16)
                                                  3‐Factor                                                                          3‐Factor
  Constant        0.54               1.15***           0.73**                 0.70**                 1.01**             0.96**            0.80**                 0.59*
                  (1.56)             (3.21)            (2.10)                 (2.33)                 (2.61)             (2.39)            (2.05)                 (1.72)
  MKTRF           ‐12.17             ‐5.52             ‐15.96*                ‐14.39*                ‐15.12             ‐18.08            ‐26.21**               ‐26.37***
                  (‐1.32)            (‐0.58)           (‐1.70)                (‐1.78)                (‐1.45)            (‐1.65)           (‐2.46)                (‐2.82)
  SMB             ‐9.73              ‐9.18             ‐7.63                  ‐10.73                 6.15               4.26              5.29                   3.50
                  (‐0.58)            (‐0.52)           (‐0.45)                (‐0.74)                (0.32)             (0.22)            (0.28)                 (0.21)
  HML             ‐6.74              ‐2.56             ‐8.87                  ‐4.74                  ‐6.21              ‐8.86             1.61                   ‐13.38
                  (‐0.44)            (‐0.16)           (0.57)                 (0.36)                 (‐0.36)            (‐0.49)           (0.09)                 (‐0.87)
                                                  5‐Factor                                                                          5‐Factor
  Constant        0.56               1.11***           0.71**                 0.71**                 0.92**             1.01**            0.75*                  0.56
                  (1.59)             (3.06)            (2.00)                 (2.33)                 (2.38)             (2.46)            (1.93)                 (1.65)
  MKTRF           ‐12.93             ‐6.52             ‐14.97                 ‐12.91                 ‐14.14             ‐19.23*           ‐18.63*                ‐18.76**
                  (‐1.35)            (‐0.66)           (‐1.53)                (‐1.54)                (‐1.32)            (‐1.69)           (‐1.73)                (‐2.00)
  SMB             ‐8.59              ‐10.90            ‐9.12                  ‐10.41                 1.77               2.74              1.38                   0.56
                  (‐0.50)            (‐0.61)           (‐0.53)                (‐0.70)                (0.09)             (0.14)            (0.07)                 (0.03)
  HML             ‐9.84              2.08              12.63                  5.09                   4.98               ‐11.29            13.49                  ‐3.51
                  (‐0.59)            (0.12)            (0.75)                 (0.35)                 (0.27)             (‐0.58)           (0.73)                 (‐0.22)
  UMD             ‐2.57              ‐2.71             3.31                   4.89                   3.55               8.31              24.72***               24.88***
                  (‐0.32)            (‐0.33)           (0.40)                 (0.69)                 (0.39)             (0.87)            (2.73)                 (3.16)
  PS_VWF          ‐2.82              9.39              3.32                   ‐3.63                  15.26              ‐4.14             ‐1.69                  ‐5.20
                  (‐0.32)            (1.02)            (0.37)                 (‐0.47)                (1.53)             (‐0.39)           (‐0.17)                (‐0.60)
                                                                Table A‐2: Portfolio Sort – Document Characteristics
       This Table reports calendar‐time portfolio 5‐factor alphas (market, size, value, momentum, and liquidity) for samples of high and low levels of Sentiment, Uncertainty, and
       Litigiousness, where “low” and “high” are defined as less than the median and higher than the median, respectively. Portfolio returns are multiplied by 100. For each of
       the four similarity measures, we compute quintiles based on the prior year’s distribution of similarity scores across all stocks. Stocks then enter the quintile portfolio in
       the month after the public release of one of their 10‐K or 10‐Q reports. Firms are held in the portfolio for 3 months. Sentiment is the number of positive words in the
       Change minus the number of negative words in the Change normalized by the size of the Change. Uncertainty and Litigiousness are the number of words categorized as
       uncertainty and litigiousness, respectively, normalized by the size of the Change. Sentiment category identifiers (e.g., negative, positive, uncertainty, litigious) are taken
       from Loughran and McDonald (2011)’s Master Dictionary. t‐statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated
       by ***, **, and *, respectively.




                                                          Sim_Cosine                                                                           Sim_Jaccard
                           Q1            Q2            Q3              Q4        Q5         Q5 ‐ Q1                 Q1             Q2          Q3            Q4          Q5        Q5 ‐ Q1
                Low    ‐0.09         ‐0.49**       ‐0.11         0.01        0.18         0.26               ‐0.45***       ‐0.44***       ‐0.24         0.23         0.09       0.54**
Sentiment              (‐0.71)       (‐2.43)       (‐0.84)       (0.07)      (1.58)       (1.48)             (‐2.79)        (‐3.16)        (‐1.24)       (1.62)       (0.69)     (2.41)
                High   0.17          ‐0.22         0.04          0.13        0.21         0.06               0.08           0.04           0.13          0.22         0.15       0.11
                       (1.27)        (‐1.45)       (0.28)        (0.99)      (1.59)       (0.30)             (0.63)         (0.27)         (0.78)        (1.53)       (1.27)     (0.61)
                Low    ‐0.03         ‐0.24         0.12          0.14        0.18         0.21               ‐0.23*         ‐0.34**        0.20          0.25*        0.20       0.44**
Uncertainty            (‐0.21)       (‐1.52)       (0.87)        (1.02)      (1.35)       (1.08)             (‐1.66)        (‐2.04)        (1.24)        (1.86)       (1.47)     (2.42)
                High   ‐0.22*        ‐0.07         0.06          0.07        0.05         0.32*              ‐0.54***       ‐0.10          0.00          0.08         0.13       0.72***
                       (‐1.79)       (‐0.42)       (0.42)        (0.45)      (0.44)       (1.81)             (‐3.11)        (‐0.72)        (0.02)        (0.59)       (1.16)     (3.51)
                Low    ‐0.10         ‐0.32**       0.15          0.18        0.04         0.14               ‐0.29**        ‐0.42***       0.13          0.11         0.16       0.47**
Litigiousness          (‐0.77)       (‐2.08)       (1.02)        (1.23)      (0.39)       (0.83)             (‐1.99)        (‐2.65)        (0.77)        (0.83)       (1.05)     (2.18)
                High   ‐0.23*        ‐0.07         0.10          0.24*       0.12         0.40**             ‐0.48***       ‐0.11          0.06          0.24**       0.2        0.71***
                       (‐1.81)       (‐0.45)       (0.75)        (1.84)      (1.02)       (2.25)             (‐2.76)        (‐0.75)        (0.32)        (2.05)       (1.57)     (3.29)
                                               Sim_MinEdit                                                      Sim_Simple
                           Q1        Q2       Q3         Q4        Q5      Q5 ‐ Q1          Q1          Q2      Q3           Q4     Q5      Q5 ‐ Q1
                Low    ‐0.36**   ‐0.22     0.16       ‐0.08     0.13      0.48**     ‐0.47***    ‐0.24       ‐0.01      0.27**    0.10     0.57***
Sentiment              (‐2.35)   (‐1.54)   (1.12)     (‐0.61)   (0.96)    (2.15)     (‐3.36)     (‐1.53)     (‐0.10)    (2.00)    (0.70)   (2.66)
                High   ‐0.02     ‐0.02     0.06       0.04      0.26*     0.32       0.11        0.06        0.08       0.09      0.20     0.12
                       (‐0.15)   (‐0.18)   (0.42)     (0.28)    (1.69)    (1.56)     (0.81)      (0.60)      (0.54)     (0.51)    (1.15)   (0.50)
                Low    ‐0.33**   0.04      ‐0.15      0.14      ‐0.03     0.33*      ‐0.17       ‐0.13       ‐0.01      0.17      0.22     0.38*
Uncertainty            (‐2.01)   (0.28)    (‐1.14)    (0.84)    (‐0.20)   (1.67)     (‐1.18)     (‐1.01)     (‐0.08)    (1.38)    (1.41)   (1.85)
                High   ‐0.14     ‐0.21     0.12       0.17      0.26*     0.41**     ‐0.41**     ‐0.08       0.30***    0.12      0.07     0.51**
                       (‐1.08)   (‐1.50)   (0.96)     (1.27)    (1.77)    (2.06)     (‐2.29)     (‐0.68)     (2.61)     (0.64)    (0.40)   (2.14)
                Low    ‐0.05     ‐0.22     ‐0.05      ‐0.08     0.32**    0.38*      ‐0.23       ‐0.30**     0.19       ‐0.07     0.16     0.39*
Litigiousness          (‐0.45)   (‐1.39)   (‐0.36)    (‐0.54)   (2.00)    (1.96)     (‐1.65)     (‐2.28)     (1.65)     (‐0.56)   (1.00)   (1.87)
                High   ‐0.32*    0.01      ‐0.04      0.27**    0.16      0.51**     ‐0.35**     ‐0.01       0.28**     0.30**    0.10     0.49**
                       (‐1.96)   (0.08)    (‐0.37)    (2.00)    (0.98)    (2.22)     (‐2.08)     (‐0.11)     (2.47)     (2.17)    (0.68)   (2.01)
                                         Table A‐3: The Influence of Specific Law Firms
   This Table reports the impact of law firm characteristics on firm‐level similarity measures. Dependent variables are
   multiplied by 100. We extract and hand‐code law firm names from 10‐Ks and 10‐Qs. InHouseLawyer is a dummy and equals
   to one if a firm has in‐house lawyers. Panel A reports the differential effects of in‐house versus outside lawyers on firm‐
   level similarity measures. Panel B reports law firm fixed effects on firm‐level similarity scores and the F‐tests on the joint
   significance of law firm fixed effects. t‐statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
   and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                    Panel A

                                              (1)                 (2)                  (3)                   (4)
                                           Sim_Cosine         Sim_Jaccard          Sim_MinEdit            Sim_Simple


              InHouseLawyer                 ‐3.70***           ‐6.02***              ‐2.66***               ‐0.87***
                                            (‐23.81)           (‐41.96)              (‐19.52)               (‐11.85)
              Cons                          91.07***           48.30***              45.14***               18.15***
                                            (26.82)            (15.76)               (15.44)                (28.54)

              Firm Fixed Effects              Yes                 Yes                  Yes                    Yes
              Time Fixed Effects              Yes                 Yes                  Yes                    Yes
              R‐Squared                      0.06                0.13                 0.12                   0.07
              N                             411023              411023               411023                 415535




                                                                    Panel B

                                          (1)                       (2)                      (3)                          (4)
                                       Sim_Cosine               Sim_Jaccard              Sim_MinEdit                   Sim_Simple


Law Firm Fixed Effects               No          Yes          No            Yes         No          Yes           No           Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                   Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
Time Fixed Effects                   Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes

Adjusted R‐Squared                 0.1402       0.1592       0.104         0.125      0.0527       0.0711       0.1031        0.1216
N                                  88,024       88,024      88,024        88,024      88,024       88,024       86,359        86,359
F‐test for joint significance of         1.2799                  1.4371                    1.4370                     1.3076
Law Firm fixed effects             Prob > chi2 = 0.0000    Prob > chi2 = 0.0000      Prob > chi2 = 0.0000       Prob > chi2 = 0.0000
Number of constraints                      1901                    1901                      1901                       1885
                                                                          Table A‐4: Robustness – Drop Special Events
           This Table reports the calendar‐time portfolio returns controlling for special events. Portfolio returns are multiplied by 100. Excluded special events are taken from
           CapitalIQ: M&A buyer, M&A target, M&A seller, Change in by laws, Discontinued operations/downsizings, Strategic alliances, and Bankruptcy events. For each of the four
           similarity measures, we compute quintiles based on the prior year’s distribution of similarity scores across all stocks. Stocks then enter the quintile portfolios in the month
           after the public release of one of their 10‐K or 10‐Q reports. Firms are held in the portfolio for 3 months. We report Excess Returns (return minus risk free rate), Fama‐
           French 3‐factor Alphas (market, size, and value), and 5‐factor Alphas (market, size, value, momentum, and liquidity). Panel A reports equal‐weight portfolio returns and
           Panel B reports value‐weight portfolio returns. t‐statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **,
           and *, respectively.


                                                                                    Panel A: Equally Weighted
                                          Sim_Cosine                                                                                           Sim_Jaccard
             Q1           Q2            Q3             Q4           Q5            Q5 – Q1                           Q1           Q2           Q3            Q4           Q5            Q5 – Q1
Excess       0.63         0.74*         0.73**         0.84**       0.88**        0.25**               Excess       0.62         0.70*        0.74**        0.86**       0.99***       0.37**
Return       (1.60)       (1.92)        (2.06)         (2.44)       (2.54)        (2.60)               Return       (1.55)       (1.82)       (2.00)        (2.49)       (3.05)        (2.43)

3‐Factor     ‐0.12        ‐0.03         ‐0.01          0.11         0.17**        0.29***              3‐Factor     ‐0.14        ‐0.07        ‐0.02         0.13         0.29***       0.42***
Alpha        (‐1.61)      (‐0.39)       (‐0.11)        (1.32)       (2.24)        (3.78)               Alpha        (‐1.63)      (‐0.86)      (‐0.28)       (1.63)       (3.40)        (4.17)

5‐Factor     ‐0.11        ‐0.01         0.00           0.10         0.18***       0.29***              5‐Factor     ‐0.12        ‐0.06        ‐0.02         0.13*        0.29***       0.41***
Alpha        (‐1.47)      (‐0.18)       (0.05)         (1.25)       (2.65)        (3.65)               Alpha        (‐1.47)      (‐0.76)      (‐0.27)       (1.69)       (3.56)        (3.97)
                                         Sim_MinEdit                                                                                           Sim_Simple
                 Q1           Q2            Q3             Q4           Q5          Q5 – Q1                         Q1           Q2           Q3            Q4           Q5            Q5 – Q1
Excess       0.63         0.77**        0.67*          0.91***      0.95***       0.33**               Excess       0.74*        0.84**       0.83**        0.95***      0.91***       0.17
Return       (1.57)       (1.99)        (1.78)         (2.61)       (3.08)        (2.27)               Return       (1.94)       (2.26)       (2.36)        (2.86)       (3.09)        (1.15)

3‐Factor     ‐0.14*       0.00          ‐0.10          0.17**       0.28***       0.42***              3‐Factor     ‐0.06        0.03         0.03          0.18**       0.22***       0.28***
Alpha        (‐1.75)      (0.60)        (‐1.35)        (2.23)       (3.44)        (4.99)               Alpha        (‐0.85)      (0.41)       (0.42)        (2.52)       (2.67)        (3.08)

5‐Factor     ‐0.12        0.02          ‐0.09          0.16**       0.28***       0.41***              5‐Factor     ‐0.04        0.07         0.04          0.20***      0.23***       0.27***
Alpha        (‐1.65)      (0.30)        (‐1.24)        (2.16)       (3.57)        (4.75)               Alpha        (‐0.55)      (1.02)       (0.64)        (2.77)       (2.84)        (2.86)
                                                                   Panel B: Value Weighted
                                Sim_Cosine                                                                       Sim_Jaccard
           Q1        Q2          Q3           Q4       Q5       Q5 ‐ Q1                      Q1        Q2         Q3           Q4        Q5       Q5 ‐ Q1
Excess     0.33      0.25        0.52         0.69**   0.72**   0.40***           Excess     0.31      0.38       0.64*        0.66**    0.74**   0.43***
Return     (0.95)    (0.69)      (1.59)       (2.11)   (2.12)   (2.75)            Return     (0.89)    (1.08)     (1.86)       (2.06)    (2.28)   (2.96)


3‐Factor   ‐0.20**   ‐0.34***    ‐0.01        0.11     0.19*    0.39***           3‐Factor   ‐0.25**   ‐0.15      0.05         0.11      0.17     0.42***
Alpha      (‐1.99)   (‐2.90)     (‐0.15)      (1.14)   (1.75)   (2.71)            Alpha      (‐1.99)   (‐0.95)    (‐0.40)      (1.03)    (1.49)   (2.93)


5‐Factor   ‐0.15     ‐0.37***    ‐0.03        0.11     0.23**   0.38**            5‐Factor   ‐0.19     ‐0.15      0.11         0.14      0.17     0.36**
Alpha      (‐1.49)   (‐3.11)     (‐0.35)      (1.14)   (2.04)   (2.55)            Alpha      (‐1.54)   (‐0.94)    (‐0.87)      (1.37)    (1.59)   (2.45)
                                Sim_MinEdit                                                                      Sim_Simple
           Q1        Q2          Q3           Q4       Q5       Q5 ‐ Q1                      Q1        Q2         Q3           Q4        Q5       Q5 ‐ Q1
Excess     0.34      0.5         0.62*        0.70**   0.75**   0.41**            Excess     0.45      0.67**     0.74**       0.78***   0.72**   0.28
Return     (0.96)    (1.46)      (1.83)       (2.19)   (2.47)   (2.18)            Return     (1.39)    (2.18)     (2.49)       (2.63)    (2.49)   (1.63)


3‐Factor   ‐0.2      ‐0.06       0.06         0.16     0.24*    0.44**            3‐Factor   ‐0.17**   0.07       0.15*        0.21*     0.17     0.34**
Alpha      (‐1.57)   (‐0.59)     (0.53)       (1.09)   (1.86)   (2.47)            Alpha      (‐2.07)   (0.90)     (1.74)       (1.84)    (1.37)   (2.16)


5‐Factor   ‐0.15     ‐0.01       0.11         0.19     0.16     0.31*             5‐Factor   ‐0.18**   0.1        0.11         0.19*     0.11     0.29*
Alpha      (‐1.17)   (‐0.14)     (1.04)       (1.35)   (1.24)   (1.78)            Alpha      (‐2.18)   (1.23)     (1.22)       (1.67)    (0.88)   (1.84)
                                                                          Table A‐5: Robustness – Industry Adjusted
           This Table reports the industry adjusted calendar‐time portfolio returns. Portfolio returns are multiplied by 100. We use Fama & French 17 industry classification. Within
           each industry, we compute quintiles based on the prior year’s distribution of similarity measures across all stocks. Stocks then enter the quintile portfolios in the month
           after the public release of one of their 10‐K or 10‐Q reports. Firms are held in the portfolio for 3 months. We then aggregate all five quintiles across all industries. We
           report Excess Returns (return minus risk free rate), Fama‐French 3‐factor Alphas (market, size, and value), and 5‐factor Alphas (market, size, value, momentum, and
           liquidity). Panel A reports equal‐weight portfolio returns and Panel B reports value‐weight portfolio returns. t‐statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical
           significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                                   Panel A: Equally Weighted
                                         Sim_Cosine                                                                                          Sim_Jaccard
            Q1            Q2            Q3             Q4           Q5            Q5 – Q1                          Q1          Q2           Q3            Q4          Q5            Q5 – Q1
Excess      0.57          0.66*         0.64*          0.74**       0.82**        0.24***              Excess      0.58        0.59         0.60          0.77**      0.87**        0.29**
Return      (1.49)        (1.75)        (1.78)         (2.10)       (2.25)        (2.77)               Return      (1.45)      (1.56)       (1.62)        (2.20)      (2.58)        (2.51)

3‐Factor    ‐0.18**       ‐0.10         ‐0.11          0.00         0.08          0.26***              3‐Factor    ‐0.18**     ‐0.17**      ‐0.17**       0.04        0.16**        0.34***
Alpha       (‐2.33)       (‐1.19)       (‐1.50)        (‐0.04)      (1.07)        (3.28)               Alpha       (‐2.30)     (‐2.21)      (‐2.19)       (0.49)      (2.09)        (3.96)

5‐Factor    ‐0.16**       ‐0.08         ‐0.11          0.01         0.09          0.25***              5‐Factor    ‐0.16**     ‐0.17**      ‐0.16**       0.05        0.17**        0.33***
Alpha       (‐2.16)       (‐1.05)       (‐1.58)        (0.10)       (1.29)        (3.13)               Alpha       (‐2.02)     (‐2.39)      (‐2.19)       (0.61)      (2.29)        (3.66)
                                         Sim_MinEdit                                                                                         Sim_Simple
                Q1            Q2            Q3             Q4           Q5          Q5 – Q1                        Q1          Q2           Q3            Q4          Q5            Q5 – Q1
Excess      0.56          0.68*         0.52           0.79**       0.86***       0.31**               Excess      0.60        0.66*        0.73**        0.76**      0.83**        0.22**
Return      (1.41)        (1.77)        (1.39)         (2.20)       (2.73)        (2.55)               Return      (1.58)      (1.75)       (2.02)        (2.17)      (2.50)        (2.30)

3‐Factor    ‐0.21***      ‐0.09         ‐0.25***       0.05         0.18**        0.40***              3‐Factor    ‐0.16**     ‐0.12        ‐0.02         0.03        0.14          0.30***
Alpha       (‐2.67)       (‐1.14)       (‐3.49)        (0.66)       (2.37)        (5.30)               Alpha       (‐2.11)     (‐1.60)      (‐0.23)       (0.47)      (1.63)        (3.87)

5‐Factor    ‐0.19**       ‐0.06         ‐0.23***       0.05         0.18**        0.37***              5‐Factor    ‐0.14*      ‐0.09        ‐0.01         0.04        0.11          0.25***
Alpha       (‐2.54)       (‐0.85)       (‐3.38)        (0.67)       (2.41)        (4.89)               Alpha       (‐0.55)     (1.02)       (0.64)        (2.77)      (2.84)        (2.86)
                                                                     Panel B: Value Weighted
                                Sim_Cosine                                                                           Sim_Jaccard
           Q1        Q2          Q3           Q4         Q5       Q5 ‐ Q1                       Q1         Q2         Q3           Q4       Q5        Q5 ‐ Q1
Excess     0.38      0.22        0.47         0.63*      0.72**   0.34**             Excess     0.24       0.27       0.59*        0.63*    0.72**    0.48***
Return     (1.10)    (0.59)      (1.38)       (1.92)     (2.05)   (2.32)             Return     (0.67)     (0.76)     (1.67)       (1.85)   (2.20)    (3.14)


3‐Factor   ‐0.14     ‐0.36***    ‐0.08        0.07       0.2      0.34**             3‐Factor   ‐0.31***   ‐0.26*     0.00         0.08     0.17      0.48***
Alpha      (‐1.24)   (‐2.75)     (‐0.7300)    (0.7206)   (1.65)   (2.28)             Alpha      (‐2.63)    (‐1.82)    (0.02)       (0.71)   (1.42)    (3.22)


5‐Factor   ‐0.05     ‐0.32**     ‐0.07        0.10       0.28**   0.33**             5‐Factor   ‐0.21*     ‐0.23      0.05         0.13     0.20*     0.41***
Alpha      (‐0.44)   (‐2.46)     (‐0.63)      (1.08)     (2.41)   (2.17)             Alpha      (‐1.85)    (‐1.60)    (0.53)       (1.18)   (1.74)    (2.75)
                                Sim_MinEdit                                                                          Sim_Simple
           Q1        Q2          Q3           Q4         Q5       Q5 ‐ Q1                       Q1         Q2         Q3           Q4       Q5        Q5 ‐ Q1
Excess     0.26      0.33        0.54         0.74**     0.70**   0.44**             Excess     0.19       0.48       0.65**       0.76**   0.56*     0.37*
Return     (0.72)    (0.90)      (1.55)       (2.30)     (2.19)   (2.25)             Return     (0.54)     (1.45)     (2.03)       (2.38)   (1.82)    (1.91)


3‐Factor   ‐0.30**   ‐0.23*      ‐0.02        0.20*      0.21     0.51***            3‐Factor   ‐0.38***   ‐0.07      0.11         0.26**   0.07      0.45**
Alpha      (‐2.43)   (‐1.87)     (‐0.17)      (1.86)     (1.54)   (2.70)             Alpha      (‐3.28)    (‐0.89)    (1.26)       (2.39)   (0.54)    (2.50)


5‐Factor   ‐0.23*    ‐0.16       0.06         0.20**     0.18     0.40**             5‐Factor   ‐0.37***   ‐0.03      0.07         0.24**   ‐0.01     0.37**
Alpha      (‐1.83)   (‐1.32)     (0.55)       (2.06)     (1.29)   (2.15)             Alpha      (‐3.11)    (‐0.33)    (0.84)       (2.18)   (‐0.05)   (1.99)
                                 Table A‐6: Bias‐Adjusted Fama‐MacBeth Coefficients
This Tables reports the test for the importance of our similarity measures to predict future stock returns relative to
unobservables that are correlated with both future stock returns and error term in Fama‐MacBeth regression in Table V.
We follow Oster (2016) and Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005) to evaluate the robustness to omitted variable bias by
observing coefficient and R‐squared movements after inclusion of controls. The bias adjusted treatment effect is computed
as follows. We start with the most basic regression:

Ret   α    β    Similarity   error,

We then observe coefficients and R‐squared after adding observable controls (Table V):

Ret   α    β    Similarity   ObservableControls         error ,

The bias‐adjusted treatment effect is defined as β∗ :

Ret   α    β∗   Similarity   ObservableControls         UnobservableControls   error,

The true treatment effect of is then computed as:


                                               β∗   β        δβ   β


The estimates for β and      are from Table V, columns (1), (4), (7), and (10). The estimates for   and    are taken from
Table V, columns (3), (6), (9), and (12). We follow Oster (2016) and choose δ     1 and         1.3    . The bias‐adjusted
treatment effect is reported in this table below.

                                                                                                  ∗



                    0.0045            0.0037        0.0006            0.0485     0.06305     0.003457

                    0.0082            0.0059        0.0017            0.0489     0.06357     0.005185

                    0.0054            0.0029        0.0017            0.0488     0.06344     0.002123

                    0.0404            0.0292        0.0019            0.0492     0.06396     0.025705
                                                     Table A‐7: Future 8Ks, Short Interest, SUE, and Bankruptcy Events
          This Table reports regressions of firm’s future 8‐K releases, insider selling activities, short interest, SUE, and future bankruptcy events on a firm’s lagged
          similarity measures. All variables in the table are winsorized at the 1% level throughout the table. The dependent variable in Panel A is the number of 8‐
          Ks (current reports) that a company must file with the SEC to announce major events that shareholders should know about in the next 6 months. The
          dependent variable in Panel B is change in short interest in the next month. The dependent variable in Panel C is the next standardized unexpected
          earnings. The dependent variable in Panel D is a dummy that equals to one if there is a bankruptcy event in the next year. Bankruptcy events are from
          CapitalIQ. All regressions include month and firm fixed effects. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the monthly level. t‐statistics calculated
          using the robust clustered standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                         Panel A                                                                                    Panel B
                              (1)             (2)                (3)           (4)                                       (1)              (2)                 (3)             (4)
                                        Number of 8Ks in the next 6 months                                                       Average short interest in the next month
Sim_Cosine                   0.03                                                             Sim_Cosine               -0.08**
                            (0.29)                                                                                     (-2.41)
Sim_Jaccard                                 -0.07**                                           Sim_Jaccard                               -0.29**
                                             (-2.19)                                                                                     (-2.03)
Sim_MinEdit                                                       -0.06***                    Sim_MinEdit                                                   0.02
                                                                   (-2.55)                                                                                 -0.55
Sim_Simple                                                                   -0.09***         Sim_Simple                                                                     -0.03
                                                                              (-2.76)                                                                                       (-0.83)
Cons                        0.22*           0.31***               0.29***       0.05          Cons                     0.35***          0.57***           0.27***           0.20**
                            (1.69)           (5.07)                (5.03)      (0.36)                                   (5.92)           (3.80)            (5.06)           (2.07)
Time FE                      Yes              Yes                   Yes        Yes            Time FE                    Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
Firm FE                      Yes              Yes                   Yes        Yes            Firm FE                    Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
R‐Squared                   0.0015          0.0016                0.0016      0.001           R‐Squared                0.0076           0.0077            0.0077            0.0079
N                           295560          295560                295560     337478           N                        158259           158259            158259            185279
                                         Panel C                                                                                    Panel D
                              (1)             (2)                   (3)        (4)                                       (1)              (2)             (3)                 (4)
                                                       Next SUE                                                                        Future bankruptcy events
Sim_ Cosine                 1.51***                                                           Sim_Cosine                -0.00
                             (4.00)                                                                                    (-0.24)
Sim_Jaccard                                 0.61***                                           Sim_Jaccard                               -0.00**
                                             (8.04)                                                                                     (-2.00)
Sim_MinEdit                                                       0.19***                     Sim_MinEdit                                                 -0.00**
                                                                   (3.31)                                                                                 (-2.19)
Sim_Simple                                                                     -0.03          Sim_Simple                                                                     -0.00
                                                                             (-0.40)                                                                                        (-0.75)
Cons                       -1.80***         -0.79***              -0.40***     0.14           Cons                     0.01***          0.01***           0.01***           0.01***
                            (-4.59)          (-6.11)               (-3.40)    (0.62)                                    (2.93)           (8.24)            (8.56)           (14.12)
Time FE                      Yes              Yes                   Yes        Yes            Time FE                    Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
Firm FE                      Yes              Yes                   Yes        Yes            Firm FE                    Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
R‐Squared                   0.0099          0.0103                0.0097     0.0098           R‐Squared                0.0007           0.0007            0.0008            0.0006
N                           180265          180265                180265     208196           N                        296074           296074            296074            338133
                          Table A‐8: Short‐Run Announcement Effects by Attention Category
This Table reports short‐run announcement effects for firms in Q1 that have investors who make the multi‐year downloads
on the SEC server, and firms that do not. Daily returns are adjusted according to Daniel, K., Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., Wermers,
R., (1997). Returns are multiplied by 100. t‐statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.



 Compare with
 last year                  cret1radj      cret2radj      cret3radj      cret4radj       cret5radj      cret6radj      cret30radj
 No                  Q1     ‐0.02          ‐0.02          ‐0.02          ‐0.07           ‐0.06          ‐0.00          ‐0.27**
                            (‐0.57)        (‐0.58)        (‐0.42)        (‐1.23)         (‐1.03)        (‐0.07)        (‐1.99)


                            cret1radj      cret2radj      cret3radj      cret4radj       cret5radj      cret6radj      cret30radj
 Yes                 Q1     ‐0.08*         ‐0.15***       ‐0.19***       ‐0.17**         ‐0.15**        ‐0.07          ‐0.14
                            (‐1.90)        (‐2.78)        (‐3.03)        (‐2.41)         (‐2.00)        (‐0.87)        (‐0.86)
                                Table A‐9: Comparing Textual Similarity to Tone Changes
This Table compares our similarity measure Sim_Jaccard to the existing tone change measures in the literature. We
measure tone and sentiment changes for full financial reports by first obtaining the set of negative and positive words
using the Loughran and McDonald (2011)’s dictionary. We then follow Loughran and McDonald (2011) and measure
negative tone change of full financial report as the change in the number of negative words normalized by document
size, positive tone changes of the full financial report as changes in the number of positive words normalized by document
size. Panel B compare our Jaccard similarity measure with the tone changes of the full financial report using a Fama-
MacBeth regression framework. Returns are multiplied by 100 in Panel B.

                                                         Panel A
                                                                     (1)                   (2)
                                                                            Sim_Jaccard


                         Negative tone change                      ‐0.02***
                                                                   (‐30.11)


                         Positive tone change                                         ‐0.01***
                                                                                      (‐20.31)


                         Cons                                      0.34***            0.34***
                                                                   (63.64)            (63.62)


                         R‐Squared                                 0.1228                 0.1189
                         N                                         342183             342006
                                             Panel B

                         (1)        (2)                 (3)              (4)        (5)        (6)
                                                                 Ret
Sim_Jaccard            0.57***                                         0.57***    0.60***    0.58***
                       (3.48)                                          (3.26)     (3.41)     (3.29)


Negative tone change              ‐0.29***                             ‐0.28***              ‐0.29***
                                  (‐6.10)                              (‐5.86)               (‐5.83)


Positive tone change                               0.14***                        0.15***    0.18***
                                                       (2.78)                     (2.93)     (3.58)


Size                    0.02       0.01                 0.01            0.02       0.02       0.02
                       (0.45)     (0.32)               (0.35)          (0.52)      (0.55)     (0.53)


Log(BM)                0.17**      0.17*               0.17*            0.16*      0.16*      0.16*
                       (2.00)     (1.92)               (1.92)          (1.92)      (1.91)     (1.88)


Ret(‐1, 0)             ‐2.59***   ‐2.63***         ‐2.64***            ‐2.66***   ‐2.66***   ‐2.66***
                       (‐4.07)    (‐4.11)              (‐4.11)         (‐4.16)    (‐4.16)    (‐4.15)


Ret(‐12, ‐1)           0.68**     0.64**               0.64**          0.64**     0.64**     0.64**
                       (2.59)     (2.43)               (2.44)          (2.43)      (2.45)     (2.45)


Cons                    0.39       0.76                 0.71            0.33       0.28       0.32
                       (0.45)     (0.91)               (0.87)          (0.38)      (0.32)     (0.36)


R‐Squared              0.0421     0.0419               0.0419          0.0428     0.0428     0.0439
N                      721815     702290           702083              702226     702019     697143
                                      Table A‐10: Exploring High Distraction Dates
This Table reports calendar‐time portfolio 5‐factor alphas (market, size, value, momentum, and liquidity) for separate
samples of firms with filing dates that have over 100 earnings announcements on that same date (which we view as high
distraction or high news days, hence low attention days), relative to filing dates that have fewer than 100 earnings
announcements (as in Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2006)). Returns are multiplied by 100. For each subsample, we compute
quintiles based on the prior year’s distribution of similarity scores across all stocks. Stocks then enter quintile portfolios in
the month after the public release of one of their 10‐K or 10‐Q reports. Firms are held in quintile portfolios for 3 months. t‐
statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **,
and *, respectively.



 Distraction                                                               5‐Factor Alpha, Jaccard Similarity
                                                    Q1              Q2               Q3           Q4             Q5        Q 5 ‐ Q1
 High news day                                   ‐0.33**          ‐0.48**           ‐0.05        0.01           0.24       0.56***
                                                  (‐2.08)         (‐2.47)          (‐0.27)      (0.04)          (1.50)      (2.85)


                                                    Q1              Q2               Q3           Q4             Q5        Q 5 ‐ Q1
 Low news day                                     ‐0.11            0.00             ‐0.04        0.05           0.23        0.34*
                                                  (‐0.77)         (0.02)           (‐0.26)      (0.36)          (1.51)      (1.83)
                               Table A‐11: Textual Similarity and the Life Cycle of the Firm
This Table reports test that textual similarity may be related to the life cycle of the firm. We follow Spence (1979), Kotler
(1980), and Anthony and Ramesh (1992) and use these four variables as proxies for a firm life cycle stage: (1) annual
dividend as a percentage of income, (2) percent sales growth, (3) capital expenditure normalize by total asset, and (4) age
of the firm. More specifically, we compute annual firm‐specific financial variables to proxy for the life cycle stage as follows
(1) Depreciation Rate: dp = (dvt/ib)*100, (2) Sales Growth: sg = (sale – sale[t‐1])/sale[t‐1]*100, (3) Capital Expenditure: ce
= capx/at*100,(4) Age: age = fyear – ipoyear (if IPO year is missing, we use the first year that the firm appears in Compustat).
Panel A reports regression of Jaccard similarity on lagged five‐year average of depreciation rate, sales growth, capital
expenditure, and age. Panel B reports the result for the test whether the unexpected component of Jaccard similarity can
still predict future stock returns using a Fama‐MacBeth regression framework. We decompose Jaccard similarity into the
expected and unexpected components based on the above predictors for a firm’s life cycle. The unexpected component is
computed as the contemporary Jaccard similarity minus the predicted Jaccard similarity obtained from running a rolling
window regression of Jaccard similarity on lagged five‐year average of depreciation rate, sales growth, capital expenditure,
and age.



                                                            Panel A
                                                                                    (1)
                                                                               Sim_Jaccard


                     Depreciation Rate                                            ‐0.00**
                                                                                  (‐2.41)


                     Sales Growth                                                 0.00**
                                                                                  (2.32)


                     Capital Expenditure                                           0.00
                                                                                  (1.02)


                     Age                                                         ‐0.01***
                                                                                 (‐14.47)


                     Constant                                                     0.42***
                                                                                 (213.82)


                     R‐Squared                                                    0.001
                     N                                                           233511
                         Panel B

                                     (1)
                                     Ret


Unexpected Sim_Jaccard             0.01***
                                   (3.82)


Size                                0.00
                                   (0.15)


log(BM)                             0.00*
                                   (1.77)


Ret(‐1, 0)                         ‐0.03***
                                   (‐4.17)


Ret(‐12,‐1)                         0.01*
                                   (1.73)


Constant                            0.01
                                   (1.04)


R‐Squared                          0.0402
N                                  494444
                     Table A‐12: Portfolio Returns Using Only Negative Words in Sentiment
This Table reports calendar‐time portfolio 5‐factor alphas (market, size, value, momentum, and liquidity) for
samples of high and low levels of Sentiment of Changes using only negative words, as defined in Loughran and
McDonald (2011). Returns are multiplied by 100. For each subsample, we compute quintiles based on the prior
year’s distribution of Sim_Simple similarity scores across all stocks. Stocks then enter quintile portfolios in the
month after the public release of one of their 10‐K or 10‐Q reports. Firms are held in quintile portfolios for 3
months. t‐statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels
is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.



      Sentiment of Changes
      (negative words only)                                   5‐Factor Alpha, Sim_Simple
                                       Q1             Q2             Q3          Q4         Q5      Q 5 ‐ Q1
      High                           ‐0.39**        ‐0.14            0.16       0.16       0.15     0.54**
                                     (‐2.18)        (‐1.01)         (1.37)     (0.97)      (1.11)   (2.31)


                                       Q1             Q2             Q3          Q4         Q5      Q 5 ‐ Q1
      Low                             ‐0.14        ‐0.24**           0.14       0.25       0.18      0.32
                                     (‐1.05)        (‐2.00)         (1.15)     (1.62)      (1.02)   (1.47)
                                       Table A‐13: Comparing 10‐Ks and 10‐Qs Only
This Table reports calendar‐time portfolio excess return, 3‐Factor alphas, and 5‐factor alphas (market, size, value,
momentum, and liquidity). Returns are multiplied by 100. Sim_Cosine is the cosine similarity measure of quarter‐on‐quarter
financial reports. Results in Panel A1 and A2 use only 10‐Q financial reports and results in Panel B1 and B2 use only 10‐K
financial reports. We compute quintiles based on the prior year’s distribution of Sim_Cosine for each type of financial
reports across all stocks. Stocks then enter quintile portfolios in the month after the public release of one of their 10‐Q
reports (in Panel A1 and A2) or one of their 10‐K reports (in Panel B1 and B2). Firms are held in quintile portfolios for 3
months in Panel A1 and A2 (10‐Q‐only similarity), and firms are held in quintile portfolios for 9 months in Panel B1 and
Panel B2 (10‐K‐only similarity). t‐statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.


                                          Panel A1: Equally weighted – 10‐Q only
                                                                 Sim_Cosine
                             Q1              Q2             Q3                Q4          Q5            Q5‐Q1
          Excess            0.66*           0.64*         0.73**         0.94***        1.03***        0.38***
          Return            (1.76)          (1.80)        (2.13)         (2.91)         (3.27)          (4.12)


          3‐Factor         ‐0.17**         ‐0.15**         ‐0.06         0.19***        0.32***        0.49***
          Alpha            (‐2.28)         (‐2.00)        (‐0.85)        (2.97)         (4.21)          (6.91)


          5‐Factor         ‐0.15**         ‐0.14**         ‐0.05         0.20***        0.33***        0.49***
          Alpha            (‐2.21)         (‐1.97)        (‐0.79)        (3.12)         (4.57)          (6.80)



                                           Panel A2: Value weighted – 10‐Q only
                                                                 Sim_Cosine
                            Q1               Q2             Q3                Q4            Q5            Q5‐Q1
       Excess              0.53             0.48           0.62*          0.82***         0.84**          0.31**
       Return             (1.59)           (1.53)          (1.88)         (2.60)          (2.52)          (2.29)


       3‐Factor            ‐0.12            ‐0.11          ‐0.01          0.21**          0.23**          0.36***
       Alpha              (‐1.40)          (‐1.17)        (‐0.09)         (2.10)          (2.07)          (2.61)


       5‐Factor           ‐0.15*           ‐0.12            0.02          0.27***         0.20*           0.35**
       Alpha              (‐1.69)          (‐1.35)         (0.20)         (2.67)          (1.74)          (2.50)
                     Panel B1: Equally weighted – 10‐K only
                                           Sim_Cosine
             Q1         Q2            Q3                Q4      Q5      Q5‐Q1
Excess     0.80**     0.77**        0.75**         0.85**     0.96***    0.16
Return     (2.18)     (2.13)         (2.17)        (2.56)     (3.05)    (1.50)


3‐Factor    0.00       ‐0.02         ‐0.03          0.10      0.24***   0.24***
Alpha      (0.05)     (‐0.20)       (‐0.31)        (1.22)     (2.76)    (2.82)


5‐Factor    0.04       ‐0.00         ‐0.00          0.11      0.23***   0.19**
Alpha      (0.53)     (‐0.70)       (‐0.02)        (1.50)     (2.70)    (2.24)



                     Panel B2: Value weighted – 10‐K only
                                           Sim_Cosine
             Q1         Q2            Q3                Q4      Q5      Q5‐Q1
Excess      0.36       0.51          0.53           0.53      1.00***   0.64***
Return     (0.99)     (1.40)         (1.56)        (1.60)     (3.00)    (3.55)


3‐Factor   ‐0.30**     ‐0.09         ‐0.01          ‐0.05     0.44***   0.74***
Alpha      (‐2.44)    (‐0.63)       (‐0.08)        (‐0.34)    (2.78)    (4.17)


5‐Factor   ‐0.24**     ‐0.02         ‐0.00          ‐0.02     0.43***   0.68***
Alpha      (‐2.03)    (‐0.12)       (‐0.01)        (‐0.14)    (2.81)    (3.77)
                                            Table A‐14: Removing Stop Words
This Table reports calendar‐time portfolio excess return, 3‐Factor alphas, and 5‐factor alphas (market, size, value,
momentum, and liquidity). Sim_Cosine is the cosine similarity measure of quarter‐on‐quarter financial reports after
excluding stop words. We exclude “Generic” stop words as recommended by Tim Loughran and Bill McDonald
(https://sraf.nd.edu/textual‐analysis/resources/#StopWords). We then compute quintiles based on the prior year’s
distribution of Sim_Cosine across all stocks. Stocks then enter the quintile portfolio in the month after the public release of
one of their 10‐K or 10‐Q reports. Firms are held in quintile portfolios for 3 months. Panel A reports equally weighted
returns and Panel B reports value weighted returns. t‐statistics are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.



                                                  Panel A: Equally weighted
                                                                 Sim_Cosine
                               Q1              Q2             Q3              Q4            Q5            Q5‐Q1
           Excess             0.65*           0.67*          0.76**        0.91***        1.07***        0.42***
           Return            (1.80)          (1.83)          (2.32)        (2.96)          (3.63)         (3.94)


           3‐Factor         ‐0.21***        ‐0.20***         ‐0.07            0.13        0.32***        0.53***
           Alpha             (‐2.81)         (‐2.76)        (‐1.04)        (1.55)          (4.76)         (7.15)


           5‐Factor          ‐0.17**         ‐0.17**         ‐0.04         0.16**         0.34***        0.50***
           Alpha             (‐2.35)         (‐2.39)        (‐0.64)        (2.03)          (5.39)         (6.70)



                                                    Panel B: Value weighted
                                                                 Sim_Cosine
                               Q1              Q2             Q3             Q4             Q5           Q5‐Q1
           Excess              0.5           0.66**          0.57*         0.72**         0.91***        0.41***
           Return            (1.50)          (2.20)          (1.88)        (2.45)          (3.05)         (2.77)


           3‐Factor          ‐0.22**          ‐0.02          ‐0.12            0.05        0.27***        0.49***
           Alpha             (‐2.29)         (‐0.22)        (‐1.28)        (0.54)          (3.05)         (3.58)


           5‐Factor          ‐0.21**          ‐0.02          ‐0.06            0.12        0.23**         0.44***
           Alpha             (‐2.12)         (‐0.28)        (‐0.71)        (1.23)          (2.56)         (3.15)
   Table A‐15: Measuring Sequential Quarterly Changes to the Risk Factors Section, Instead of Annual Document
                                                         Changes
This Table reports calendar‐time portfolio excess return, 3‐Factor alphas, and 5‐factor alphas (market, size, value,
momentum, and liquidity). Sim_Cosine is the cosine similarity measure of quarter‐over‐quarter “Risk Factors” sections of
firms’ quarterly reports (10‐Qs). We compute quintiles based on the prior year’s distribution of Sim_Cosine across all stocks.
Stocks then enter the quintile portfolio in the month after the public release of their 10‐Q reports. Firms are held in the
portfolio for 3 months. Panel A reports equally weighted returns and Panel B reports value weighted returns. t‐statistics
are shown below the estimates, and statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *,
respectively.


                                                 Panel A: Equally weighted
                                                                Sim_Cosine
                               Q1              Q2             Q3              Q4            Q5           Q5‐Q1
           Excess            ‐0.14            0.55            0.66            0.76         0.68          0.82*
           Return           (‐0.19)          (1.02)          (1.16)        (1.41)         (1.34)         (1.70)


           3‐Factor         ‐0.80**          ‐0.13           ‐0.04            0.07         0.14          0.95**
           Alpha            (‐2.16)          (‐1.24)        (‐0.37)        (0.62)         (0.87)         (2.03)


           5‐Factor         ‐0.80**          ‐0.14           ‐0.04            0.07         0.15          0.95**
           Alpha            (‐2.22)          (‐1.42)        (‐0.34)        (0.63)         (0.94)         (2.12)



                                                    Panel B: Value weighted
                                                                Sim_Cosine
                               Q1              Q2             Q3              Q4            Q5           Q5‐Q1
           Excess            ‐0.23            0.43            0.56            0.73         0.78          1.00*
           Return           (‐0.32)          (0.88)          (1.08)        (1.64)         (1.59)         (1.91)


           3‐Factor         ‐0.96**          ‐0.26*          ‐0.05            0.12         0.16          1.12**
           Alpha            (‐2.29)          (‐1.87)        (‐0.29)        (0.87)         (0.77)         (2.18)


           5‐Factor         ‐0.96**          ‐0.27*          ‐0.05            0.14         0.18          1.13**
           Alpha            (‐2.34)          (‐1.95)        (‐0.31)        (0.97)         (0.88)         (2.30)




    Figure A‐1: More Example Passages and the Changes Made to Them from Baxter’s 10‐Ks in 2008 and 2009
                         2008:                                                          2009:
We continue to address issues with our infusion pumps         We continue to address a number of regulatory issues as
as discussed further under the caption entitled certain       discussed further under the caption entitled Certain
Regulatory Matters in Management Discussion and               Regulatory Matters in Item 7 of this Annual Report on
Analysis of the Annual Report.                                Form 10‐K.

In connection with these issues, there can be no              In connection with these issues, there can be no assurance
assurance that additional costs or civil and criminal         that additional costs or civil and criminal penalties will
penalties will not be incurred, that additional regulatory    not be incurred, that additional regulatory actions with
actions with respect to the company will not occur, that      respect to the company will not occur, that substantial
substantial additional charges or significant asset           additional charges or significant asset impairments may
impairments may not be required, or that additional           not be required, or that additional legislation or regulation
legislation or regulation will not be introduced that may     will not be introduced that may adversely affect the
adversely affect the company’s operations. Third parties      company’s operations. Third parties may also file claims
may also file claims against us in connection with these      against us in connection with these
pump issues. In addition, sales of these products may         issues. In addition, sales of the related products may
continue to be affected and sales of other Baxter products    continue to be affected and sales of other Baxter products
may be adversely affected if we do not adequately             may be adversely affected if we do not adequately address
address these pump issues.                                    these issues.

In addition, the healthcare regulatory environment may        The sales and marketing of our products and our
change in way that restricts our existing operations or       relationships with healthcare providers are under
our growth. The healthcare industry is likely to continue     increasing scrutiny by federal, state and foreign
to undergo significant changes for the foreseeable future,    government agencies. The FDA, the OIG, the Department
which could have an adverse effect on our business,           of Justice (DOJ) and the Federal Trade Commission have
financial condition and results of operations. We cannot      each increased their enforcement efforts with respect to
predict the effect of possible future legislation and         the anti‐kickback statute, False Claims Act, off‐label
regulation.                                                   promotion of products, other healthcare related laws,
                                                              antitrust and other competition laws. The DOJ has
Failure to provide quality products and services to our       announced an increased focus on the enforcement of the
customers could have an adverse effect on our business        U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) particularly as it
and subject us to regulatory actions and costly litigation.   relates to the conduct of pharmaceutical companies.
                                                              Foreign governments have also increased their scrutiny of
\                                                             pharmaceutical companies’ sales and marketing activities
                                                              and relationships with healthcare providers. The laws and
                                                              standards governing the promotion, sale and
                                                              reimbursement of our products and those governing our
                                                              relationships with healthcare providers and governments
                                                              can be complicated, are subject to frequent change and
                                                              may be violated unknowingly. We have compliance
                                                              programs in place, including policies, training and various
                                                              forms of monitoring designed to address these risks.
                                                              Nonetheless, these programs and policies may not always
                                                              protect us from conduct by our employees that violate
                                                              these laws. Violations, or allegations of violations, of these
                                                              laws may result in large civil and criminal penalties,
                                                              debarment from participating in government programs,
                                                              diversion of management time, attention and resources
                                                              and may otherwise have an adverse effect on our
                                                              business, financial condition and results of operations.

                                                              Issues with product quality could have an adverse effect
                                                              on our business and subject us to regulatory actions and
                                                              costly litigation.
                           2008:                                                         2009:
Failure to provide quality products and services to our        Issues with product quality could have an adverse effect
customers could have an adverse effect on our business         on our business and subject us to regulatory actions and
and subject us to regulatory actions and costly litigation.    costly litigation.

Quality management plays an essential role in                  Quality management plays an essential role in
determining and meeting customer requirements,                 determining and meeting customer requirements,
preventing defects and improving the company’s                 preventing defects and improving the company’s
products and services. Our future operating results will       products and services. Our future operating results will
depend on our ability to implement and improve our             depend on our ability to implement and improve our
quality management program, and effectively train and          quality management program, and effectively train and
manage our employee base with respect to quality               manage our employee base with respect to quality
management. While Baxter has a network of quality              management. While we have a network of quality systems
systems throughout our business units and facilities,          throughout our business units and facilities that relate to
which relates to the design, development, manufacturing,       the design, development, manufacturing, packaging,
packaging, sterilization, handling, distribution and           sterilization, handling, distribution and labeling of our
labeling of our products, quality and safety issues may        products, quality and safety issues may occur with
occur with respect to any of our products. In addition,        respect to any of our products. In addition, some of the
some of the raw materials employed in Baxter’s                 raw materials employed in our production processes are
production processes are derived from human and animal         derived from human and animal origins. Though great
origins. Though great care is taken to assure the safety of    care is taken to assure the safety of these raw materials,
these raw materials, the nature of their origin elevates the   the nature of their origin elevates the potential for the
potential for the introduction of pathogenic agents or         introduction of pathogenic agents or other contaminants.
other contaminants.
                                                               A quality or safety issue could have an adverse effect on
A quality or safety issue could have an adverse effect on      our business, financial condition and results of operations
our business, financial condition and results of operations    and may result in warning letters, product recalls or
and may result in warning letters, product recalls or          seizures, monetary sanctions, injunctions to halt
seizures, monetary sanctions, injunctions to halt              manufacture and distribution of products, civil or
manufacture and distribution of products, civil or             criminal sanctions, refusal of a government to grant
criminal sanctions, refusal of a government to grant           approvals, restrictions on operations or withdrawal of
approvals, restrictions on operations or withdrawal of         existing approvals. An inability to address a quality or
existing approvals. An inability to address a quality or       safety issue in an effective manner on a timely basis may
safety issue in an effective manner on a timely basis may      also cause a loss of customer confidence in us or our
also cause a loss of customer confidence in us or our          products, which may result in the loss of sales. In
products, which may result in losses of sales. In addition,    addition, we may be named as a defendant in product
we may be named as a defendant in product liability            liability or other lawsuits, which could result in costly
lawsuits, which could result in costly litigation, reduced     litigation, reduced sales, significant liabilities and
sales, significant liabilities and diversion of our            diversion of our management’s time, attention and
management’s time, attention and resources. Even claims        resources. We continue to be self‐insured with respect to
without merit could subject us to adverse publicity and        product liability claims. The absence of third‐party
require us to incur significant legal fees.                    insurance coverage increases our potential exposure to
                                                               unanticipated claims and adverse decisions. Even claims
In 2008, we removed our heparin sodium injection               without merit could subject us to adverse publicity and
products from distribution in the United States after          require us to incur significant legal fees.
identifying an increasing level of allergic‐type and
hypotensive adverse reactions occurring in certain             For more information on certain regulatory matters
patients. For more information on this recall and the          currently being addressed by the company with the FDA,
lawsuits we face in connection with this recall, please        please refer to “Certain Regulatory Matters” in Item 7 of
refer to “Certain Regulatory Matters” in “Management’s         this Annual Report on Form 10‐K.
Discussion and Analysis” of the Annual Report and “Notes
to Consolidated Financial Statements — Note 11 Legal
Proceedings” of the Annual Report.
                             2008:                                                         2009:
The company began to hold shipments of COLLEAGUE              In July 2005, the company stopped shipment of
infusion pumps in July 2005, and continues to hold            COLLEAGUE infusion pumps in the United States.
shipments of new pumps in the United States. Following a      Following a number of Class I recalls (recalls at the
number of Class I recalls (recalls at the highest priority    highest priority level for the FDA) relating to the
level for the FDA) relating to the performance of the         performance of the pumps, as well as the seizure
pumps, as well as the seizure litigation described in         litigation described in Note 11, the company entered
Note 11, the company entered into a Consent Decree in         into a Consent Decree in June 2006. Additional Class I
June 2006 outlining the steps the company must take to        recalls related to remediation and repair and
resume sales of new pumps in the United States. Additional    maintenance activities were addressed by the company
Class I recalls related to remediation and repair and         in 2007 and 2009. The Consent Decree provides for
maintenance activities were addressed by the company in       reviews of the company’s facilities, processes and
2007. The Consent Decree provides for reviews of the          controls by the company’s outside expert, followed by
company’s facilities, processes and controls by the           the FDA. In December 2007, following the outside
company’s outside expert, followed by the FDA. In             expert’s review, the FDA conducted inspections and
December 2007, following the outside expert’s review, the     remains in a dialogue with the company. As discussed in
FDA inspected and remains in a dialogue with the company      Note 11, the company received a subpoena from the
with respect to observations from its inspection as well as   Office of the United States Attorney of the Northern
the validation of modifications to the pump required to be    District of Illinois relating to the COLLEAGUE infusion
completed in order to secure approval for                     pump in September 2009. As discussed in Note 5, the
recommercialization. As discussed in Note 5, the company      company has recorded a number of charges in
has recorded a number of charges in connection with its       connection with its COLLEAGUE infusion pumps. It is
COLLEAGUE infusion pumps. It is possible that additional      possible that substantial additional charges, including
charges related to COLLEAGUE may be required in future        significant asset impairments, related to COLLEAGUE
periods, based on new information, changes in estimates,      may be required in future periods, based on new
and modifications to the current remediation plan as a        information, changes in estimates, and modifications to
result of ongoing dialogue with the FDA.                      the current remediation plan.
Figure A‐2: Further Example ‐ Herbalife


   Panel A: Changes in 10‐K Similarity
                           Panel B: Herbalife’s main events and news articles


1.    02/18/2014: Herbalife filed its 2013 10‐K financial report with the SEC

     https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/10456/000095012310015380/0000950123‐10‐015380‐
                                           index.htm

2.    03/12/2014: Reuters “Herbalife says FTC opens inquiry long sought by Ackman"

      http://www.reuters.com/article/us‐herbalife‐ftc‐idUSBREA2B1KS20140313

      “Herbalife Ltd said on Wednesday that the U.S. Federal Trade Commission had opened an inquiry into 0its
      operations, news that briefly sent the nutrition and weight loss company’s share price down more than 16
      percent.”

3.    11/04/2014: Reuters “FBI conduction a probe into Herbalife"

      http://www.reuters.com/article/us‐herbalife‐idUSBREA3A1V520140411

      “The FBI is probing Herbalife Ltd, the nutrition and weight loss company that hedge fund manager William
      Ackman has called a pyramid scheme, sources familiar with the investigation said on Friday.”
                 Panel C: Example passages and the changes made to them from Herbalife’s 10‐Ks in 2013 and 2014

2013                                                           2014
From time to time, we receive inquiries from various           From time to time, the Company is subject to inquiries
government authorities requesting information from             from and investigations by various governmental and
the Company. Following December 2012 market events             other regulatory authorities with respect to the
and a subsequent meeting we requested with the staff of        legality of the Company’s network marketing
the SEC’s Division of Enforcement, the staff requested         program. To the extent any of these inquiries are or
information regarding the Company’s business and               become material they will be disclosed as required by
financial operations. Consistent with its policies, the        applicable securities laws. The Company believes it
Company is and will fully corporate with these inquiries.      could receive additional inquiries. Consistent with its
                                                               policies, the Company has cooperated and will fully
                                                               cooperate with any such inquiries.



2013                                                           2014
Our stock price may be affected by speculative trading,        Our stock price may be adversely affected by third
including those shorting our stock.                            parties who raise allegations about our Company.
        In late 2012, a hedge fund manager publicly raised            Short sellers and others who raise allegations
allegations regarding the legality of our network              regarding the legality of our business activities, some
marketing program and announced that his fund had              of whom are positioned to profit if our stock declines,
taken a significant short position regarding our common        can negatively affect our stock price. In late 2012, a
shares, leading to intense public scrutiny and significant     hedge fund manager publicly raised allegations regarding
stock price volatility. Following this public announcement     the legality of our network marketing program and
in December 2012, our stock price dropped from $42.50          announced that his fund had taken a significant short
on December 18, 2012, to prices as low as $24.24 in the        position regarding our common shares, leading to intense
following week. Our stock price has continued to exhibit       public scrutiny and significant stock price volatility.
heightened volatility. As of January 15, 2013, the New         Following this public announcement in December 2012,
York Stock Exchange reported a short interest of               our stock price dropped significantly. This hedge fund
approximately 35.8 million of our common shares, which         manager continues to make allegations regarding the
constitutes approximately 33% of our outstanding shares.       legality of our network marketing program, our product
As of the end of fiscal year 2012, the number of common        safety, our accounting practices and other matters.
shares sold short represented a significantly unusual high     Additionally, from time to time the Company is
short position based on our historical trend, where our        subject to governmental and regulatory inquiries and
short interests in our common shares were less than 5%         inquiries from legislators that may adversely affect
at the end of fiscal year 2011 compared to approximately       our stock price. Our stock price has continued to exhibit
35% at the end of fiscal year 2012. It is also possible that   heightened volatility and the short interest in our
the New York Stock Exchange short interest reporting           common shares continues to remain high. Short sellers
system does not fully capture the total short interest and     expect to make a profit if our common shares decline in
that it could be larger. Short sellers expect to make a        value, and their actions and their public statements may
profit if our common shares decline in value, and their        cause further volatility in our share price. While a number
actions and their public statements may cause further          of traders have publicly announced that they have taken
volatility in our share price. While a number of traders       long positions contrary to the hedge fund shorting our
have publicly announced that they have taken long              shares, the existence of such a significant short interest
positions contrary to the hedge fund shorting our shares,      position and the related publicity may lead to continued
the existence of such a significant short interest position    volatility. The volatility of our stock may cause the value
and the related publicity may lead to continued volatility.    of a shareholder’s investment to decline rapidly.
The volatility of our stock may cause the value of a
shareholder’s investment to decline rapidly.
                                                      Figure A‐3:
This Figure plots calendar‐time long‐short value‐weighted excess returns. Quintile 1 (Q1) refers to firms that have the least
similarity (Cosine similarity) between their document this year and the one last year, quintile 5 (Q5) refers to firms that
have the most similarity in their documents across years. Q5‐Q1 represents the long‐short (L/S) portfolio that goes long
Q5 and short Q1 each month.
                          Figure A‐4: Release date of 10‐Ks and 10‐Qs by month of the year.

This Figure plots the number of filings by their release dates, by calendar month of the year, for the 10‐Ks and 10‐Qs in
our sample.


                Month                                  Freq.                Percent                    Cum.
                1                                      5,290                    1.59                    1.59
                2                                    24,834                     7.47                    9.07
                3                                    49,150                   14.79                   23.86
                4                                    13,798                     4.15                  28.01
                5                                    63,832                   19.21                   47.22
                6                                      8,444                    2.54                  49.76
                7                                      9,812                    2.95                  52.71
                8                                    64,705                   19.47                   72.19
                9                                      9,483                    2.85                  75.04
                10                                   10,455                     3.15                  78.19
                11                                   63,674                   19.16                   97.35
                12                                     8,807                    2.65                    100
                Total                               332,284                     100
