                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              DETERRENCE, WORK AND CRIME:
                      REVISITING THE ISSUES WITH BIRTH COHORT DATA




                                     Helen Tauchen

                                    Ann Dryden Witte

                                   Harriet Griesinger




                                 Working Paper No. 2508




                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 1988




We would like to thank Marvin E. Wolfgang of the Center for Studies in Criminology
and Criminal Law at the University of Pennsylvania for providing us with data and Neil
Weiner, also at the Center, for invaluable assistance with the data and for information
about the Philadelphia criminal justice system. Terence Thornberry, Dean of the School
of Criminal Justice, State University of New York, Albany, also provided valuable insights
regarding the data and its use. Finally, we would like to thank the National Science
Foundation for the funding that made the research possible. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2508
                                                February 1988




                         Deterrence, Work and Crime:
                Revisiting the Issues with Birth Cohort Data




                                 ABSTRACT


          In this paper we analyze the criminal behavior of a cohort sample of
     young men over an eight year period using random effects probit and Tobi
     techniques. Our major advances relate to our careful conceptualization of
     general deterrence, and our data. As far as we are aware, this work
     represents the first time that a richly specified model of criminal
     activity has been estimated using panel data for a general population
      group.
           We find very robust evidence for a general deterrent effect emanating
      from police resources. Our results regarding general deterrence are open to
      fewer questions than previous findings. We also find that working and going
      to school significantly decrease the probability of committing criminal
      acts and by virtually identical amounts. This similarity of effect when
      coupled with other findings suggests that crime does not serve mainly as a
      direct source of income and that incentive effects emanating from higher
      wages are not very strong. There is little empirical support for the "crime
      as work" model that has dominated economic thought regarding crime over the
      last two decades. More fruitful models of work and crime may result if work
                                                                                 -
      is conceived as having its primary effects either through preferences or
      through information.


Helen Tauchen                    Ann Dryden Witte                Harriet Griesinger
Department of Economics          National Bureau 0f              23 Bellevue Ave.
University of North Carolina     Economic Research               Cambridge, MA 02138
Chapel Hill, NC 27514            1050 Massachusetts Ave.
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
I.   Introduction

     In this paper we consider the criminal behavior of a cohort sample of

young men over an eight year period. We are primarily interested in two

issues: (1) the general deterrent effects of criminal justice resources and

(2) the interaction between employment, schooling, and criminal choices.

     Our work extends and we believe improves upon existing work in a

number of ways. The vast majority of work on crime by economists uses

aggregate data on crime rates not individual data that reflects individual

choices. During the 1980s, there have been a small but increasing number

of studies that use individual data to estimate economic models of crime.

While these studies have improved our understanding of the criminal choice,

they suffer from a number of difficulties some of which we are able to

address. First, existing studies generally use data for "high-risk"

individuals such as prison releasees. We use data for a cohort sample that

is quite representative of the general population of young males in large

urban areas. As a result, we provide evidence concerning factors

associated with ever participating in criminal activity as well as evidence

concerning the behavior of criminals. Second, existing studies generally

use cross sectional data. We use longitudinal data. The longitudinal

nature of our data allows us to separate the "pure" age effect from cohort

effects on criminality. Further, the panel aspect of the data allows us to

obtain more efficient estimates of the effect of work, schooling and socio-

demographic factors on crime. Finally, existing individual-level studies

have either ignored the deterrence issue or created individual specific

deterrence variables that are: (1) unlikely to represent independent

variation in the probability or severity of sanctions and (2) unlikely to
                                      2

be uncorrelated with the random element in the crime equation. We exploit

the longitudinal nature of our data to obtain a deterrence variable that is

both conceptually superior to those used in the past and more policy

relevant.

-    To summarize briefly our most interesting results, we find very robust

evidence for a general deterrence effect emanating from police resources.

tUe also find that both working and going to school significantly decrease

the probability of committing criminal acts. Further, our empirical

results indicate that the effect of schooling and work are virtually

identical. This similarity of effect when coupled with some of our other

findings and some previous work suggests that crime may not have as its

only, or possibly even its primary, motivation monetary gain. The

traditional economic model which sees crime mainly as a substitute for work

(i.e., an income source) may be too simplistic. Recent results suggest

that the similarity of effects for working and being in school may occur

because such activities simply keep young males occupied, or, we believe

more plausibly, because participation in these activities are related to

preference (e.g.. a lesser inclination for crime to begin with or lowered

attraction for illegal activity as a result of working or going to school)

or informational effects. We find that members of our cohort become less

likely to commit criminal acts as they age. This is a "pure" age effect

since we are dealing with a single cohort. A somewhat surprising finding

is that young men who attended parochial high schools are significantly

less likely to commit offenses as adults, ceteris parabis. The literature

suggest that this finding may either come from some benefit due to active

participation in religious activities (e.g., morality, networking), or to
                                      3


the fact that parochial schools provide a more structured and disciplined

learning environment. Such an environment both serves to better educate

boys and to keep them out of trouble. Our data do not allow us to

disentangle the various possible effects of a parochial education.

However, the result is quite interesting and is consistent with a number of

findings that have appeared lately in labor economics.

     The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows. In the

next section we review the literature with particular attention to

empirical work that uses individual data to estimate crime models. In

section three, we present the conceptualization which structures our

empirical work and in section four we describe the data we use to estimate

our model. Section five contains a discussion of the way in which we

measure our theoretical constructs and the estimation techniques we use.

In section six we describe our empirical results, and the final section

contains our conclusions.


II. The Literature

     It is now almost twenty years since Becker (1968) published a

pioneering article that led economists to reconsider the factors causing

individuals to commit criminal acts. Work by economist since Becker's

article can be conveniently divided Into two decades of activity. Since

our work is primarily empirical, we focus on the empirical literature in

our review.


The First Decade

     Ehrlich (1973, 1974) and a number of other economists extended

Becker's model.1 As this work progressed, the economic model of crime
                                      4

became firmly embedded in labor economics. Most of the economic models

were time allocation models in which criminal activity was one possible

time use. Criminal activity was generally represented as being similar to

employment in that it requires time and produces income. For convenience,

we refer to such models as "crime as work" models.

     Much of the empirical work during the first decade was based on

aggregate cross sectional or time series data usually obtained from the

FBI's Uniform Crime Reports (IJCRs).2 Most of the studies posit a set of

simultaneous equations for the crime rate and some measure of sanctions

(e.g., the fraction of cases "solved" or mean prison time served).

Identification of the crime equation is achieved by excluding

sociodemographic variables (e.g., population density), police resource

variables, or lags of the crime rate from the crime equation.

     First generation theoretical and empirical work dwindled in the late

l970s. Extensions of the theoretical model (e.g., enriching the vector of

criminal justice system actions) provided needed directions for the

specification of empirical models but few testable hypotheses. The

empirical work that was done during this decade was seriously questioned by

a National Academy of Sciences' panel (Blumstein, et al.   ,   1978) and others
(e.g. Brier and Fienberg, 1980). The panel could find little, if any,

justification for the exclusion restrictions used to identify the crime

equation in the simultaneous equation models. While the panel did not

reject the simultaneous equation approach, they concluded that the previous

research based on such models warranted no definitive conclusions about the

extent of any deterrence effects. Further, many researchers suggested that

little would come from additional attempts to estimate deterrence models
                                      S

with this approach (e.g., Cook, 1979, 1980).


The Second Decade

     During the second decade, empirical work by economist used either time

series methods and aggregate, generally UCR, data (e.g., Cook and Zarkin,

1985; Ehrlich and Erower, 1987; Hashimoto, 1987; Phillips and Ray, 1982;

Yamada, 1985) or qualitative and limited dependent variable techniques and

individual data (e.g., Good, Pirog-Cood and Sickles, 1986; Montmarguette

and Nerlove, 1985: Myers, 1983; Viscusi, 1986a, 1986b; Schmidt and Witte,

1984; Witte, 1980,). Since the latter work relates most closely to our own

we will concentrate our review on this literature. For completeness, we

will also discuss briefly some relevant work by sociologists (e.g., Rossi,

Berk and Lenihan, 1980; Thornberry and Christenson, 1984) and psychologists

(e.g., Farrington, et al., 1986; Cottfredson, 1985).

     In the first half of the l980s a number of economists used data for

prison releasees to estimate single equation models of criminal activity.

For example, see Witte (1980) and Myers (1983). This work treated criminal

justice system actions and labor market variables as exogenous. Deterrence

variables were created using information on each individual's previous

experience with the criminal justice system. For example, in Witte's work

the probability of conviction is proxied by the fraction of prior arrests

that resulted in conviction. This representation of deterrence variables

can be challenged since such variables may reflect differences in the types

of crimes committed rather than any difference in the probability of

arrest, ceteris paribus.3 Further, if there is autocorrelation in criminal

behavior, these deterrence variables are not exogenous regressors.

     There are, in addition, two other limitations to work that uses cross
                                        6

sectional data for prison releasees. First, such work cannot reveal how

criminal justice system actions or opportunities affect the decision as to

whether or not to participate in criminal activity. Second, cross

sectional data cannot yield information about the dynamics of criminal

activity or about the effects of variables that vary mainly through time

and not in the cross section (e.g., macroeconomic conditions).

     Recent work using individual data has attempted to overcome some of

the difficulties outlined above. Montmarquette and Nerlove (1985) and

Thornberry and Christenson (1984) use data for general population groups.

Farrington, et al. (1986), Good, Pirog-Good, and Sickles (1986),

Gottfredson (1985) and Thornberry and Christenson (1984) use data that

contain observations for at least two time periods. Only Farrington,

et al. (1986) and Thornberry and Christenson (1984) have panels that extend

over a number of years (four years in each instance). However, these

authors do not use panel data techniques to estimate their models.

Further, Farrington, et al. estimate their individual Poisson model for

only 36 of the 399 youths in their sample.4 Methods of estimation vary

widely with some studies failing to take account of the qualitative or

limited nature of measures of criminal activity (e.g., Gottfredson ,1985;

Rossi Berk and Lenihan, 1980; Thornberry and Christenson ,1984).

     Most of the recent studies either include no general deterrence

variables (e.g., Good, Pirog-Good, and Sickles, Rossi, Berk and Lenihan,

1980; Thornberry and Christenson, 1984) or use measures that depend on the

individual's past criminal choices (e.g. ,t4yers, 1983; Schmidt and Witte,

1984; Viscusi, l986a, 198Gb; Witte, 1980). Only Montmarquette and

Nerlove's study of self reports of drug     use,   petty theft, and shoplifting
                                      7

by juveniles in Canada uses deterrent variables that do not depend directly

on the individual's past criminal behavior. One of the advantages of their

data set is that it contains information on the probability of arrest for

each of the three offense categories. The arrest probabilities are,

however, self reports of the perceived probabilities of arrest. Some

recent work that incorporate economic and psychological theories of

decision making (e.g. ,Akerlof and Dickens, 1982, and Dickens, 1986) would

suggest that an individual's perception of the probability of arrest is not

determined independently from the criminal decision. It is not clear

whether the perceptions are cx ante causal factors or ex post

rationalizations for crime choices. None of the studies consider the

potential endogeneity of criminal justice actions.

     A few empirical studies have considered the criminal and labor market

decisions jointly. These studies are similar to the aggregate data studies

of the previous decade in that they use a simultaneous equations method to

determine the causal link. However, they differ from these studies in that

it is the link between crime and employment not deterrence that is of

primary interest. As in the earlier work based on aggregate data, the

primary difficulty with this approach is in achieving identification of the

crime and employment equations since the one-period "crime as workM model,

implies that the same variables appear in both equations.

     Good, Pirog-Good and Sickles (1986) Rossi, Berk, and Lenihan (1980)

and Schmidt and Witte (1984) identify their crime equations by assuming

that variables related to job skills or job search affect the labor market

variable but not criminal activity. Thornberry and Christenson (1984)

obtain identification in their four year panel data study by treating the
                                       8

 crime rate and employment status for each year as separate and uncorrelated

 variables.

      Our work seeks to extend existing economic work on crime in a number

 of ways. First, unlike much of the recent work, we explicitly consider

both of the issues that have been central to economic work on crime:

 deterrence and the nature of the relationship between work and crime. In

considering these two issues, we have stepped back and attempted to advance

the state of the art. To more effectively estimate deterrence effects, we

exploit the panel nature of our data and the fact that the data contains

information on criminal justice resources as well as the usual individual-

level information. To provide better information on the way in which crime

and work are related, we carefully choose our period of study (the young

adult year, 18-25) and explicitly recognize the need to consider schooling

as well as work. Second, the nature of our data allows broader

generalizations than have been possible with previous work. We estimate

our model using data for a sample that can be considered quite

representative of young, US males in large urban areas. Finally, we

estimate our model using a technique which specifically accounts for both

the qualitative and limited nature of the dependent variable and the panel

nature of the data.


III. Conceptualization

     In this section we present a simple model of criminal behavior. The

purpose of the model is to explain our empirical specification and to help

in comparing our work with that of others.

    We assume a von Neumann-Morgenstern decision maker who chooses the

level of criminal activity to maximize expected utility. Consistent with
                                          9

the empirical literature, we assume that the number and type of offenses

can be aggregated to an index measure and denote the index level of

criminal activity as c. Also in accordance with empirical findings, we

assume that the probability of apprehension and the extent of any sanctions

depend on the level of criminal activity. In addition, the probability of

apprehension and level of sanctions may depend on individual

characteristics related to the person's ability to elude arrest or to

mitigate the punishment and on exogenous factors related to the criminal

justice system (e.g., the availability of resources and the legal code).

The probability of apprehension and the level of sanctions if apprehended

are denoted P(c,at,$) and S(c,ci1,fl) respectively where 1 is a vector of

individual characteristics and fi   is   a vector of exogenous factors related

to the criminal justice system.5

     For notational simplicity, we ignore the possibility of multiple

arrests and assume that in any time period the individual is either

arrested once or not at all.6 In either of these two states, an

individual's well-being depends on the rewards to legal and criminal

activities and the level of sanctions. The utility with total income I,

offense level c, and sanctions s is


                  U(I,R(c)


where R(c) is the returns with criminal activity c, and         denotes a vector

of exogenous variables systematically related to preferences. It is often

assumed that the benefits from crime and the sanctions can be monetized;

the individual's utility then depends only on disposable income, income

from all sources including crime and net of fines or other monetized
                                       10

 penalties. We do not find this traditional assumption appropriate since

 many offenses yield no direct monetary gain (e.g., assault, drug use) and

 most punishments involve restrictions on personal freedom (e.g., probation,

 imprisonment) not a monetary fine. Under our model both rewards and

punishments may be nonpecuniary.

     The individual chooses the level of criminal activity to maximize

expected utility given by


      EU — P U(I,R(c),S(c,al,fl);a0) ÷ (1-P) U(I,R(c),0;a°).


The optimal level of criminal activity, c*, and the expected number of
                        *
arrests, P(c*, a I,fl) c depend on total income from legal activities, the
                       ,




preferences of the individual, and any factors that might cause the form of

the probability, sanctions or criminal returns functions to shift.

     Note that in this model the probability of arrest is endogenous and

depends explicitly on the nature of the criminal act. This means that the

probability of arrest can not be treated as a simple explanatory variable

as it has been in recent individual-level work examining the deterrence

issue. Under the model, one could either estimate an equation for arrest

simultaneously with the crime equation or enter exogenous arguments from

the arrest function in the crime equation and estimate the resulting semi-

reduced form. We take the latter approach in our empirical work because of

the very considerable difficulties involved in the former.7

     This model differs from most economic models in two major ways.

First, the model represents the individual as choosing an index of criminal

activity rather than the time to allocate to crime. Much of the work of

the first (e.g., Ehrlich, 1974) and second decades (e.g., Flinn, 1986)
                                     11

adopted the crime as work assumption which sees the criminal choice as a

time allocation decision. In recent years, some studies have suggested

alternatives. They point out that many crimes require relatively little

time (Crowley, 1981) and that in many instances crime and work are combined

(e.g.. Holzman, 1982; Phillips and Votey, 1985).

     As a practical matter, empirical work based on a crime as work model

and the criminal activity model presented above are quite similar. Since

information on actual time allocations, wage rates and wealth are not

generally available, studies based on crime as work models have estimated

equations like the one described above for self reported offenses or

arrests. We have simply presented a model which is more consistent with

empirical practice and recognizes the fact that much crime is not very time

intensive.

     The second way in which the model differs from most of the previous

literature is by allowing the probability of arrest to depend on the level

of criminal activity. Despite considerable evidence to the contrary, the

empirical work on individual criminal choices treats the probability of

arrest as exogenous. We alter this assumption and are careful to include

only exogenous factors related to the probability of arrest in our

empirical model.


IV. The Data

     Our primary data is for a ten percent random sample of males born in

1945 and residing in Philadelphia between their 10th and lath birthdays.

The birth cohort was identified and information collected from school

records, draft registration records and the Juvenile Aid Division of the

Philadelphia Police Department beginning in 1964. See Wolfgang, Figlio and
                                      12

 Sellin (1972) for a detailed discussion of this phase of data collection.

      Beginning in 1970, researchers attempted to interview the 975

 individuals in the ten percent random sample. The subjects were 25 or 26

 when interviewed and were asked for detailed information on their

 activities since leaving high school including schooling, work and criminal

 activities (self reports). Interviews were carried out with 567

 Individuals (62 percent of the individuals in the ten percent sample).8

Researchers have carefully considered the issues of response bias for the

 interview data.9 Thornberry and Christenson conclude that the bias is "not

sufficient to distort correlational analysis or to alter appropriate

conclusions concerning statistical significance" (1984, p. 401). They do

warn however that blacks were substantially less likely to be interviewed

than whites.

     In 1975, researchers carried out complete searches of FRI records for

offenses committed by the ten percent sample. We added detailed

information on the neighborhood of residence at the time each individual

left high schoolj° In addition, for the years of the panel, we recorded

information on police resources ,crime rates, and real wages in

manufacturing In Philadelphia. We also completely restructured the data

set so that we could exploit the longitudinal nature of information.

     Our panel traces sample members' activities from the time they were 18

or 19 in 1964 until they were 25 or 26 in 1971.11 These eight years are

the time period in which there is generally the greatest mingling of work

and criminal activity. Young adults are still in the high crime years and,

yet are old enough to have begun working or training for work. Further, 18

is both a legal and psychological watershed.   Legally, in Philadelphia,
                                     13

individuals become subject to adult statutes and are handled by the adult

criminal justice system after the age of 18. Criminal records are public

after the age of 18. Psychologically, by the age of 18 individuals are

beginning to pursue lives independent of their families.


V.   The Empirical Model

     Before we estimate our model, we oust develop empirical measures for

our theoretical constructs and select an estimation technique. We discuss

measurement issues first and then describe the method we use to estimate

our model.

     Our two most difficult measurement issues relate to criminal activity

and deterrence. One must make two decisions when measuring criminal

activity. One must first select the source from which to obtain

information on criminal offenses and then decide on a method of aggregating

various types of offenses. Our data set contains both official records and

self reports of criminal activity. The relative merits of these two

sources have been discussed at length in the literature (e.g., Hindelang,

Hirschi and Weis, 1981 and Weis, 1986). In his recent survey, Weis

concludes: "In general there is surprising consistency in the descriptions

of most important correlates of crime based on official crime records and

self-reports of criminal involvement" (1986, p.4). Further, Thornberry and

Farnworth (1982) report a substantial level of concordance between self

reports and official records for the Philadelphia data. We use official

arrest records as our source of information on criminal activity because

the arrest records in the Philadelphia data contain detailed information

regarding the timing of offenses and the self report information does not.

     Next, one must decide how to represent such a heterogeneous activity
                                      14

 as crime. We measure criminal activity in two ways. Our first measure is

 a binary variable which indicates whether or not the individual committed

 an offense during the given time period. This measure, which is the type

 of measure generally used in the literature, implicitly treats all offense

 as identical. Our second measure of criminal activity is an index which

uses Sellin and Wolfgang's (1964) offense seriousness scale to aggregate

offenses. The index reflects both the seriousness and frequency of

arrests.

     The second measurement issue relates to deterrence. Recall that under

our model, the probability of arrest depends on the type of criminal

activity undertaken, on individual characteristics related to the ability

to avoid arrest and on exogenous factors related to the criminal justice

system. Simply using a probability of arrest as an explanatory variable as

has been done in the existing literature is clearly unacceptable. Most of

the observed variation in the probability of arrest will result from

differences in crime type and crime frequency not from exogenous

differences in the probability of arrestj2 Further, the probability of

arrest will be correlated with random element in the crime equation.

     Under our model, individual characteristics related to the ability to

avoid arrest and changes in criminal justice resources and policies may

cause independent variation (i.e., variation that does not depend on the

type and extent of criminal activity) in the probability of arrest. From a

policy point of view, the effect of changes in the probability of arrest

caused by changes in the criminal justice system are of far more interest

than changes caused by differences in individual elusiveness. Since there
                                                                    13
were no major changes in police policies during the study period,        we use
                                     15

the police budget in real dollars per index offense as our primary measure

of general deterrence.14 As was recently pointed out to us, Block, et al.

(1981) use a similar approach in their study of antitrust enforcement.

     It is, of course, possible that there are shifts in the probability of

arrest that flow from differences in individual elusiveness.

Unfortunately, we don't know precisely how to reflect elusiveness in our

empirical model. Further, most variables likely to reflect differing

abilities to elude arrest (e.g., intelligence or like minded friends) are

also likely to be related to differences in the individuals' criminal

choices. To reflect this confounding of effects, we interpret the

coefficients on variables Likely to be related to elusiveness as reflecting

some mixture of preference and deterrence effects.

     We are not able to measure the returns from legal activities directly

since there are no income variables in our data set. However, we do have

information on the amount of time allocated to work and school during each

year and we incorporate these variables as partial measures of the returns

to work and schooling. To further reflect both returns to work and

schooling, we incorporate factors generally correlated with income (i.e.,

IQ and a binary indicating whether or not the individual received a high

school degree). Recall that our data set contains information on the

average wage in manufacturing in Philadelphia for each year of the sample.

We had hoped to use this as a further measure of the return to legitimate

time uses. However, the years represented in our panel were a period of

sustained growth in real wages. As a result, the variable representing the

year of the panel and the variable for the real wage rate in manufacturing

are highly correlated ( a correlation coefficient of .97). with this
                                       16

 correlation it is not possible to separate the year and real wage effects.

 As can be seen in Table 1 where we list all variables used in our empirical

 analysis, we include only the year variable in our model. However, when

 interpreting the coefficient on this variable, we recognize that it may

 reflect both age and real wage effects.

      The variables we see as related to preferences are of three types: (1)

 variables that reflect faintly and community background (i.e., a binary

 equal to one if both parents were born in the US, an index measure of the

 occupational status of the household head when the sample member was in

 high school151 a binary equal to one if the individual attended a parochial

 school, the number of addresses during primary and secondary school years,

 average income in the neighborhood of residence during high school years, a

binary equal to one if the high school neighborhood was predominantly

Italian); (2) variables reflecting personal characteristics (i.e., IQ, a

binary equal to one if the individual is white16); (3; :ariables reflecting

activities that occurred during the Juvenile or young adult years (i.e.,

three variables indicating the type of charge at first arrest, the number

of police contact as a juvenile, the percent of Juvenile police contacts

resulting in formal criminal justice system processing, a binary for gang

membership, a binary equal to one if the individual is married).

     We estimate our model of criminal activity with the binary and index

measures of criminal offenses by random effects probit and Tobit techniques

respectivelyj7 The two-factor random effects models are extensions of the

usual probit and Tobit models.   En the two-factor random effects probit and

Tobit models, as in the linear two-factor random effects models, the

disturbance terms are correlated across time for any individual but not
                                     17

across individuals. The component of the disturbance term that is

correlated across time for any individual is designed to reflect

unmeasured, persistent individual effects. If the random disturbance terms

are uncorrelated with the explanatory variables, the parameter estimates of

the random effects probit and Tobit models are consistent and
                            18
asymptotically efficient.

     Before selecting the random effects model, we considered the

possibility of using a fixed effects model with a separate intercept term

for each individual. With a linear model, differencing the data makes it

possible to estimate at least some parameters without having to estimate

the separate intercept terms. However, this approach exploits the

linearity of the model. With nonlinear models like the probit and Tobit,

estimation of a fixed-effects model requires that the individual specific

intercept terms be estimated. This leads to the classical incidental

parameter problem, and means that the parameter estimates from a nonlinear

fixed effects model will not be consistent.


VI. Empirical Results

     Tables 1 and 2 contain the empirical results for the random effects

probit and Tobit models respectively. The first column of results is for a

specification including only variables that are unaffected by an

individua)Js criminal or time allocation decisions (e.g., police resources,

and family background). The second column contains the results for a

specification that also includes predetermined variables related to the

juvenile criminal record. The last column is for a specification including

variables related to activities that occurred in the current year (e.g.,

faction of the year employed) or previous years, possibly during the sample
                                      18

 period (e.g., high school graduation). We estimate several models to check

 the robustness of results. We are particularly concerned about possible

 correlation between the variables included only in Models 2 and 3 and the

 error term and with the bias this can impose.

     Note first that the probit and Tobit models are significant in all

 specifications and the estimated coefficients, when significant, are of the

 same sign in all specifications. The estimated coefficients on the

variables of primary interest are stable in sign and magnitude across

specifications for a given estimation technique. In particular, note that

 the estimated coefficients on the variable for police resources are

negative and significant in all specifications. Further, the magnitudes of

the coefficients on the police resource variable are not statistically

different across specifications for either estimation technique. The

magnitude of significant coefficients for most other variables is also

quite stable although the significance of coefficients on some family

background (e.g. occupational status of household head) and personal

characteristics are more variable due to collinearity as we discuss below.

The individual effects component of the random disturbance is a substantial

part of the overall variance of the random element in the Tobit models, and

is significant in both the probit and Tobit models.

     From an economist's perspective the results for the police resource

variable may be of most interest. Our findings provide robust (across

specifications and estimation technique) support the general deterrence

hypothesis. Further, the deterrence results we obtain are open to fewer

questions than are previous results that use aggregate or individual data.

Unlike the aggregate studies, our work is not subject to the type of
                                       19

simultaneity bias common in studies that use crime rates as a dependent

variable and the clearance rate as the independent variable. Unlike

previous work using individual data, we recognize that general deterrence

flows only from variation in the probability of arrest that is not related

to the type of criminal activity and include a policy relevant variable

related to such variation.19

     Recall that under our model it is total returns to legal activity that

will affect the criminal choice. We seek to reflect total income by

incorporating variables related to time allocation and to the wage rate.

See Table 1 or 2. We find greater time working, greater time in school and

higher IQ to be significantly associated with lower probabilities of

criminal activity. However, we find that receipt of a high school diploma

has no significant effect on offending. If we consider only the results

for the time allocated to work and IQ, we could interpret our findings as

consistent with our model. However, when we consider the results for the

high school degree binary and the time allocated to school as well

interpretation becomes more complex.

     The coefficient on the proportion of the time working and the

proportion of time at school are not significantly different from one

another. Yet, under our model or a crime as work model, we would expect

the effect of these two variables to be quite different. Under our model,

we expect time at work to affect the level of criminal activity primarily

because it increases income. Specifically, our results for time at work

could be interpreted as indicating that crime is an inferior good.

Schooling does not enter either our model or most crime as work models

explicitly. However, under such static models, our results for time in
                                       20

 school could be interpreted as reflecting preference effects. For example,

more time in school might be associated with lower probabilities of

criminal acts because those who choose to attend school are less inclined

to participate in criminal activities or possibly because attending school

lowers perceptions regarding the desirability of crime. Dynamic models of

criminal activity provide other possible interpretations for our schooling

results. For example Flinn's model (1986) Implies that time in school

affects crime because it lead to higher future legitimate income streams

through human capital effects and possibly lower discount rates through

dynamic preference effects.

     To throw further light on the effect of school on criminality,

consider the fact that we find attending a parochial junior or senior high

school to be significantly related to lower levels of criminal activity as

an adult in all specifications of our model. In a recent study, Viscusi

(1986a) finds church attendance to be associated with lower levels of

reported participation in criminal activity. Also, Freeman (1986) finds

that church attendance is a significant determinant of who escapes

inner-city poverty. These results may relate to our findings since the

families of many parochial school children are actively involved in

religious activities. The findings regarding religion would be consistent

with an effect for parochial schooling operating through preference

although informational effects (e.g. .networking) are also possible.

     There may, however, be a more direct link between the type of

education received in parochial schools and future decisions regarding

criminal behavior. Studies have shown that schools that do the best job of

reducing the expected level of delinquency also do the best job of
                                     21

improving educational achievement, maintaining good attendance and reducing

misbehavior.20 Parochial schools are more likely to have these

characteristics than are public schools, particularly pubLic schools in

central cities such as Philadelphia. Given that we find no significant

effect for high school graduation on crime, it appears that this

interpretation too is consistent with the primary effect of schooling

running through preferences or informational effects. In this case the

preference or informational effects would, of course, have to be dynamic,

and could run directly through education rather than through participation

in religious activities.

     However one interprets the results for schooling, it seems unlikely

that time in school and time at work would have similar effects with such

different causal processes at work. Yet similar effects have been found by

a number of authors (e.g., Farrington, et al., 1986; Gottfredson, 1985;

Viscusi, 1986a). The similarity of results suggests that the effect of

working on criminal activity does not stem primarily from immediate income

or incentive effects as assumed by our model and crime as work models since

schooling has no such effects. The fact that we find consistently

insignificant effects for high school graduation (assumably associated with

a higher wages on average) provides further evidence suggesting that the

direct income effects of working are relatively unimportant.

     There are at least two possible explanations for the similar effects

of working and being at school. First, and most consistent with existing

models, the effect of time in school and time working may result simply

from the individual's time constraint. If an individual allocates more

time to school or work, there is simply less time to allocate to other
                                     22

activities, e.g., crime and leisure. If there is only this time constraint

effect and no income effect from working than the effect of time in school

and time working would be quite similar. However, note that the policy

implications of a simple time constraint effect are quite different than

the implications of a crime as work model. It is not higher incomes and

better jobs that will keep young men out of trouble, but rather its is

keeping them busy doing something legal that is important. Keeping them in

school will have the saute effect as putting them to work. Viscusi (1986a)

makes this point.

     However, this explanation seems a bit simplistic to us and does not

square well with existing work suggesting that crime is not a very time

intensive activity and that it is often combined with work. We believe

that a more plausible explanation for the similarity of effects has to do

with the preference or informational effects. Work like schooling may

either reflect individual preferences or shape them in ways that are not

conducive to criminal activity. Alternatively, either working or being in

school may provide information conducive to legal activities or not

conducive to illegal ones.

     The coefficient on the year variable is negative in all specifications

of the model and significant in all but one specification (Model 2 of Table

2). Recall that year may be reflecting either a pure age effect or a real

wage effect since real wages were increasing throughout our study period.21

The fact that we find no significant effect for receipt of a high school

degree leads us to believe that year has a significant effect on criminal

activity primarily because of aging. Thus, like other studies we find that

older adults are less likely to participate in crime, ceteris parabis.22
                                     23

However, since we are using panel data we can unambiguously interpret our

findings as teflecting a pure age rather than a cohort effect. Separation

of the age and cohort effect on crime was not possible in cross sectional

studies.

    As noted earlier, the coefficients on race, socioeconomic status of

parent's occupation, number of addresses during the high school years,

average income of the family neighborhood, and ethnic background of the

family neighborhood (i.e., the Italian binary) are not consistently

significant across the specifications of the probit and Tobit models. When

significant, the coefficients of each variable are always of the same sign

and support previous empirical findings or common hypothesis about

individual or family characteristics and participation in criminal

activity. See Bluinstein, et al. (1986) or Wilson and Herrnstein (1985).

As might be expected, these variables are correlated and the reason for the

changes in significance across specification is the collinearity,that

results from this correlation. By omitting one or more of these variables

we could obtain what might appear to be much cleaner results. However,

such results would be a somewhat misleading representation of the

information in our data. Since these factors tend to occur in the same

families, it is not clear which has the more important role in reducing     -




criminal   behavior.

     The limited evidence we obtain that whites are arrested less often

than other racial groups is consistent with the common finding that blacks

have far higher crime participation rates than white (e.g., Blumstein, fl

flj., 1986). In our sample, though, this finding could be partly

attributable to the practices of the criminal Justice system. A study that
                                          24

 uses the same data set we do (Collins, 1985) indicates that blacks were

 treated more harshly than whites by the Philadelphia criminal justice

 system during the l96Os and in particular that they were more likely to be

 arrested given whatever crime they committed. Since we are using arrest as

 our measure of criminal activity, our findings reflect these differences in

 police arrest practices as well as differences in criminal behavior across

 racial groups.

     As in other studies that use official crime data, we find that the

probability of committing a criminal act (as measured by arrest records) is

higher for young men whose household head during high school had a

relatively low status occupation.23 In light of this finding, it may seem

surprising that young men who grew up in higher income neighborhoods are

more likely to be arrested in their early adult years. There is some

question though about what an ecological variable such as average

neighborhood income measures. A number of economic studies based on

aggregate data include such a variable.24 In these studies, researchers

interpret average community income as measuring the "opportunities for

crime" and expect, and, indeed, often find this variable to be positively

related to the crime rate. It is possible that many of the young men in

our sample continue to frequent the neighborhood they grew up in after

graduating from high school. In this case, the average income variable may

be capturing "criminal opportunities.

     Our   results   for other family background variables (growing up in an

Italian neighborhood and the number of addresses during the primary and

secondary school years) are not generally significant. However, when they

are significant, they have the expected sign, i.e., growing up in an
                                      25

Italian neighborhood or moving around a great deal as a child is associated

with higher levels of criminal activity. We find no evidence of any

difference in the arrest rates between boys whose parents are and are not

born in the U.S.

     For the variables that are related to the boys' juvenile criminal

record and enter only the second and third specifications, we find that

boys who had more police contacts as juveniles, whose first arrest was for

a serious crime against persons and who were gang members as juveniles show

higher crime rates as young adults. There is a great deal of support in

the literature for the finding that a more extensive and serious previous

record is associated with higher crime rates. There has been less study of

the effects of gang membership of criminality but our results do not

contradict previous findings or hypotheses.25 Our finding for gang

membership and juvenile record is not inconsistent with our interpretation

of schooling and work effects as largely due to preference or informational

effects. Just as schooling and work lead to preferences that are not

supportive of criminal activity and to information about legal endeavors so

gang membership may lead to criminal preferences or to information about

illegal activities. A more substantial and serious record can, of course,

be seen as a revealing a strong preferences for crime, and certainly helps

to establish a network of criminal contacts.

    Our finding for gangs may also relate to lower probabilities of arrest

and ,thus, may in part be a deterrent effect. Juvenile gang membership may

allow acquisition of skills related to avoiding arrest.

    The coefficients on the percent of juvenile police contacts resulting

in formal criminal justice system processing are consistently negative but
                                     26

never significant. Whatever specific deterrent effect may flow through

this variable is certainly not very strong.

     As is clear front the above discussion, the results for our probit and

Tobit model are quite similar and provide convincing support for the

robustness of the effects we uncover. However, we are better able to

explain the binary measure of criminal activity than our index measure.

There are fewer significant coefficients in the Tobit models and the

magnitude of the "t-ratios" for significant coefficients declines in a

number of instances.

     Since the Tobit technique models both the probability of offending and

the seriousness of offending for those who do commit criminal acts, it is

clear that we are better able to explain whether or not someone commits an

offense than the seriousness of any offenses. This is disappointing since

we had anticipated that one of the strengths of our work would be our

ability to treat offending as a heterogeneous activity. We do not know why

we are unable to explain the seriousness of offending as well as the

probability. It is possible that although our measure of seriousness is

one of the oldest and most widely used in criminology, it is not good

enough. A more likely explanation, though, is that police charge at arrest

has a much larger random element than does arrest.

     It is also possible that the Tobit model is not an appropriate

functional form for estimating the seriousness of offending. This would be

true, for example, if the factors determining the seriousness of offending

and the probability were different. Schmidt and Witte (1988) have recently

experimented with models that allow the probability and the timing of

offenses to be affected by explanatory variables in different ways. It is
                                      27

interesting that they were able to explain the probability of offending to

a much greater degree than its timing.


VII. Conclusions

     Our most comforting finding relates to the general deterrence effect

of police resources. In contrast to previous studies with individual data,

we are able to use a general deterrence measure that does not depend on an

individual's past criminal choices and experiences with the criminal

justice system. We find a negative effect of real police expenditures on

the probability and seriousness of arrests. Further, the effect is

significant and of the same magnitude across specifications of the model.

It may be that the sensitivity of the deterrence findings in previous work

results partly from the use of variables that reflect differences in prior

criminal record rather than ceteris paribus difference in the probability

of apprehension or severity of punishment. With deterrence variables that

depend on an individual's past experiences, the effects of actual

differences in deterrence factors are confounded with differences in the

legal codes and enforcement for different types of crimes.

     Some of our other findings are more unsettling and when combined with

the results of other research suggest that it may be necessary to change

the way we conceive of the relationship between work and crime. The crime

as work model has dominated economic analysis of crime during the last two

decades. However, empirical practice has often not been consistent with

this model and empirical results have not been terribly supportive of it.

In our conceptualization, we sought to present a model that was more

consistent with empirical practice and which more carefully dealt with the

deterrence issue. Our empirical results suggest that we have indeed dealt
                                     28

more effectively with the deterrence issue. However, it appears that we

have not succeeded in developing a model that effectively deals with the

work and crime issue.

     Empirical work has provided little consistent support for a

significant relationship between wages, unemployment or income and crime.26

It does not appear that crime serves mainly as a direct source of income

nor does it appear that incentive effects emanating from higher wages are

very strong. Time spent working does appear to lead to lower levels of

criminal activity, but time spent working has effects that are virtually

identical to time in school for both juveniles and young adults. The

effect of working or going to school might occur either because of the time

constraint, or because of preference or informational effects. However,

substantial effects operating through the time constraint do not seem

likely since crime is not in general a very time consuming activity, and

unemployment does not appear to be significantly related to crime. Further

support for the importance of preference or informational effects flows

from findings indicating that participating in legally oriented activities

(e.g., religious activities) serves to lessen criminal activity and

participating in illegally oriented ones (i.e., juvenile gangs) serves to

stimulate it.

     If we are to understand the way in which work and crime affect one

another we must move beyond simple models adopted from labor economics or

consumer theory. There is mounting empirical support for models of crime

that either explicitly consider preference formation or that incorporate

imperfect information.
                                       29




                                    NOTES



 1.   For a survey of this literature see Heineke (1978) or Schmidt and

Witte (1984).

2.    See Blumstein, et al.(1978), Cook (1980), Long and Vitte (1981), or

Freeman (1983) for surveys.

3.    While variables such as the ratio of past arrest to past offenses

cannot be considered measures of general deterrence, they may be worthwhile

as measures of specific deterrence. The interpretation of the coefficients

is of course quite different with the variables used as measures of

specific rather than general deterrence.

4.
      They estimate individual specific Poisson parameters for periods of

employment and unemployment for the 36 individuals who committed at least

one offense and who spent at least one fourth of the year employed and at

least one fourth of the year unemployed.

5.
      See Tauchen, Witte, and Long (1985) or Blumstein, et al. (1983) for

discussions of the general determinants of criminal justice system actions.

For the cohort of our sample, Collins (1985) considers the factors

affecting the actions of the Philadelphia criminal justice system and finds

that the seriousness of offense and prior records were the two most

important determinants. In addition, he finds that race had an effect

early in the adjudication process and that blacks were more likely to be

arrested than whites for similar offenses.
                                      30

6.   The notation with multiple arrests is messy and complicated. The

implications of the model for structuring the empirical work are the same

as for the above model.

7.   Pursuit of the former approach would require information on

differences in arrest probabilities for various criminal offenses. Data on

the probability of arrest for only the crimes committed recently is not

sufficient since there is considerable evidence that individuals involved

in crime do not specialize. For a recent survey see Blumstein et at.

(1986). Such data is not available to us.

8.   Missing data for some variables and the fact that information for 1971

was available for only part of our sample resulted in our using information

for only 246 individuals in our analysis.

9.   For example, see Thornberry and Christenson (1984) or Wolfgang,

Thornberry and Figlio (1985).

10. This information caine from the City of Philadelphia Community Renewal

Program (1963) and the 1960 Census.

11. One might question the relevance of using data for the 1964-1971 time

period. However, in a number of ways Philadelphia of the l96Os and early

l97Os was quite like the US as a whole today. The violent crime rate in

Philadelphia during our study period was quite like the violent crime rate

in the US today. Further, both employment structure and family structure

in Philadelphia during the study period was quite reflective of current

nationwide patterns.

12. See Poterba (1987) for an excellent discussion of this issue in

another context.
                                     31

13. We discussed this issue at some length with Neil Weiner of the Center

for Studies in Criminology and Criminal Law, University of Pennsylvania.

14. We believe that this variable is a very good measure of real police

resources per offense and, thus, the relative probability of arrest in

Philadelphia during the 8 year period we are studying. As noted earlier,

the policies of the police did not change markedly during the period.

Also, it appear that reporting practices were quite similar throughout the

period. Finally, the mix of offenses changed little during the years

covered by our data. For instance, the ratio of serious person offenses to

total offenses was 23 to 26 percent during the 8 years. We had hoped to

include deterrence variables related to the court system as well as the

police system. We were unable to do so because resource data were not

available and there were no major changes in the criminal code or court

practices.

15. The index was developed by Reiss (1963).

16. The three Hispanics in our sample were classified as nonwhite.

17. The index measure of criminal activity during the year is censored at

zero and has a substantial pile-up at the censoring point (approximately 70

percent of our sample had no arrests during the years of the panel).

18. See Chamberlain (1984) or Hsiao (1986) for surveys of the literature

on panel data.

19. As a further check on the stability of the coefficient on the police

resource variable, we also estimated a specification that included only the

police resource and year variables. With this approach we avoid any

potential bias from correlation between the time invariant individual

effects component of the disturbance term and the included individual
                                     32

characteristics. The results do not change; the coefficients on both the

police and year variables are negative, significant, and not significantly

different from the coefficients in the other specifications.

20. These insights are drawn from Wilson and Herrnstein (1985) who provide

a good survey of the effect of schools on criminality.

21. The negative coefficient on the year variable does not reflect crime

trend factors since crime rates in Philadelphia were increasing throughout

the study period. However, it is possible that this variable is picking up

other trend factors.

22. See Blunistein, et al, (1986) and Wilson and Herrnstein (1985) for

recent surveys.

23. Studies using crime data from self reports do not find this

relationship. One explanation for the difference in findings between

studies that use official and self report crime data is that boys from

lower socioeconomic groups do not commit more crimes than other boys but

their crimes are more serious crimes and that they are more likely to be

arrested than others. Our results for the Tobit estimation in which we use

a crime variable that reflects both frequency and seriousness of the

criminal activity supports this claim. The variable for the occupational

status of the family head of household is more significant in the Tobit

model than in the probit model.

24. See Long and Witte (1981) or Freeman (1983) for a review of these

studies.

25. Blumstein et al. (1986) conclude that involvement with delinquent

friends is a significant risk factor for participation in delinquency. As

in our work, Viscussi (1986) finds that gang membership is associated with
                                     33

higher crime rates, However, Good, Pirog-Good and Sickles (1986) find no

significant relationship between participation in crime and gang

membership.

26. See Long and Witte (1981) and Freeman (1983) for reviews of the

literature.
                                        34
                                   REFERENCES



Akerlof, C. A. and W. T. Dickens. 1982.      "The Economic Consequences of

     Cognitive Dissonance," American Economic Review 72: 307-319.

Becker, C. 1968. "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach," Journal of

     Political Economy 76: 169-217.

Block, 1€ K., F. C. Nold and 3. 8. Sidak. 1981. "The Deterrent Effect of

     Antitrust Enforcement," Journal of Political Economy 89: 429-445.

Blumstein, A., J. Cohen, S. E. Martin and M. H. Tonry, eds. 1983.

     Research on Sentencinz: The Search for Reform. 2 vols. Washington,

     D.C.: National Academy Press

Blumstein, A. ,   3. Cohen and D. Nagin, eds. 1978. Deterrence and
     Incapacitation: Estimating the Effects of Criminal Sanctions on Crime

     Rates. Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences.

Blunstein, A., 3. Cohen, J. A. Roth and C. A. Visher, eds. 1986. Criminal

     Careers and 'Career Criminals'. 2 vols. Washington, D.C.: National

     Academy Press.

Brier, S. S. and S. E. Fienberg. 1980. "Recent Econometric Modeling of

     Crime and Punishment: Suppport for the Deterrence Hypothesis?",

     Evaluation Review 4:    147-191.

Chamberlain, C. 1984. "Panel Data       in Z. Cricilhes and M. Intriligator,

     eds., Handbook of Econometrics. Vol. II, Amsterdam: North-Holland,

     1247-1318.

City of Philadelphia Community Renewal Program. 1963. Trends in

     Populatjon, Housing and Socio-Economic Characteristics. Philadelphia,

     Pa.: Planning Analysis Sections.
                                         35

Collins, J. .3.    1985. "The Disposition of Adult Arrests: Legal and

     Extralegal Determinants of Outcome," in M. E. Wolfgang, et al.     ,   ads.
     "From Boy to Man, from Delinquency to Crime: A Follow-up of

     'Delinquency in a Birth Cohort.'" Working manuscript, Wharton School,

     University of Pennsylvania, 116-128.

Cook, P. J. 1979. "The Clearance Rate as a Measure of Criminal Justice

     System Effectiveness," Journal of Public Economics 11: 135-142.

Cook P. J. 1980. "Research in Criminal Deterrence: Laying the Groundwork

     for the Second Decade," in N. Morris and M. Tonry, ads., Crime and

     Justice: An Annual Review of Research. Chicago: University of Chicago

     Press, 2: 211-268.

Cook, P. J. and C. A. Zarkin. 1985.     "Crime and the Business Cycle,"

     Journal of Lnal Studies 14: 115-128.

Crowley, J. E. 1981. "Delinquency and Employment: Substitutions or

     Spurious Associations," Working Paper, Center for Human Resource

     Research, Ohio State University.

Dickens, W. T. 1986. "Crime and Punishment Again: The Economic Approach

     with a Psychological Twist," Journal of Public Economics 30: 97-107

Ehrlich, I.     1973. "Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A

     Theoretical and Empirical Analysis," Journal of Political Economy 81:

     521-565.

Ehrlich, I. 1974. "Participation in Illegitimate Activities: An Economic

    Analysis," in C. Becker and W. Landes, eds., Essays in the Economics

     of Crime and Punishment. New York: Columbia University Press,

     68-134.
                                      36

Ehrlich, I. and C. 0. Bower. 1987. "On the Issue of Causality in the

    Economic Model of Crime and Law Enforcement: Some Theoretical

    Considerations and Experimental Evidence," American Economic Review

     77: 99-106.

Farrington, D. P., et al. 1986. "Unemployment, School Leaving and Crime,"

    British Journal of Criminology 26: 335-356.

Farrington, D. P., L. E. Ohlin and 3. Q. Wilson. 1986. Understandinz and

     Controllin2 Crime: Toward a New Research Stratezv. New York:

     Springer-Verlag.

Flinn, C. 1986. "Dynamic Models of Criminal Careers," in A. Blumstein,

     et al., eds., Criminal Careers and 'Career Criminals'. Washington,

     DC: National Academy Press, 2:   356-379.

Freeman, K. B. 1983. "Crime and Unemployment," in 3. Q. Wilson, ed.,

     Crime and Public Policy. San Francisco, CA: ICS Press, 89-106.

Freeman, K. B. 1986. "Who Escapes? The Relation of Churchgoing and Other

     Background Factors to the Socioeconomic Performance of Black Male

     Youths from Inner-City Tracts," in R. B. Freeman and H. 3. Holzer,

     eds., The Black Youth Ernoloyment Crisis. Chicago: University of

     Chicago Press, 353-376.

Good, D. H., K. Pirog-Cood and R. C. Sickles. 1986. "An Analysis of Youth

     Crime and Employment Patterns," Journal of quantitative Criminolozv,

     2, 219-236

Gottfredson, 0. C. 1985. "Youth Employment, Crime, and Schooling: A

     Longitudinal Study of a National Sample," Developmental Psychology 21:

     419-432.
                                           37
 Heineke, J. M. 1978. "Economic Models of Criminal Behavior:
                                                             An Overview,"
     in J. H. Heineke, ed.   ,   Economic Models of Criminal Behavior.

     Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1-33.

Hashimoto, H.     1987, "The Minimum Wage Law and Youth Crimes: Time-Series

     Evidence," Journal of Law and Economics, 30, 443-464.

Hindelang, H. J. •   T. Hirschi and J. C. Weiss. 1981. Measuring

     Delinauency. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Holzman, H. R. 1982. "The Serious Habitual Property Offender as

     'Moonlighter' : An Empirical Study of Labor Force Participation among

     Robbers and Burglars," Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 73:

     1774-1793.

Hsiao, C. 1986. Analysis of Panel Data. Cambridge: Cambridge University

     Press.

Lattimore, P. K. and A. 0. Witte. 1986. "Models of Decision making Under

     Uncertainty: The Criminal Choice," in 0. B. Cornish and R. V. Clarke,

     eds., The Reasoning Criminal: Rational Choice Persnectives on

     Offendinz. New York: Springer-Verlag, 129-155.

Long, S. K. and A. D. Witte 1981, "Current Economic Trends: Implications

    for Crime and Criminal Justice," in K. N. Wright, ed,, Crime and

    Criminal Justice in a Declining Economy. Cambridge, MA:

    Oelgeschlager, Cunn & Ham, 69-143.

Montmarquette, C. and H. Nerlove. 1985. "Deterrence and Delinquency: An

    Analysis of Individual Data," Journal of Ouantitative Criminolov 1:

    37-58.
                                         38

Myers,   S.   1983. "Estimating the Economic Model of Crime: Employment

     versus Punishment Effects," Quarterly Journal of Economics 98:

     157-166.

Phillips, L. and 5; C. Ray. 1982. "Evidence on the Identification and

     Causality Dispute about the Death Penalty," in 0. D. Anderson and M.

     R. Perryman, eds. •   Aoolied Time Series Analysis. New York: Elsevier,
     313-340.

Phillips, L. and H. L. Votey. 1984. "Black Women, Economic Disadvantage

     and Incentives to Crime," American Economic Review 74: 293-297.

Poterba, J. M. 1987. "Tax Evasion and Capital Gains Taxation," American

     Economic Review 77: 234-239.

Reiss, A. J., Jr. 1963. Occurations and Social Status. Glencoe, IL: The

     Free Press.

Rossi, P. H., R. A. Berk and K. J. Lenihan. 1980. Money. Work, and Crime:
                                                   ______________________

     Exterimav.ral. Ev! ,inra
     ____________________       New York: Academic Press

Schmidt P. and A. D. Witte. 1984. An Economic Analysis of Crime and

     Justice. New York: Academic Press.                            -




Schmidt P. and A. D. Witte. 1988. Predictina Recidivism usina Survival

     Models. New York: Springer-Verlag.

Sellin, T. and M. E. Wolfgang. 1964. The Measurement of Delinquency. New

     York: John Wiley.

Tauchen, H., A. D. Witte and S. K. Long. 1984. Iviolence in the Family: A

     Nonrandom Affair," Working Paper No. 1665, National Bureau of

     Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
                                           39

 Thornberry, T. P. and M. Farnworth. 1982, "Social Correlates of Criminal

      Involvement: Further Evidence of the Relationship between Social

      Status and Criminal Behavior," American Sociolo2ical Review 47:

     505-518.

Thornberry, T. P. and R. L. Christenson. 1984. "Unemployment and Criminal

     Involvement: An Investigation of Reciprocal Causal Structures,"

     American Sociological Review 49: 398-411.

Viscusi, W. K. l986a. "Market Incentives for Criminal Behavior," in R. B.

     Freeman and H. J. Hoizer, eds.   ,   The Black Youth Employment Crisis.

     Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 301-346.

Viscusi, W. K. 1986b. "The Risks and Rewards of Criminal Activity: A

     Comprehensive Test of Criminal Deterrence," Journal of Labor Economics

     4: 317-340.

Weiss, J. C. 1986, "Issues in the Measurement of Criminal Careers," in A.

     Blumstein, et al., ads., Criminal Careers and 'Career Criminals'

     Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2:      1-51.

Wilson, J. Q. and R. J. Herrnstein. 1985. Crime & Human Nature. New

     York: Simon and Schuster.

Witte, A. D.    1980. "Estimating the Economic Model of Crime with

     Individual Data," Quarterly Journal of Economics 94: 57-87.

Witte, A. D. 1983. "Estimating the Economic Model of Crime: Reply,"

     Quarterly Journal of Economics 98: 167-175.

Wolfgang, M. E. , R. if. Figlio and T. Sellin. 1972. Delinquency in a Birth

     Cohort. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
                                     40

Wolfgang, M. E., T. P. Thornberry and R. M. Figlio. 1985. Eds., "From Boy
     to Man, From Delinquency to Crime: A Follow-up of Delinquency in a

    Birth Cohort," Working Manuscript. Center for Studies in Criminology

    and Criminal Law, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Yamada, T. 1985. "The Crime Rate and the Condition of the Labor Market: A

    Vector Autoregressive Model," Working Paper No. 1782, National Bureau

    of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
                                    Table 1

                 Results for the Probability of Offending
                  (Asympototic "t-ratios" in parentheses)


INDEPENDENT VARIABLE                 MODEL 1      MODEL 2        MODEL 3


General Deterrence
  Real Police Resources              -O.7036**    -0.6762*      -O.7109**
  Per Index Offense                 (-2.05)      (-1.93)       (-1.96)

Total Legal Income
  IQ                                 -O.92l7**    -l,7845***    -l.9232***
                                    (-2.31)      (-2.87)       (-4.03)
  Fraction of Years Individual                                  -O.3166***
  Was Employed                                                 (-2.32)

  Fraction of Years Individual                                  -O.427l**
  Was in School                                                (-2.28)

  A Binary Equal to 1 if Received                               -4•3344***
  a High School Degree                                         (-0.39)

Age/Returns to Legal Activity
  Year                               -3.0080**    -31459**      -3.7219**
                                    (-2.06)      (-2.09)       (-2.28)

Family Background
  A Binary Equal to 1 if             -2.2744      12.7996        1.6143
  Parents US Born                    (0.16)       (0.64)        (0.09)

 Occupational Status of              -0.3811*     -0.2756       -0.3073
 Household Head During              (-1.69)      (-1.01)       (-1.25)
 High School

 Number of Addresses During           1.2283      4.4748*       5.4010**
 Primary & Secondary School          (0.59)       (1.73)       (2.22)

 A Binary Equal to 1 if             -455937**    38.O703**     -29.6339
 Attended Parochial                 (-3.22)      (-2.65)       (-1.96)
 High Schools

 Average Income in Neighbor-         -0.0633       1.6523       l.7972***
 hood During High School             (0.11)       (2.59)       (2.82)
  ($1000)

 A Binary Equal to 1 if             20.5390*     16.9506        8.6699
 High School Neighborhood            (1.73)      (1.47)        (0.74)
 Was Predominantly Italian
                                 Table 1 (Continued)


INDEPENDENT VARIABLE                    MODEL 1            MODEL 2          MODEL 3


Personal Characteristics
  A Binary Equal to 1 if                -6.7084           -21.533*       -34.6ll8***
  White                                (-0.52)            (-1.69)        (-2.81)

Past Activities
  A Binary Equal to 1 if First                            l03.8508***    l54.0178***
  Arrest was a Serious Personal                            (4.60)         (5.23)
  Crime

    A Binary Equal to 1 if First                           -0.4859        23.3528
    Arrest was a Less Serious                             (-0.02)         (1.38)
    Personal Crime

    A Binary Equal to 1 if First                           26.1157        28.2282
    Arrest was a Property Offense                          (1.40)         (1.93)

    Number of Times in Police                              5939**          7.8902***
    Custody as a Juvenile                                  (2.52)         (3.03)

    Percent of Juvenile Police                             -0.1764       -0.1525
    Contacts Resulting in Some                            (-0.89)        (-083)
    Formal Criminal Justice
    Processing

    A Binary Equal to 1 if A Gang                         58.5823***     44.8760***
    Member as a Juvenile                                   (4.44)         (4.76)

    A Binary Equal to 1 if                                                 0.9840
    Married                                                               (0.11)


Estimated Individual                     1.1035            1.1598          1.2709
Effects                                 (7.14)             (5.23)         (5.63)

Log Likelihood                                         -256.71          -245.89

N                                      1968               1968           1968


    *   Significant   at the .10 level, two-tailed test
 **     Significant   at the .05 level, two-tailed test
***     Significant   at the .01 Level, two-tailed test
                                   Table 1

                 Results for the Probability of Offending
                  (Asympototic "t-ratios" in parentheses)


INDEPENDENT VARIABLE               MODEL 1        MODEL 2        MODEL 3


General Deterrence
  Real Police Resources             -O.7036**     -0.6762*      -O.71O9**

  Per Index Offense                (-2.05)       (-1.93)       (-1.96)

Total Legal Income
  iq                                0.92l7**      -l.7845***    -1.9232***
                                   (-2.31)       (-2.87)       (-4.03)

  Fraction of Years Individual                                  -O.3l66*t*
  Was Employed                                                 (-2.32)

 Fraction of Years Individual                                   -0.4271**
 Was in School                                                 (-2.28)

 A Binary Equal to 1 if Received                                -43344***
 a High School Degree                                          (-0.39)

Age/Returns to Legal Activity
  Year                             3.008O**       3.l459**      3.72l9**
                                   (-2.06)       (-2.09)       (-2.28)

Family Background
  A Binary Equal to I if           -2.2744        12.7996        1.6143
  Parents US Born                  (0.16)         (0.64)        (0.09)

 Occupational Status of            0.38l1*        -0.2756       -0.3073
 Household Head During             (-1.69)       (-1.01)       (-1.25)
 High School

 Number of Addresses During         1.2283         4.4748*       5.4010**
 Primary & Secondary School         (0.59)        (1.73)        (2.22)

 A Binary Equal to 1 if            -45•5937**    38.0703**      29.6339
 Attended Parochial                (-3.22)       (-2.65)       (-1.96)
 High Schools

 Average Income in Neighbor-       -0.0633         1.6523        1.7972***
 hood During High School           (0.11)         (2.59)        (2.82)
  ($1000)

 A Binary Equal to 1 if            20.5390*       16.9506        8.6699
 High School Neighborhood           (1.73)        (1.47)        (0.74)
 Was Predominantly Italian
                                Table I (Continued)


INDEPENDENT VARIABLE                   MODEL I           MODEL 2         MODEL 3


Personal Characteristics
  A Binary Equal to 1 if               -6.7084           21.533*       .34.6118***
  White                               (-0.52)            (-1.69)       (-2.81)

Past Activities
  A Binary Equal to 1 if First                        lO3.85O8*** 154.0178***
  Arrest was a Serious Personal                           (4.60)        (5.23)
  Crime

    A Binary Equal to 1 if First                          -0.4859      23.3528
    Arrest was a Less Serious                            (-0.02)       (1.38)
    Personal Crime

    A Binary Equal to 1 if First                         26.1157       28.2282
    Arrest was a Property Offense                         (1.40)       (1.93)

    Number of Tines in Police                              8.5939**      7.8902***
    Custody as a Juvenile                                 (2.52)        (3.03)

    Percent of Juvenile Police                            -0.1764       -0.1525
    Contacts Resulting in Some                           (-0.89)       (-0.83)
    Formal Criminal Justice
    Processing

    A Binary Equal to 1 if A Gang                        58.5823***    44.8760***
    Member as a Juvenile                                  (4.44)       (4.76)

    A Binary Equal to 1 if                                              0.9840
    Married                                                            (0.11)


Estimated Individual                    1.1035             1.1598       1.2709
Effects                                (7.14)             (5.23)       (5.63)

Log Likelihood                       -288.51          -256.71         -245.89

N                                     1968               1968          1968


  *    Significant   at the .10 level, two-tailed test
 **    Significant   at the .05 level, two-tailed test
***    Significant   at the .01 Level, two-tailed test
                                     Table 2

                     Results for the Seriousness of Offenses
                     (Asympototic Mt.ratiostl in parentheses)


INDEPENDENT VARIABLE                  MODEL 1          MODEL 2          MODEL 3


General Deterrence
  Real Police Resources               -O.1002**        .0.1014*    -O.0948**
  Per Index Offense                  (-2.11)          (-1.74)     (-1.97)

Total Legal Income
  IQ                                  -O.1220**        -0.2584*    -O.2312**
                                     (-2.27)          (-1.77)     (-3.21)

  Fraction of Years Individual                                     -0.0330*
  Was Employed                                                    (-1.90)

  Fraction of Years Individual                                     -0.0397
  Was in School                                                   (-1.41)

  A Binary Equal to 1 if Received                                   1.5621
  a High School Degree                                             (0.89)

Age/Returns to Legal Activity
  Year                                -0.3824*        -0.3984      -0.44l9**
                                     (-1.91)         (-1.44)      (-2.38)

Family Background
  A Binary Equal to 1 if              -0.3849         -1.2828       2.8885
  Parents US Born                    (-0.19)          (0.34)       (1.27)

 Occupational Status of               -0.0609*        -0.0532      -0.l009**
 Household Head During               (-1.87)         (-0.91)      (-2.39)
 High School

 Number of Addresses During           0.0645          -0.0540      -0.1020
 Primary & Secondary School           (0.23)          (0.09)       (-   .30)
 A Binary Equal to 1 if              -6.2157***       -8.7969**    ..641l3***
 Attended Parochial                 (-3.22)          (-2.25)      (-4.50)
 High Schools

 Average Income in Neighborhood        0.0225          0.0009      0.0021***
 During High School ($1000)           (0.32)          (0.57)       (2.62)

 A Binary Equal to 1 if                2.1949         -0.0154      2.5862*
 High School Neighborhood             (1.25)         (-0.001)      (1.73)
 Was Predominantly Italian
                                 Table 2 (Continued)


INDEPENDENT VARIABLE                    MODEL 1         MODEL 2       MODEL 3


Personal Characteristics
  A Binary Equal to 1 if                -1.7519          -4.9498    -4.7158***
  White                                (-1.00)          (-1.48)     (-2.93)

Past Activities
  A Binary Equal to 1 if First                           8.6143       6.93l7***
  Arrest was a Serious Personal                          (1.58)      (3.42)
  Crime

    A Binary Equal to 1 if First                         3.0182      -2.3693
    Arrest was a Less Serious                           (0.62)      (-0.87)
    Personal Crime

    A Binary Equal to I. if First                        -0.4452      1.1417
    Arrest was a Property Offense                       (-0.14)      (0.60)

    Number of Times in Police                            0.9l27**     2.1033***
    Custody as a Juvenile                                (2.12)      (3.11)

    Percent of Juvenile Police                          -0.0449      -0.0408
    Contacts Resulting in Some                         (-1.19)      (-1.13)
    Formal Criminal Justice
    Processing

    A Binary Equal to 1 if A Gang                        4.3500**    9.1428***
    Member as a Juvenile                                (2.23)      (5.81)

    A Binary Equal to 1 if                                          -0.2360
    Married                                                         (0.20)


Estimated Individual                    0.1553           0.2098      0.2211
Effects                                 (7.38)          (3.11)      (5.78)

Random Error                             0.1482          0.1401      0.1400
                                        (4.90)          (2.51)      (4.46)

Log Likelihood                          -6.78           11.64       13.84

N                                       1968             1968        1968


  *   Significant   at the .10 level, two-tailed test
 **   Significant   at the .05 level, two-tailed test
***   Significant   at the .01 Level, two-tailed test
