                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        ORDERED LENIENCY:
   AN EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT WITH SELF-REPORTING

                                      Claudia M. Landeo
                                       Kathryn E. Spier

                                     Working Paper 25094
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25094


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




We thank Tom Brennan, Dan Coquillette, Nick Feltovich, John Goldberg, Christine Jolls, Louis
Kaplow, Max Nikitin, Jack Ochs, and Abe Wickelgren for insightful discussions and comments.
We are grateful for suggestions from participants at the 2018 NBER Summer Institute in Law and
Economics and the Harvard Law School Faculty Workshop. We thank Susan Norton for
administrative assistance, Tim Yuan for programming the software used in this study, and the
Harvard Decision Science Laboratory for assistance in conducting the experimental sessions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Claudia M. Landeo and Kathryn E. Spier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Ordered Leniency: An Experimental Study of Law Enforcement with Self-Reporting
Claudia M. Landeo and Kathryn E. Spier
NBER Working Paper No. 25094
September 2018
JEL No. C72,C90,D86,K10,L23

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper reports the results of an experiment designed to assess the ability of an enforcement
agency to detect and deter harmful short-term activities committed by groups of injurers. With
ordered-leniency policies, early cooperators receive reduced sanctions. We replicate the strategic
environment described by Landeo and Spier (2018). In theory, the optimal ordered-leniency
policy depends on the refinement criterion applied in case of multiplicity of equilibria. Our
findings are as follows. First, we provide empirical evidence of a "race-to-the-courthouse" effect
of ordered leniency: Mild and Strong Leniency induce the injurers to self-report promptly. These
findings suggest that the injurers' behaviors are aligned with the risk-dominance refinement.
Second, Mild and Strong Leniency significantly increase the likelihood of detection of harmful
activities. This fundamental finding is explained by the high self-reporting rates under ordered-
leniency policies. Third, as a result of the increase in the detection rates, the averages fines are
significantly higher under Mild and Strong Leniency. As expected when the risk-dominance
refinement is applied, Mild Leniency exhibits the highest average fine.


Claudia M. Landeo
Department of Economics
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta
T6G 2H4 Canada
landeo@ualberta.ca

Kathryn E. Spier
Hauser Hall 302
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
kspier@law.harvard.edu
1         Introduction
Illegal activities, including corporate crimes and securities fraud, are often committed by groups
of wrongdoers rather than by individuals working in isolation. Law enforcement agencies have
established leniency policies to encourage wrongdoers to self-report, with the goals of improving
detection of socially-harmful activities and strengthening deterrence.1 A common feature of
these policies is that wrongdoers who cooperate with the agency early in the process receive
reduced sanctions, i.e., law enforcement agencies apply ordered-leniency mechanisms (Landeo
and Spier, 2018). For instance, in 2009, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
brought charges against Raj Rajaratnam and other co-conspirators for insider trading at several
hedge funds including Galleon Management LP and New Castle Funds LLC.2 Anil Kumar,
an early cooperator, signed a cooperation agreement and was granted leniency. In contrast
to other co-conspirators, he paid a reduced fine and received no prison time. At Kumar’s
sentencing, U.S. Attorney Prett Bharara stated: “Kumar’s immediate cooperation warrants
special mention and recognition” (Southern District of New York, Sentencing Memorandum,
2012, p. 12; emphasis added).3
        Kaplow and Shavell (1994) provide seminal theoretical work on the control of harmful
externalities with self-reporting.4 In the context of a single injurer, they show that enforcement
with self-reporting can induce individuals to report their harmful acts without compromising
deterrence. This is accomplished by allowing those who self-report to pay a sanction equal
to (or slightly less) than the expected sanction they would face if they did not report the
act. Given that enforcement efforts do not need to be allocated to identify the injurers who
voluntarily self-report, the enforcement agency can economize on investigatory costs and social
welfare rises.5
        Landeo and Spier (2018) extend this theoretical literature by studying the design of optimal
enforcement policies with self-reporting for illegal short-term activities committed by groups
of injurers.6 They focus their analysis on ordered-leniency mechanisms where the degree of
    1
      The Securities and Exchange Commission’s Cooperation Program is an example of such a leniency policy.
    2
      SEC v. Rajaratnam, 622 F.3d 159 (2nd Cir. 2010).
    3
      United States v. Kumar, Case 1:10-cr-00013-DC, Document 47-1 (S.D.N.Y. July 16, 2012). Additional
legal cases involving ordered leniency are discussed in Landeo and Spier (2018).
   4
     See Becker (1968) and Polinsky and Shavell (1984) for early work on law enforcement policies.
   5
     See also Malik (1993) and Innes (1999).
   6
     Short-term illegal activities do not involve an ongoing relationship among group members. They are also
referred as “occasional” activities (Buccirossi and Spagnolo, 2006). In game-theoretic terms, they correspond


                                                     1
leniency granted to an injurer is determined by his or her position in the self-reporting queue.
Landeo and Spier (2018) show that granting a penalty reduction to the first injurer to report,
and possibly (albeit lower) to the subsequent injurers, generates a so-called “race to the court-
house” where, in equilibrium, all injurers self-report immediately.7 Importantly, by inducing
self-reporting, ordered leniency increases the likelihood of detection of harmful acts without
raising the enforcement costs. As a result of the higher likelihood of detection, the expected
fine rises, deterrence is strengthened and social welfare is improved.8 Our paper contributes
to this literature by exploring these issues in a laboratory setting. To the best of our knowl-
edge, there are no previous experimental analyses of law enforcement with ordered leniency for
short-term group activities.
    Landeo and Spier (2018) demonstrate that the optimal degree of leniency for self-reporting
depends critically on the refinement criterion for equilibrium selection when multiple equilibria
arise. When the enforcement agency grants relatively small discounts for self-reporting (Mild
Leniency), the strategic environment faced by the injurers is a coordination game with two
Nash equilibria: One where all injurers self-report, the risk-dominant equilibrium (Harsanyi and
Selten, 1988); and, one where no injurer self-reports, the Pareto-dominant equilibrium. When
the Pareto-dominance refinement is applied, Mild Leniency is a totally ineffective policy. In that
case, the enforcement agency must grant larger discounts for self-reporting (Strong Leniency).
With Strong Leniency, the strategic environment faced by the injurers is a prisoners’ dilemma
game where self-reporting by all injurers is the unique Nash equilibrium.
    Since Landeo and Spier’s (2018) framework involves multiple equilibria, and since the op-
timal enforcement policy with ordered leniency depends on the refinement criterion for equi-
librium selection, it is appropriate to use experimental economics methods. Our experimental
environment replicates Landeo and Spier’s (2018) theoretical setting. Our experimental design
includes three leniency conditions: Strong Leniency, where the first injurer to report receives a
large reduction in the penalty; Mild Leniency, where the first injurer to report receives a small
reduction in the penalty; and, No Leniency, where penalty reductions for self-reporting are not
to one-shot strategic environments. Leniency programs have been also applied to long-term illegal activities.
See Spagnolo and Marvão (2016) for a survey on this literature.
   7
     In civil litigation cases, the expression “race to the courthouse” refers to the superior rights granted to
the first action filed. In Landeo and Spier (2018), early reporting increases the likelihood of getting the first
position in the self-reporting queue and, hence, of getting a larger reduction in the penalty.
   8
     Feess and Walzl (2004) theoretically study enforcement with self-reporting for criminal teams, focusing on
the effects of injurers’ cooperation on self-reporting.


                                                          2
granted. Across leniency conditions, the strategic environment involves two potential injurers.
The timing of the game is as follows.
       First, the private benefits from committing the act and the enforcement policy are com-
municated to the potential injurers. The enforcement policy involves a penalty, probabilities
of detection that depend on the number of injurers who self-report (the higher the number of
injurers who self-report, the higher the likelihood of detection), and reduced penalties for self-
reporting that depend on the injurers’ positions in the self-reporting queue (ordered leniency).
       Next, given the enforcement policy, the potential injurers play a two-stage game of complete
information. In Stage 1, the potential injurers decide whether to participate in the act. If both
potential injurers elect to participate, then the act is committed and Stage 2 starts; otherwise,
the game ends. In Stage 2, the injurers decide whether and when to report themselves to the
authorities. The decision of an injurer to self-report hinges on the likelihood of detection if he
remains silent, which itself depends on the self-reporting decision of the other injurer. There
are negative externalities in the self-reporting stage: The likelihood that an injurer will be
detected is higher when the other injurer reports the act. Finally, the injurers, if detected, are
sanctioned.
       Our main results are as follows. First, we provide empirical evidence that ordered-leniency
policies create a race to the courthouse where the majority of injurers self-report promptly. The
result that ordered leniency significantly raises the likelihood of self-reporting for Mild as well
as Strong Leniency suggests that the injurers’ behaviors are aligned with the risk-dominance
refinement. Second, Mild and Strong Leniency significantly increase the likelihood of detection
of harmful activities. This fundamental finding is explained by the high self-reporting rates
under ordered-leniency policies. Third, as a result of the increase in the detection rates, the
averagel fines are significantly higher under Mild and Strong Leniency. As expected under
the risk-dominance refinement, Mild Leniency exhibits the highest average fine. Fourth, our
experimental results indicate that some injurers systematically underestimate the likelihood
and severity of sanctions when making their decisions about participating in the harmful act.
These findings might suggest the presence of self-serving bias on the injurers’ beliefs about
securing the first position in the self-reporting queue. As a consequence, the deterrence power
of ordered-leniency policies is weakened, and harmful acts are committed more frequently than
predicted.9
   9
       Our findings on deterrence are aligned with previous literature on crime and deterrence. See Nagin and
Pogarsky (2003) for experimental evidence of the association between individual’s perception of the risk associ-


                                                       3
    Important policy implications are derived from our analysis and findings. Contrary to the
common beliefs held by legal practitioners and policy makers, our results suggest that the
proverbial prisoners’ dilemma game is not the only relevant strategic environment for the de-
sign of optimal enforcement policies with self-reporting and the design of optimal cooperation
agreements with wrongdoers. In fact, when the wrongdoers are sufficiently distrustful of each
other, the enforcement agency can induce maximal cooperation by implementing a coordina-
tion game instead. Our findings underscore the importance of combining experimental and
behavioral observation with theoretical modeling.
    Our paper is motivated by insider trading and securities fraud. We believe, however, that
the main insights derived from our study might apply to other contexts as well. The control of
harmful externalities and the implementation of law-enforcement policies with self-reporting
are relevant to environments such as plea bargaining with criminal defendants (Landes, 1971;
Grossman and Katz, 1983; and, Kobayashi, 1992), corporate criminal liability and third-party
enforcement (Kraakman, 1986; Arlen and Kraakman, 1997; and Arlen, 2012), federal gov-
ernment misbehavior and the qui tam whistleblower program (Engstrom, 2012), corporate
misconduct and the whistleblower mechanisms under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act (Greenberg, 2011), environmental policies and standards (Livernois
and McKenna, 1999), and tax evasion (Andreoni, 1991; and Malik and Schwab, 1991), among
other settings.10 Our results regarding the effects ordered-leniency policies might be useful for
the design of optimal law-enforcement mechanisms in these environments too.
    Our work is also related to the literature on the enforcement of competition policies for
illegal long-term activities. Motta and Polo (2003) and Spagnolo (2005) provide seminal the-
oretical work on leniency programs for cartels.11 They demonstrate that although leniency
policies strengthen deterrence, they might also be exploited by cartel members.12 In par-
ticular, Spagnolo (2005) shows that leniency policies might be used by cartel members as a
punishment tool, and hence contribute to the stability of collusive agreements. Bigoni et al.
(2012) study the effects of leniency programs in the lab. Their findings suggest that leniency
policies strengthen deterrence (i.e., reduce cartel formation) but they also contribute to the
ated with the participation in harmful activities, self-serving bias, and participation in harmful activities. See
Chalfin and McCrary (2017) for a survey on the economics and criminology literature on crime and deterrence.
See Section 6 for further discussion.
  10
     See Landeo and Spier (2018) for further discussion.
  11
     See also Aubert et al. (2006).
  12
     See also Chen and Rey (2013).


                                                        4
stabilization of surviving cartels.13 Landeo and Spier’s (2018) theoretical framework can be a
useful component in the analysis of optimal enforcement with self-reporting for harmful long-
term group activities. Therefore, our experimental insights might be relevant for the design of
enforcement mechanisms in antitrust environments, too.
       Another strand of literature related to our paper is that on contract design in the presence
of externalities among contract recipients. Rasmusen, et al. (1991) and Segal and Whinston
(2000) study exclusive dealing contracts in a theoretical framework. Their analysis demon-
strates that incumbent monopolists can use exclusive contracts to deter efficient entry when
there are economies of scale in production. Landeo and Spier (2009, 2012) provide experimen-
tal evidence of the effects of exclusive dealing contracts on market foreclosure. Their results
suggest that the incumbent monopolists can design profitable exclusive-dealing contracts by
exploiting the negative externalities among buyers when there are economies of scale in pro-
duction.14
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the theoretical model and
predictions. Section 3 presents the experimental design. Section 4 discusses the qualitative
hypotheses to be tested. Section 5 examines the results from the experimental sessions. Section
6 provides further discussion of our findings, proposes avenues for future research, and concludes
the paper.


2        Theoretical Framework

2.1        Model Setup
Landeo and Spier (2018) consider a general model of complete information. Their benchmark
model includes three risk-neutral players: Two identical potential injurers and an enforcement
agency. The potential injurers maximize their private net benefits from committing a harmful
act and the enforcement agency maximizes social welfare.15 They assume that the enforcement
  13
       See Apestegui et. (2007), Hinloopen and Soetevent (2008), Bigoni et al. (2015) and Feltovich and Ham-
aguchi (2018) for additional experimental work on leniency and cartels.
  14
     See Smith (2011) for additional experimental work on exclusive contracts. See Landeo and Spier (2015) for
experimental work on the design of incentive contracts for teams in the presence of externalities among team
members.
 15
    Social welfare includes the aggregation of the benefits to the injurers. It also includes the social costs: The
harm inflicted on others (externalities associated with the harmful activities) and the cost of enforcement.


                                                        5
agency cannot costlessly identify the parties responsible for committing the harmful act. The
timing of the game is as follows.
       First, the enforcement agency publicly commits to an enforcement policy with ordered
leniency for self-reporting. The enforcement policy includes a fine or monetary sanction f
(measured per injurer), leniency multipliers r1 , r2 ∈ [0, 1] that correspond to the first and
second positions in the self-reporting queue, respectively.16 The discount for position i in the
reporting queue is then 1 − ri , i = 1, 2.
       Second, the potential injurers play a two-stage game. In Stage 1, they decide simultaneously
and independently whether to participate in a socially-harmful group activity. The benefit of
committing the act is b for each injurer. The value of b is observed by both potential injurers
before they decide whether to participate in the activity. If both injurers decide to participate,
then the act is committed. If the act is committed, then Stage 2 begins; otherwise, the game
ends. In Stage 2, the injurers decide simultaneously and independently whether and when to
report the harmful act to the enforcement agency. Each injurer can choose to report at any
time in an interval, t ∈ [0, t̄].17
       Third, the injurers, if detected, are accurately identified by the enforcement agency and
are forced to pay sanctions. The probabilities of detection and the corresponding sanctions
are as follows. If neither injurer self-reports, then the harmful act is detected with probability
p0 and each injurer pays fine f .18 If exactly one injurer reports the act, then the injurer who
reports pays fine r1 f and the injurer who remains silent is detected with probability p1 and
fully sanctioned (i.e., pays fine f ).19 If both injurers report the act, then the first injurer pays
fine r1 f and the second injurer pays fine r2 f .20 In the event of a tie, then a coin flip (equally
weighted) determines the injurers’ positions in the self-reporting queue. The strategic-form
representation of the self-reporting subgame is presented in Figure 1.21
       To minimize subjects’ computational costs, and given that the purpose of this study is to
  16
     Multipliers (r1 , r2 ) = (1, 1) imply that the enforcement policy does not grant leniency for self-reporting.
  17
     In theory, t = 0 represents immediate reporting and t > 0 represents delayed reporting.
  18
     Each injurer gets an expected payoff equal to b − p0 f .
  19
     The injurer who self-reports the act gets a payoff equal to b − r1 f , and the silent co-conspirator gets an
expected payoff equal to b − p1 f .
  20
     If both injurers self-report the act, then they are equally likely to get the first and second position in the
self-reporting queue. Hence, the expected payoff for each injurer is equal to b − ( r1 +r
                                                                                       2 )f .
                                                                                         2

  21
     This figure, which replicates Landeo and Spier’s (2018) Figure 1, describes the components that determine
the injurers’ expected payoffs.



                                                        6
       Figure 1: Strategic-Form Representation of the Self-Reporting Subgame (Expected Payoffs)

                                             No Report (NR)                 Report (R)
                       No Report (NR)        b − p0 f , b − p0 f      b − p1 f , b − r1 f
                                                                      r1 +r2
                                                                              f , b − r1 +r
                                                                                             
                       Report (R)            b − r1 f , b − p1 f   b−    2                2
                                                                                            2
                                                                                               f




assess the determinants of self-reporting, time to report, detection and deterrence, our exper-
imental design focuses on the potential injurers’ decisions to participate in the act and the
injurers’ decisions to self-report. We assign particular numerical values to the model param-
eters.22 Across leniency environments, the parameter values are as follows: b ∈ [200, 1600];
f = 900; p0 = 0.4 and p1 = 0.9; and, t ∈ [0, 90] (measured in seconds). When ordered leniency
for self-reporting is granted, the leniency multipliers are: r1S = 0.333 and r2S = 1, for Strong Le-
niency; and, r1M = 0.466 and r2M = 1, for Mild Leniency. The leniency multipliers under Strong
and Mild Leniency generate maximal detection and deterrence when the Pareto-dominance and
risk-dominance refinements are applied, respectively.23 When leniency for self-reporting is not
granted, the leniency multipliers are r1N = r2N = 1.


2.2        Equilibrium Analysis
The equilibrium concept is subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium. We focus on pure-strategy
equilibria. We apply backward induction and start by analyzing the injurers’ self-reporting
decisions in Stage 2. Then, we analyze the potential injurers’ decisions regarding participating
in the act in Stage 1.

2.2.1       Stage 2: Decision to Report the Act and Time to Report

The strategic-form representation of the self-reporting subgame for the Strong Leniency (S),
Mild Leniency (M), and No Leniency (N) environments under the chosen numerical values for
the model parameters is presented in Figure 2.
  22
       Our numerical example satisfies satisfies all the model’s assumptions and, therefore, the predictions derived
from these assumptions hold.
   23
      The construction of the leniency multipliers follows Landeo and Spier (2018): By Landeo and Spier’s (2018)
                               1+p0
Proposition 3 (Case 2, p1 >      2 ),   the leniency multipliers that generate maximal detection and deterrence for
these parameter values, i.e., optimal ordered leniency, are (r1S , r2S ) = (0.400, 1) and (r1M , r2M ) = (0.533, 1). To
break indifference, we deduct ε = 0.067 from r1S and r1M .


                                                             7
                 Figure 2: Strategic-Form Representation of the Self-Reporting Subgame
                               (Expected Payoffs per Leniency Environment)

                                              Strong Leniency (S)
                                                NR                R
                                   NR    b − 360, b − 360   b − 810, b − 300
                                    R    b − 300, b − 810   b − 600, b − 600

                                              Mild Leniency (M)
                                               NR               R
                                   NR    b − 360, b − 360   b − 810, b − 420
                                    R    b − 420, b − 810   b − 660, b − 660

                                               No Leniency (N)
                                               NR                  R
                                   NR    b − 360, b − 360   b − 810, b − 900
                                    R    b − 900, b − 810   b − 900, b − 900




      When Strong Leniency is implemented, the injurers confront a “prisoners’ dilemma” game,
where the unique Nash equilibrium is the less-preferred outcome where both injurers self-
report, i.e., the (R, R) outcome. When Mild Leniency is implemented, the injurers confront
a “coordination game” where the two Nash equilibria are (NR, NR) and (R, R). The Pareto-
dominant Nash equilibrium is (NR, NR) and the risk-dominant Nash equilibrium is (R, R).
Then, self-reporting by both injurers occurs only when both injurers fail to coordinate on their
preferred outcome. Given that only the first injurer to report receives leniency under Strong
Leniency and Mild Leniency, both injurers have an incentive to minimize the time to report
in order to secure the first position in the self-reporting queue.24 In other words, ordered-
leniency policies exhibit a race-to-the-courthouse effect. As a result, each injurer will report
the act immediately in equilibrium, t = 0. When leniency for self-reporting is not granted (No
Leniency), the unique Nash equilibrium involves no reporting by both injurers, i.e., the (NR,
NR) outcome.
      Proposition 1 characterizes the pure-strategy Nash equilibria of the self-reporting subgame
for the three leniency environments.25
 24
      We assume that in case of indifference, an injurer decides to self-report immediately.
 25
      For general versions of the content of this proposition and formal proofs, see Landeo and Spier’s (2018)
Lemmas 1 and 2.



                                                       8
Proposition 1. The pure-strategy Nash equilibria of the self-reporting subgame are as follows.

  1. Suppose Strong Leniency for self-reporting is granted. There is a unique pure-strategy
     Nash equilibrium where both injurers self-report immediately, (R, R).

  2. Suppose Mild Leniency for self-reporting is granted. There are two pure-strategy Nash
     equilibria, one where both injurers self-report immediately, and one where neither injurer
     self-reports. (R, R) Pareto dominates (NR, NR) and (R, R) risk dominates (NR, NR).

  3. Suppose No Leniency for self-reporting is granted. There is a unique pure-strategy Nash
     equilibrium where neither injurer self-reports, (NR, NR).


Detection Rate

In equilibrium, the enforcement agency achieves higher detection rates with ordered leniency.
Specifically, when Strong Leniency is granted, or Mild Leniency is granted and the risk-
dominance refinement is applied, both injurers self-report in equilibrium. Hence, the enforce-
ment agency will detect an injurer with certainty. When leniency for self-reporting is not
granted, or when Mild Leniency for self-reporting is granted and the Pareto-dominance refine-
ment is applied, neither injurer self-reports in equilibrium. Hence, the enforcement agency will
detect an injurer with a likelihood equal to p0 = .40. Corollary 1 summarizes the equilibrium
detection rate for the three leniency environments.

Corollary 1. Across b-values, an injurer is detected with 40% likelihood under No Leniency
or Mild Leniency with the Pareto-dominance refinement. Across b-values, an injurer is always
detected under Strong Leniency or Mild Leniency with the risk-dominance refinement.


Expected Fine

As discussed above, ordered-leniency policies increase the likelihood that harmful group ac-
tivities are detected. Although ordered leniency involves fine discounts, a potential injurer
will confront a higher expected fine when Strong Leniency or Mild Leniency (with the risk-
dominance refinement) are implemented. In particular, when Strong Leniency or Mild Leniency
is granted and the risk-dominance refinement is applied, a potential injurer confronts expected
                rS +rS              rM +rM 
fines equal to 1 2 2 f = 600 and 1 2 2 f = 660 in equilibrium, for Strong and Mild Le-
niency, respectively. When leniency for self-reporting is not granted or when Mild Leniency for

                                               9
self-reporting is granted and the Pareto-dominance refinement is applied, a potential injurer
confronts a expected fine equal to p0 f = 360 in equilibrium. Hence, the highest expected
fine corresponds to Mild Leniency when the risk-dominance refinement is applied. Corollary 2
summarizes the equilibrium expected fine for the three leniency environments.

Corollary 2. Across b-values, the expected fine under Mild Leniency with the risk-dominance
refinement is equal to 660. The expected fine under Strong Leniency is equal to 600. The
expected fine under No Leniency or Mild Leniency with the Pareto-dominance refinement is
equal to 360.

2.2.2       Stage 1: Decision to Participate in the Act

Given the equilibrium expected fines, the highest individual benefits to induce an injurer not
to participate in the act, i.e, the deterrence thresholds b̂i (i = N, S, M ), are as follows:26 b̂N =
b̂M = p0 f = 360, for the No Leniency environment and the Mild Leniency environment when
                                                   rS +rS 
the Pareto-dominance refinement is applied; b̂S = 1 2 2 f = 600, for the Strong Leniency
                            rM +rM 
environment; and, b̂M = 1 2 2 f = 660 for the Mild Leniency environment when risk-
dominance is applied. Proposition 2 characterizes the equilibrium decisions in Stage 1 for the
three leniency environments.27

Proposition 2. Each potential injurer will decide to participate in the act under the following
conditions.

   1. Suppose Strong Leniency for self-reporting is granted. The potential injurer decides to
         participate if and only if b > b̂S = 600.

   2. Suppose Mild Leniency for self-reporting is granted. If the Pareto-dominance refinement
         is applied, then the potential injurer decides to participate if and only if b > b̂M = 360. If
         the risk-dominance refinement is applied, then the potential injurer decides to participate
         if and only if b > b̂M = 660.

   3. Suppose No Leniency for self-reporting is granted. The potential injurer decides to par-
         ticipate if and only if b > b̂N = 360.
  26
       We assume that in case of indifference, a potential injurer decides not to commit the act.
  27
       For a general version of this proposition and a formal proof, see Landeo and Spier (2018), Lemma 3.



                                                       10
                                     Table 1 – Theoretical Point Predictions
       Leniency Environment                   Report            Detection      Expected Fined   Deterrence Rate
                                              a            b               c
                                       Rate       Time              Rate            (b̂)        b ≤ b̂    b > b̂
       Strong Leniency (S)                1            0             1              600           1         0


       Mild Leniency (M)
       • Risk Dominance                   1            0             1              660           1         0
       • Pareto Dominance                 0        −                 .40            360           1         0


       No Leniency (N)                    0        −                 .40            360           1         0

Notes: a Report rate conditional on committing the act; b report time (in seconds) conditional on committing the
act and reporting; c detection rate conditional on committing the act; d expected fine conditional on committing
the act.


Deterrence Rate

Remember that a harmful (group) act is committed only if both potential injurers agree to
participate in the act. Hence, across leniency environments, a harmful act will be deterred
with certainty when the individual benefit from committing the act is not greater than the
deterrence threshold, i.e., when b ≤ b̂i (i = N, S, M ). Corollary 3 summarizes the equilibrium
deterrence rate for the three leniency environments.

Corollary 3. A harmful act is always deterred when b ≤ bˆi (i = N, S, M ) and never deterred
when b > bˆi (i = N, S, M ).

       Table 1 outlines the theoretical point predictions (individual level).28


3        Experimental Design
In assessing the validity of the qualitative predictions derived from the theory, our study an-
alyzes the effects of ordered-leniency policies on self-reporting, detection, individual fines, and
deterrence, and investigates whether ordered-leniency policies exhibit a race-to-the-courthouse
  28
       In theory, the rate of deterrence of individuals from participating in harmful group activities and the rate of
deterrence of harmful group activities are the same. In the lab, however, they might be different. Our statistical
analysis will be focused on the deterrence of harmful group activities, i.e., on the percentage of groups where
one or both potential injurers decided not to participate in the activity. See Section 5.2.5.


                                                               11
effect. The experimental design consists of three leniency environments: Strong Leniency (S),
where the fine reduction for self-reporting is large; Mild Leniency (M), where the fine reduction
for self-reporting is small; and, No Leniency (N), where a fine reduction for self-reporting is
not granted.
       Next, we present a description of the laboratory implementation of the theoretical environ-
ments.


3.1        The Games
Procedural regularity is accomplished by developing a software program that allows the sub-
jects to play the game by using networked personal computers. The software, constructed
using the Java programming language, consists of 3 versions of the game, reflecting the three
experimental conditions: Strong Leniency, Mild Leniency, and No Leniency.29
       To ensure control and replicability, a free-context environment is implemented. Specifically,
neutral labels are used to denote the subjects’ roles: Players B1 and B2 (potential injurers 1 and
2, respectively). The “Act” is described as an economic decision involving potential benefits
(associated with Stage 1) and potential losses (associated with Stage 2).30 The players’ choices
are also labeled in a neutral way: Decision whether “To Agree to Jointly Commit the Act”
or “Not to Agree to Jointly Commit the Act;” and, decision whether “To Report the Act” or
“Not to Report the Act.” The game includes 5 practice matches and one actual match. The
practice matches allow the subjects to experiment with the different options and hence, learn
about the consequences of their choices. Only the actual match is considered in the subject’s
payment.
       The benchmark game corresponds to the Strong Leniency condition (S). Subjects play the
role of Player B1 or Player B2. The roles of Players B1 and B2 are similar. Each match
involves two stages. In Stage 1, each player independently decides whether to participate in
the act. The players have 90 seconds to make their decisions in Stage 1. After the decisions
are made, both players are informed about the other player’s decision. If both players agree
to commit the act, then Stage 2 starts. Otherwise, the game ends.
  29
       The use of a JAVA software especially designed for this study allows us to have flexibility in the design of
randomization processes and the design of user-friendly screens. See Supplementary Material for a Sample of
Software Screens. A complete set of software screens is available from the authors upon request.
  30
     See the Appendix for a sample of the instructions (Mild Leniency condition). See Supplementary Material
for a complete set of instructions for the three experimental conditions.


                                                         12
       In Stage 2, each player independently decides whether to report or not report the act. Each
player has 90 seconds to decide whether to report or not report the act and submit his or her
chosen action.31 When both players decide to report at the same time, the computer randomly
assigns the first position in the self-reporting queue to each player with equal probability. After
the decisions are made, both players are informed about the decision of the other player and
the payoffs for both players, and the game ends. The payoffs reflect the Strong Leniency policy:
The first player to self-report receives a fine reduction. It is worth noting that our experimental
design also allows us to collect data on the time to submit the chosen action. These data are
used to assess whether ordered-leniency policies exhibit a race-to-the-courthouse effect.32
       Variations of the benchmark game satisfy the other experimental conditions. In the Mild
Leniency condition (M) and No Leniency condition (N), the subjects play a similar game. The
only difference across conditions refers to the fine reduction granted to the first player to self-
report. Specifically, in the Mild Leniency condition (M), the first player to self-report receives
a fine reduction which is lower than the one granted in case of the Strong Leniency condition
(S). In the No Leniency condition (N), the first player to self-report does not receive a fine
reduction.
       Each experimental condition includes four 24-subject sessions. To achieve independent
observations in the actual match, we use the following role and pairing procedure per session:
(1) The total number of subjects are anonymously and randomly assigned to one of the following
two groups, Group 1 and Group 2; (2) half of the subjects in each group is assigned the role
of Player B1 and the other half is assigned the role of Player B2; (3) for each practice match,
Players B1 from Group 1 are anonymously and randomly paired with Players B2 from Group
2, and Players B2 from Group 1 are anonymously and randomly paired with Players B1 from
Group 2; (4) for the actual match, Players B1 and B2 from Group 1 are anonymously and
randomly paired, and Players B1 and B2 from Group 2 are anonymously and randomly paired.
The same protocol for pair formation is applied across sessions and conditions. As a result, for
each session of 24 subjects, 12 independent observations (pairs) are obtained, across sessions
and conditions. Hence, 48 independent observations (pairs) per condition and 144 independent
  31
       To control for any possible differences in connectivity time between the lab server and the terminals, we
decided to place all subjects that submitted their chosen actions within the same second in the same “time
interval.” For instance, if two subjects submitted their actions between the first and second seconds, i.e.,
t ∈ [1, 2) seconds, then the recorded “time interval” will be the same for both subjects.
  32
     See Section 4.2 for details.



                                                        13
                                   Table 2 – Experimental Conditions
           b-Value Segments              Strong Leniency (S)     Mild Leniency (M)      No Leniency (N)
           b ∈ [200, 360]                          8                      8                     8
           b ∈ (360, 600]                          22                     22                   22
           b ∈ (600, 660]                          22                     22                   22
           b ∈ (660, 1600]                         44                     44                   44
           Total Number of Individuals             96                     96                   96




observations (pairs) in total are obtained. Given our experimental design, the observations
within a pair are also independent.33 Hence, 288 independent individual observations in total
are obtained.
       Table 2 summarizes the information regarding the experimental conditions and observations
per b-value segment for the actual match. The theoretical deterrence thresholds guide the
design of the distribution of b-values. To ensure comparability across conditions, we randomly
predetermine the b-values used in the actual match of each of the four sessions of a condition,
and apply these values to each condition.34 For each condition, the total number of b-values for
the actual match is equal to 48 (12 values per session; 4 sessions per condition).35 To ensure
consistency across sessions and conditions, we randomly predetermine the b-values for each of
the five practice matches, and apply these values across sessions and conditions.36
  33
       Two features of the experimental design are relevant. (1) Pairs are anonymously formed, across sessions
and conditions. (2) When an act is committed by a pair, the only information that each pair member receives
about the other pair member at the end of Stage 1 is that the other pair member also decided to participate in
the act. The information is provided in a general and structured format: “You agreed to commit the act and
Player B2 agreed to commit the act.” (See the Sample Software Screens in the Supplementary Materials.) The
exact same information is provided to the subjects across pairs, sessions and conditions. As a result, the specific
pair where a subject is assigned does not affect the decisions of that subject, and hence, the observations within
a pair are independent.
  34
     The chosen distribution of b-values has the following features: Four b-value segments are considered,
[200, 360], (360, 600], (600, 660], and (660, 1600]; the segments include 8, 23, 23 and 46% of the total b-values,
respectively; for each segment, the specific b-values are randomly chosen (equally likely values).
  35
     The adopted distribution of b-values allows us: (1) To collect a sufficiently high number of observations to
perform statistical analysis of deterrence across conditions, and across relevant b-value segments within each
condition; and, (2) to collect a sufficiently high number of observations in which Stage 2 occurs with certainty
in equilibrium across conditions (b > 660) to perform statistical analysis of detection across conditions.
  36
     For each practice match, at least one b-value pertains to each of the four b-value segments; and, the
majority of b-values pertain to the last b-value segment, which in theory, elicits a self-reporting stage with


                                                        14
3.2     The Experimental Sessions
We ran twelve 80-minute sessions of 24 subjects each (four sessions per condition; 96 subjects
per condition; 288 subjects in total) at Harvard University.37 Each session was conducted by
two research assistants at the Harvard Decision Science Laboratory.38 Subjects were recruited
using the lab’s Sona computer program and the lab’s subject pool. Subjects were allowed to
participate in one experimental session only, and received information only about the game
version that they were assigned to play. The participant pool included undergraduate and
graduate students from Harvard University, Boston University and Northeastern University,
from a wide variety of fields of study. A laboratory currency called the “token” (29 tokens =
1 U.S. dollar) was used in our experiment. To avoid negative payoffs, each subject received
an initial endowment equal to 700 tokens.39 The show-up fee was equal to $10. The average
game earnings was equal to $32. Hence, the average total payment was equal to $42 (average
game earnings plus participation fee) for an 80-minute session.
   At the beginning of each session, written instructions were provided to the subjects (see
the Appendix). The instructions about the game and the software were verbally presented by
the experimenter to create common knowledge. Specifically, subjects were informed: (1) about
the game structure, possible choices, and payoffs; (2) about the random process of allocating
roles; (3) about the randomness and anonymity of the process of forming pairs;40 (4) about
the token/dollar equivalence, and that they would receive the dollar equivalent of the tokens
they held at the end of the session. Finally, subjects were asked to complete a set of exercises
to ensure their ability to read the information tables. The answers to the exercises were read
aloud by the research assistants. Questions about the written instruction and questions about
the exercises were answered by the research assistants privately and before the beginning of the
practice matches. The rest of the session was entirely played using computer terminals and the
software designed for this experiment. After the actual match, subjects were required to fill
certainty. Hence, the distribution of b-values ensures that the subjects will get enough experience regarding
the self-reporting stage.
  37
     See Supplementary Material for detailed description of the procedures followed to implement the experi-
mental sessions and detailed information about the subjects used in this study.
 38
    See Supplementary Material for a description of the procedure followed to train the research assistants.
 39
    Note that the minimum possible b-value was equal to 200 tokens and the maximum possible fine was equal
to 900 tokens. Then, the minimum possible match payoff was equal to 0 tokens.
  40
     In particular, subjects were informed that they would not play with the same partner in any practice
match; and, that they would not play with any of their previous partners in the actual match.


                                                     15
out a short questionnaire with general demographic questions. At the end of each experimental
session, subjects privately received their monetary payoffs in cash.


4        Qualitative Hypotheses
The qualitative hypotheses are presented below. Cooper et al. (1990) suggest that risk-
dominance is generally the equilibrium selection criterion chosen by subjects in the lab when
there are multiple equilibria.41 Then, we might expect that the majority of subjects will
apply the risk-dominance refinement in our experiment. Hence, the hypotheses related to Mild
Leniency are constructed under the risk-dominance refinement.


4.1        Report Rate
Hypothesis 1. Strong and Mild Leniency increase the report rate, with respect to No Leniency.

       In theory, Strong Leniency and Mild Leniency (when the risk-dominance refinement is
applied) induce both injurers to self-report, i.e., (R, R) is the unique N.E. of the reporting
subgame. In contrast, No Leniency induces both injurers to no-report, i.e., (NR, NR) is the
unique N.E. of the reporting subgame. Therefore, the implementation of ordered leniency raises
the report rate. When the Pareto-dominance refinement is applied instead, Mild Leniency
induces both injurers to no-report, i.e., (NR, NR) is chosen by both injurers. Then, Mild
Leniency and No Leniency exhibit the same zero report rate.

Hypothesis 2. Strong and Mild Leniency exhibit the same report rate.

       As mentioned, Strong Leniency and Mild Leniency (when the risk-dominance refinement
is applied) induce both injurers to self-report. Then, both leniency policies exhibit the same
100% report rate, and the same zero no-report rate. When the Pareto-dominance refinement
is applied instead, Mild Leniency induces both injurers to no-report. Then, Mild Leniency
increases the no-report rate (100% v. zero, for Mild and Strong Leniency, respectively).
  41
       Landeo and Spier (2009) offer important evidence in favor of the risk-dominance refinement in contractual
settings with multiple equilibria. Burton and Sefton (2004) provide powerful evidence of the role of riskiness
in the choice of a strategy. See Ochs (1995) for a survey of seminal work on coordination games.




                                                        16
4.2        Race-to-the-Courthouse Effect
Hypothesis 3. Strong and Mild Leniency (weakly) reduce the time to submit the chosen
action, with respect to No Leniency. There is a race-to-the-courthouse effect.

       In theory, Strong Leniency and Mild Leniency (when the risk-dominance refinement is
applied) incentivize the injurers to minimize their reporting times to increase their chances
to get the first position in the self-reporting queue. In other words, the incentives provided
by ordered-leniency policies generate a race-to-the-courthouse effect. As a result, all injurers
self-report immediately, t = 0. In the lab, subjects have between zero and 90 seconds to decide
an action (R or NR) and to submit the chosen action. Then, a prompt submission of the
chosen action will be represented by a time t = 0 + ε (ε > 0, small number).42
       We assess the race-to-the-courthouse effect of ordered-leniency policies by comparing the
times to submit the chosen action under Strong and Mild Leniency with the time to submit
the chosen action under No Leniency. In theory, Strong Leniency and Mild Leniency (when
the risk-dominance refinement is applied) induce both injurers to self-report, i.e., (R, R) is the
unique N.E. of the reporting subgame. In other words, the chosen action by both injurers is
R in equilibrium. In contrast, No Leniency induces both injurers to no-report, i.e., (NR, NR)
is the unique N.E. of the reporting subgame, i.e., the chosen action by both injurers is NR in
equilibrium. When the Pareto-dominance refinement is applied instead, Mild Leniency induces
both injurers to no-report, i.e., (NR, NR) is chosen by both injurers, i.e., the chosen action is
NR in equilibrium.
       In theory, given that an early submission of the NR action does not benefit the injurers (i.e.,
an early submission of the NR action does not involve any penalty reductions), the time to
submit the chosen action under No Leniency and Mild Leniency (when the Pareto-dominance
refinement is applied) will be t ∈ [0 + , 90] (ε > 0) in equilibrium. In contrast, the time to
submit the R action under Strong and Mild Leniency (when the risk-dominance refinement is
  42
       The value of ε is, of course, unknown. Then, a theoretical point prediction of “prompt” submission of the
chosen action under Strong and Mild Leniency cannot be constructed. Hence, statistical analyses to assess
the validity of theoretical point predictions are not possible. Alternatively, we could directly elicit the time to
report by adding a question about the preferred time to report to the “report” choice. To avoid influencing
subjects’ choices, a similar type of question would need to be added to the “no report” choice. To ensure the
truthful revelation of information, an additional payment mechanism would be required. Hence, this alternative
would add unnecessary complexity to the experimental environment, and hence, noise to the collected data.



                                                        17
applied) will be t = 0 + ε (ε > 0) in equilibrium.43 Hence, Strong Leniency or Mild Leniency
when the risk-dominance refinement is applied (weakly) decrease the time to submit the chosen
action, with respect to No Leniency.44 In other words, ordered-leniency policies exhibit a race-
to-the-courthouse effect.


4.3        Detection Rate
Hypothesis 4. Strong and Mild Leniency increase the detection rate, with respect to No
Leniency.

       In theory, Strong Leniency and Mild Leniency (when the risk-dominance refinement applies)
induce both injurers to self-report after committing the act. As a result, an injurer is detected
with certainty in equilibrium. In contrast, with No Leniency, neither injurer self-reports. Then,
an injurer is detected with only 40% chance (p0 ). Hence, the implementation of ordered-
leniency policies raises the detection rate. When the Pareto-dominance refinement is applied
instead, neither injurer self-reports under Mild Leniency. So both Mild and No Leniency exhibit
the same low 40% detection rate.

Hypothesis 5. Strong and Mild Leniency exhibit the same detection rate.

       As mentioned above, Strong Leniency and Mild Leniency (when the risk-dominance refine-
ment is applied) induce both injurers to self-report after committing the act. Therefore, an
injurer is detected with certainty under both leniency policies. When the Pareto-dominance
refinement is applied instead, neither injurers self-reports under Mild Leniency. As a result,
the likelihood of detection is 40% only. Hence, Strong Leniency will increase the detection
rate.
  43
       The logic of the proof of Landeo and Spier’s (2018) Lemma 1 for r1 = r2 = 1 and r1 < r2 = 1, respectively,
applies here.
  44
     In addition to assuming that the risk-dominance refinement applies and that the equilibrium actions are
chosen, a behavioral assumption is implicitly used in the construction of Hypothesis 3. We assume that the
decision-making processes associated with the choices of actions R and NR involve the same amount of time.
Remember that the choice of action R and the choice of action NR involve the review of the same information.
Then, this assumption is appropriate.




                                                        18
4.4        Expected Fine
Hypothesis 6. Mild Leniency increases the expected fine, with respect to Strong Leniency and
No Leniency. Strong Leniency increases the expected fine, with respect to No Leniency.

       In theory, given the detection rates, the implementation of ordered-leniency policies raises
the expected fine. The expected fines are equal to 660 for Mild Leniency (when the risk-
dominance refinement is applied), 600 for Strong Leniency, and 360 for No Leniency and Mild
Leniency (when the Pareto-dominance refinement is applied).


4.5        Deterrence Rate
Hypothesis 7. Within each leniency environment, the deterrence rate is lower when the
benefit from the harmful act is greater than the deterrence threshold.

       According to the theoretical predictions, the benefit associated with the harmful act incen-
tivizes each potential injurer to participate in the act. In equilibrium, the act is committed
only when the benefit is greater than the deterrence threshold (expected fine). In other words,
when b > b̂i (i = N, S, M ), the deterrence rate is lower.

Hypothesis 8. Mild Leniency increases the deterrence rate, with respect to Strong Leniency
and No Leniency. Strong Leniency increases the deterrence rate, with respect to No Leniency.

       In theory, a harmful act is committed only when b > b̂i (i = N, S, M ). In equilibrium,
the deterrence threshold for Mild Leniency (when the risk-dominance refinement is applied) is
higher than the expected fine for Strong Leniency and No Leniency (660 v. 360, 660 v. 600,
respectively); and, the expected fine for Strong Leniency is also higher than the expected fine
for No Leniency (600 v. 360). As a result, Mild Leniency exhibits the highest deterrence rate
and No Leniency exhibits the lowest deterrence rate. When the Pareto-dominance refinement
is applied instead, the expected fine for Mild and No Leniency will be the same (360). Then,
Mild and No Leniency exhibit the same deterrence rates, and the highest deterrence rate is
achieved with Strong Leniency. Across b-values, in theory, the deterrence rates are 31, 54, and
8%, for Strong Leniency, Mild Leniency, and No Leniency, respectively.45
  45
       Given the number of observations per b-value segment (see Table 2), the deterrence rates are computed as
follows: 4/48, 15/48 and 26/48, for Strong Leniency, Mild Leniency, and No Leniency, respectively.



                                                       19
       It is worth noting that, in theory, Strong and Mild Leniency (when the risk-dominance
refinement is applied) have the property of incentivizing both injurers to be the first to report.
As a result, both injurers will report immediately, and hence, they will be equally likely to get
the first position in the self-reporting queue (i.e., the chance of each injurer to get the first
position will be equal to 50%).46 In the lab, however, some subjects might exhibit cognitive
biases, such as self-serving bias (Babcock et al., 1995),47 and hence believe that their chances
to be the first to report are greater than the chances of the other injurers (i.e., they might
believe that their chances to get the first position in the self-reporting queue are greater than
50%). In the limiting case, some subjects might believe that they will always be the first to
report. Then, under Strong Leniency, they might consider a fine equal to 300 instead of an
expected fine equal to 600 when making their decision about committing the act.48 Similarly,
under Mild Leniency, some subjects might consider a fine equal to 420 instead of an expected
fine equal to 660 when making their decision about committing the act.49 As a result, we
might observe deterrence rates lower than those predicted by the theory.50
  46
       Remember that, in the Strong Leniency environment, the expected fine under (R, R) and equal likelihoods
of getting the first or second position in the self-reporting queue is equal to .50(300) + .50(900) = 600; and,
in the Mild Leniency environment, the expected fine under (R, R) and equal likelihoods of getting the first or
second position in the self-reporting queue is equal to .50(420) + .50(900) = 660.
  47
     Self-serving bias is attributed to motivated reasoning, i.e., a propensity to reason in a way that supports
the individual’s subjectively favored beliefs by attending only to some available information (Kunda, 1990,
1987). See Babcock et al. (1995) and Landeo (2009) for experimental evidence of self-serving bias, and Landeo
et al. (2013) for theoretical work on self-serving bias in incomplete-information environments. See also Landeo
(2018) for further discussion of theoretical and experimental studies on self-serving bias.
  48
     The expected fine for the biased injurer is 300 irrespective of the reporting decision of the other injurer.
Importantly, under these biased beliefs, report is the dominant strategy for the biased injurer. This is because
his expected fines under no-report are 360 or 810, depending on the choice of no-report or report by the other
injurer, respectively. Then, as in the case of the environment with unbiased injurers, the biased injurer will
choose to report.
  49
     The expected fine for the biased injurer is 420 irrespective of the reporting decision of the other injurer.
Importantly, under these biased beliefs, report will be the best response when the other injurer chooses to report
(420 < 810) and no-report will be the best response when the other injurer chooses no-report (360 < 420).
Then, as in the case of the environment with unbiased injurers, the biased injurer might choose to report or
no-report, according to his beliefs about the strategy that the other injurer will choose and his assessment of
the riskiness of each strategy.
  50
     Nagin and Pogarsky (2003) provide experimental evidence of the association between individual’s percep-
tion of the risk of participating in harmful activities, self-serving bias, and participation in harmful activities.
See Chalfin and McCrary (2017) for a survey on the literature on crime and deterrence. See Section 6 for


                                                        20
                                          Table 3 – Descriptive Statisticsa

 Condition                Report       Time to Submit Chosen Actionb     Detection   Individual   Deterrence Rate
                                                                                           c
                           Rate          R        NR        R or NR        Rate        Fine       b ≤ b̂   b > b̂
 Strong Leniency (S)        .90         2.14     15.25          3.49          .99     588.46       .47      .06
 [96]                                  (1.30)    (19.62)        (7.25)                (307.47)
 Mild Leniency (M)          .76         2.71     12.29          4.99          .96     638.25       .31      .00
 [96]                                  (2.70)    (17.28)        (9.51)                (268.71)
 No Leniency (N)            .06        16.75     16.21          16.24         .53     475.71       .75      .23
 [96]                                  (22.23)   (17.67)    (17.77)                   (452.51)

Notes: a Total number of individuals in brackets; standard deviation in parentheses; report and detection rates
conditional on committing the act; b mean time to submit chosen action (in seconds) conditional on committing
the act; c mean individual fine conditional on committing the act.


5       Results
Given our experimental design, the collected observations are independent. Then, it is appro-
priate to use non-parametric statistical tests. Specifically, our analysis involves the use of the
Fisher’s exact test and the Wilcoxon rank-sum (Mann Whitney) test.


5.1      Data Summary
Table 3 provides descriptive statistics (individual-level data) for the report rate, report time,
detection rate, fine, and deterrence rate (for b-values below and above the deterrence threshold
b̂. The time to submit the chosen action is defined as the average individual time to submit
the chosen action (R or NR) in seconds, conditional on committing the act.51 The report
rate is defined as the percentage of individuals who decided to report the act, conditional on
committing the act. The detection rate is defined as the percentage of individuals who were
detected, conditional on committing the act. The individual fine corresponds to the average
individual fine, conditional on committing the act. The deterrence rate when b ≤ b̂ (or b > b̂)
further discussion.
  51
     As mentioned in Section 3.1 (footnote 30), to control for any possible differences in connectivity time
between the lab server and the terminals, we decided to place all subjects that submitted their chosen actions
within the same second in the same “time interval.” For instance, if two subjects submitted their chosen
actions between the first and second seconds, i.e., t ∈ [1, 2) seconds, then the recorded “time interval” to
submit the chosen action will be the same for these two subjects. We use the midpoint of each time interval in
the statistical analysis of results.


                                                           21
is defined as the percentage of groups with b ≤ b̂ (or b > b̂) where one or both potential injurers
decided not to participate in the act (i.e., the percentage of harmful acts that are deterred).
   Overall, our results are aligned with the theoretical predictions under the risk-dominance
refinement. Specifically, the data indicate that the implementation of ordered-leniency policies
increased self-reporting (90 v. 6%, Strong Leniency and No Leniency, respectively; 76 v. 6%,
Mild Leniency and No Leniency, respectively). The average time to submit the chosen action
(R or NR) for Strong, Mild, and No Leniency were equal to 3.49, 4.99, and 16.24 seconds,
respectively. In particular, the average times to submit the R action under Strong and Mild
Leniency were equal to 2.14 and 2.71 seconds, respectively; and the average time to submit the
NR action under No Leniency was equal to 16.21 seconds. These findings suggest that ordered-
leniency policies incentivize the injurers to self-report promptly to increase their chances to get
the first position in the self-reporting queue. In other words, the data indicate the presence of
a race-to-the-courthouse effect under ordered-leniency policies.
   Importantly, the data suggest that the implementation of ordered-leniency policies increased
the rate of detection of harmful acts (99 v. 53%, Strong Leniency and No Leniency, respectively;
96 v. 53%, Mild Leniency and No Leniency, respectively). The high detection rates under
Strong and Mild Leniency are explained by the relatively high self-reporting rates in these
environments. Remember that the likelihood of detection of a silent co-conspirator increases
when the other injurer self-reports (from 40 to 90%), and that detection occurs with certainty
when both injurers self-report the act.
   Our findings also indicate that Mild Leniency increased the average individual fine, with
respect to Strong Leniency and No Leniency; and, Strong Leniency increased the average
individual fine, with respect to No Leniency. As predicted when the risk-dominance refinement
is applied, the highest and lowest average individual fines were obtained under Mild Leniency
and No Leniency, respectively. These results might be explained by the higher detection rates
under ordered-leniency policies.
   Finally, the data suggest that the deterrence rates under Strong Leniency, Mild Leniency,
and No Leniency for b ≤ b̂i (i = S, M ) were lower than 100% (the theoretical predictions).
These results might indicate that some injurers considered a different deterrence threshold
when making their decisions about participating in the act, due for instance to self-serving
bias.




                                                22
                            Table 4 – Effect of Ordered Leniency on Self-Reportinga

                   Conditions                              Number of          Report        p-valued
                                                          Individualsb        Ratec
                   Strong Leniency v. No Leniency             78, 70        .90 v. .06      p < .001


                   Mild Leniency v. No Leniency               80, 70        .76 v. .06      p < .001


                   Mild Leniency v. Strong Leniency           80, 78        .76 v. .90      p = .020

          a
Notes:        “v.” denotes “versus;” b number of individuals who committed the act; c report rate conditional on
committing the act; d p-value corresponds to one-sided Fisher’s exact test.


5.2        Analysis
The main findings will be presented in a series of results.

5.2.1         Report Rate

We start our analysis by studying the effects of the implementation of ordered-leniency policies
on the injurers’ decisions to self-report. Table 4 summarizes the results.52 Consider first the
effect of the implementation of a Strong Leniency policy on self-reporting. In theory, self-
reporting by both injurers is the unique N.E. under Strong Leniency and no-reporting by
both injurers is the unique N.E. under No Leniency. Then, the report rate under Strong
Leniency is 100% and the report rate under No Leniency is zero. Our results indicate that
Strong Leniency significantly increases the report rate (90 v. 6%, for Strong Leniency and
No Leniency, respectively; p < .001). Our results are aligned with our theoretical qualitative
predictions and provide strong support for Hypothesis 1.53

Result 1. Strong Leniency significantly increases the report rate, with respect to No Leniency.

       Consider now the effect of implementing a Mild Leniency policy on self-reporting. In theory,
when the risk-dominance refinement is applied, Mild Leniency increases the report rate, with
  52
       See Supplementary Material for pair-level statistical analysis.
  53
       Regarding the behavior of pairs (pair-level data), our findings suggest that the (R, R) rate is significantly
higher under Strong Leniency (.79 v. .00, for Strong and No Leniency, respectively, p < .001, one-sided Fisher’s
exact test), and the (NR, NR) rate is significantly higher under No Leniency (.89 v. .00, for No Leniency
and Strong Leniency, respectively; p < .001, one-sided Fisher’s exact test). These results are consistent across
b-values. See Supplementary Material for details.

                                                         23
respect to No Leniency (100% v. zero, for Mild and No Leniency, respectively). If the Pareto-
dominance refinement is applied instead, Mild Leniency and No Leniency exhibit the same
zero report rate. Our results indicate that Mild Leniency significantly increases the report rate
(76 v. 6%, for Mild Leniency and No Leniency, respectively; p < .001). These findings are
aligned with our theoretical predictions under the risk-dominance refinement. Importantly, our
results suggest that the enforcement agency can elicit injurers’ cooperation without relying on
large discounts for self-reporting (Strong Leniency), i.e., by implementing a coordination-game
environment through Mild Leniency. Our results provide strong support for Hypothesis 1.54

Result 2. Mild Leniency significantly increases the rate of self-reporting, with respect to No
Leniency.

       Finally, consider the effect of implementing Mild and Strong Leniency on self-reporting. In
theory, when the risk-dominance refinement is applied, both injurers self-report in equilibrium.
Then, Strong and Mild Leniency exhibit the same 100% report rates. If the Pareto-dominance
refinement is applied instead, neither injurer self-report in equilibrium under Mild Leniency.
Then, Strong Leniency increases the report rate (100% v. zero, for Strong and Mild Leniency,
respectively). Our results indicate that, although Mild Leniency also exhibits a relatively high
report rate, Strong Leniency significantly increases the report rate (90 v. 76%, for Strong and
Mild Leniency, respectively p = .020). These findings might be explained by the behavior
of subjects under Mild Leniency: Although the vast majority of subjects chose the strategy
associated with the risk-dominant equilibrium, (R, R), some subjects attempted to coordinate
on their preferred outcome and chose the no-report strategy.55

Result 3. Strong Leniency significantly increases the rate of self-reporting, with respect to
Mild Leniency.
  54
       Regarding the behavior of pairs (pair-level data), our findings suggest that Mild Leniency significantly
increases the (R, R) rate (.58 v. zero, for Mild and No Leniency, respectively; p < .001, one-sided Fisher’s
exact test), and No Leniency significantly increases the (NR, NR) rate (.89 v. .05, for No Leniency and Mild
Leniency, respectively; p < .001, one-sided Fisher’s exact test). These results are consistent across b-values.
See Supplementary Material for details.
  55
     Regarding the behavior of pairs (pair-level data), our findings suggest that, although Strong Leniency
increases the (R, R) rate (79 v. 58%, for Strong and Mild Leniency, respectively; p = .031, one-sided Fisher’s
exact test), Strong and Mild Leniency exhibit the same (NR, NR) rate (zero v. 5%, for Strong and Mild
Leniency, respectively; p = .253, one-sided Fisher’s exact test). These results are consistent across b-values.
See Supplementary Material for details.

                                                       24
Table 5 – Effect of Ordered Leniency on Time to Submit Chosen Action in the Self-Reporting Stagea

        Conditions                          Number of             Time to Submit             p-valued
                                            Individualsb     Chosen Action (R or NR)c
        Strong Leniency v. No Leniency         78, 70               3.49 v. 16.24           p < .001
                                                                   (7.25) (17.77)


        Mild Leniency v. No Leniency           80, 70               4.99 v. 16.24           p < .001
                                                                   (9.51) (17.77)

Notes: a “v.” denotes “versus;” b number of individuals who committed the act; c mean time to submit chosen
action (R or NR) in seconds, conditional on committing the act; standard deviation in parentheses; d p-value
corresponds to Wilcoxon rank-sum (Mann Whitney) test.


5.2.2     Race-to-the-Courthouse Effect

We now investigate whether ordered-leniency policies exhibit a race-to-the-courthouse effect.
In theory, Strong Leniency and Mild Leniency when the risk-dominance refinement is applied
incentivize the injurers to minimize their reporting times to increase their chances to get the
first position in the self-reporting queue. As a result, all injurers self-report immediately.
   As discussed in Section 4.2, given our general theoretical framework and robust experimen-
tal design, we can assess whether ordered-leniency policies exhibit this “incentivizing” property
in the lab by comparing the times to submit the chosen action under Strong Leniency and Mild
Leniency with the time to submit the chosen action under No Leniency. In theory, Strong and
Mild Leniency when the risk-dominance refinement is applied (weakly) reduce the time to sub-
mit the chosen action, with respect to No Leniency. In other words, ordered-leniency policies
exhibit a race-to-the-courthouse effect.
   Table 5 summarizes our findings. Consider first the effect of implementing Strong Leniency.
Our results indicate that the average time to submit the chosen action under Strong Leniency
is less than 4 seconds and the average time to submit the chosen action under No Leniency
is more than 16 seconds, a highly significant difference (p < .001). These findings are mainly
explained by the high report rate and the relatively low time to submit the R action under
Strong Leniency, and the high no report rate and the relatively high time to submit the NR
action under No Leniency. These results suggest that Strong Leniency generates a race-to-
the-courthouse effect where self-reporting occurs promptly, and provides strong support to
Hypothesis 3.


                                                    25
Result 4. Strong Leniency significantly reduces the time to submit the chosen action, with
respect to No Leniency. There is a race-to-the-courthouse effect.

       Consider now the effect of implementing Mild Leniency. Our findings suggest that the
average time to submit the chosen action under Mild Leniency is less than 5 seconds and
the average time to submit the chosen action under No Leniency is more than 16 seconds, a
highly significant difference (p < .001). Our results indicate that Mild Leniency incentivizes
the injurers to self-report promptly. In other words, Mild Leniency exhibits a race-to-the-
courthouse effect. These findings provide additional evidence of the subjects’ choice of the
risk-dominant strategy and a strong support to Hypothesis 3.56

Result 5. Mild Leniency significantly reduces the time to submit the chosen action, with
respect to No Leniency. There is a race-to-the-courthouse effect.

5.2.3       Detection Rate

Next, we study the effect of ordered leniency on the detection rate. Table 6 reports our find-
ings. In theory, when Strong Leniency or Mild Leniency (when the risk-dominance refinement
is applied) are implemented, both injurers self-report. Hence, an individual who committed
a harmful act is detected with certainty in equilibrium. In contrast, when No Leniency for
self-reporting or Mild Leniency (when the Pareto-dominance refinement is applied) are imple-
mented, no injurer self-reports the act. Therefore, an individual who committed a harmful act
is detected with a 40% likelihood only. Our results indicate that ordered-leniency policies are
very effective detection mechanisms. Specifically, Strong Leniency significantly increases the
detection rate of an injurer (99 v. 53%, for Strong and No Leniency, respectively; p < .001).
Similarly, Mild Leniency significantly increases the detection rate of an injurer (96 v. 53%, for
Mild and No Leniency, respectively; p < .001). Importantly, as predicted, Mild and Strong
Leniency exhibit the same likelihood of detection. Our findings are aligned with Hypotheses
4 and 5, and provide strong support for the theoretical predictions under the risk-dominance
refinement.57
  56
       Our results also suggest that the average times to submit the chosen action under Strong and Mild Leniency
are only marginally different (p = .062, Wilcoxon rank-sum (Mann Whitney) test).
  57
     Regarding the likelihood of detection of one or both members of a pair of injurers (pair-level data), our
results suggest that the implementation of ordered leniency significantly increases the detection rate of one or
both injurers (100 v. 54%, for Strong and No Leniency, respectively; p < .001, one-sided Fisher’s exact test;
and, 98 v. 54%, for Mild and No Leniency, respectively; p < .001, one-sided Fisher’s exact test).

                                                        26
                            Table 6 – Effect of Ordered Leniency on Detectiona

               Conditions                              Number of         Detection     p-valued
                                                       Individualsb           Ratec
               Strong Leniency v. No Leniency              78, 70        .99 v. .53   p < .001


               Mild Leniency v. No Leniency                80, 70        .96 v. .53   p < .001


               Mild Leniency v. Strong Leniency            80, 78        .96 v. .99   p = .320

Notes: a “v.” denotes “versus;” b number of individuals who committed the act; c detection rate conditional on
committing the act; d p-value corresponds to one-sided Fisher’s exact test.


Result 6. Strong Leniency significantly increases the detection rate, with respect to No Le-
niency.

Result 7. Mild Leniency significantly increases the detection rate, with respect to No Le-
niency.

Result 8. Strong Leniency and Mild Leniency exhibit the same detection rate.

5.2.4     Individual Fine

We now investigate the effect of implementing ordered-leniency policies on the individual fine.
Table 7 reports our results. In theory, when the risk-dominance refinement is applied, ordered-
leniency policies increase the expected fine. Mild Leniency exhibits the highest expected fine
and No Leniency exhibits the lowest expected fine. These outcomes are explained by the
higher detection rates under ordered leniency. Our results indicate that the average individual
fines under Strong, Mild and No Leniency are equal to 588.46, 638.25 and 475.71, respectively,
and that the pairwise differences are significant (Strong v. No Leniency, p = .026; Mild v.
No Leniency, p = .035; and, Mild v. Strong Leniency, p = .008). These results are aligned
with our theoretical predictions under the risk-dominance refinement and provide support for
Hypothesis 6.

Result 9. Strong Leniency significantly increases the individual fine, with respect to No Le-
niency.

Result 10. Mild Leniency significantly increases the individual fine, with respect to Strong
Leniency and No Leniency.

                                                      27
                        Table 7 – Effect of Ordered Leniency on Individual Finea

           Conditions                               Number of            Individual          p-valued
                                                   Individualsb             Finec
           Strong Leniency v. No Leniency             78, 70          588.46, v. 475.71      p = .026
                                                                      (307.47) (452.51)


           Mild Leniency v. No Leniency               80, 70          638.25 v. 475.71       p = .035
                                                                     (268.71), (452.51)


           Mild Leniency v. Strong Leniency           80, 78          638.25 v. 588.46       p = .008
                                                                      (268.71) (307.47)

Notes: a “v.” denotes “versus;” b number of individuals who committed the act; c mean individual fine conditional
on committing the act; standard deviation in parentheses; d p-value corresponds to Wilcoxon rank-sum (Mann-
Whitney) test.


Result 11. Mild Leniency significantly increases the individual fine, with respect to Strong
Leniency.

5.2.5    Deterrence Rate

Remember that the deterrence rate is defined as the percentage of groups where one or both
potential injurers decided not to participate in the act, i.e., the percentage of harmful acts that
are deterred. Then, the analysis in this section uses pair-level data.
    We start our analysis of deterrence by studying the effect of the benefit derived from the
commission of the harmful act (b-value) on the deterrence rate, a within-condition analysis.
Table 8 outlines our findings. For each condition, we consider the theoretical deterrence thresh-
old, and compare the deterrence rates for b-values below and above this threshold. Given that
our previous analysis of the effect of ordered-leniency policies on self-reporting suggests that
the risk-dominant N.E. (the (R, R) outcome) is chosen by the majority of subjects under Mild
Leniency, we considered the deterrence threshold that corresponds to this refinement. Two
important insights deserve attention. First, our findings suggest that the benefit from the
harmful act incentivizes the potential injurers to commit the act. Consider, for instance, the
effect of the b-value on deterrence for the case of Strong Leniency (first three lines of Table
8). The data indicate that when the benefits are above the theoretical threshold (600), the
deterrence rate is equal to 6%; and, when the benefits are below this threshold, the deter-


                                                       28
                                Table 8 – Effect of Benefit on Deterrencea
                                         (Within-Condition Analysis)

                               Condition             Number of        Deterrence
                                                                 b
                                                        Pairs            Rate
                               Strong Leniency
                               b ∈ [200, 600]               15            .47
                               b ∈ (600, 1600]              33            .06
                               p-value                                 p = .002
                               Mild Leniency
                               b ∈ [200, 660]               26            .31
                               b ∈ (660, 1600]              22            .00
                               p-value                                 p = .004
                               No Leniency
                               b ∈ [200, 360]               4             .75
                               b ∈ (360, 1600]              44            .23
                               p-value                                 p = .055

Notes: a p-value corresponds to one-sided Fisher-exact test; b total number of pairs.


rence rate rises to 47% (a statistically significant effect, p = .002). More generally, for each
leniency environment, the likelihood of deterrence is significantly lower when the benefits are
greater than the theoretical deterrence threshold. These results are aligned with our theory
and provide strong support for Hypothesis 7.

Result 12. Within each leniency environment, the deterrence rate is lower when the benefit
from the harmful act is greater than the deterrence threshold.

    Second, our results indicate that the deterrence rates for b-values below the theoretical
thresholds are lower than the rates predicted by the theory for the Strong, Mild and No
Leniency policies (47, 31 and 75% instead of 100%). The low deterrence rate under Strong
Leniency might suggest that some subjects considered an alternative deterrence threshold. In
theory, both injurers report immediately, and hence, they are equally likely to get the first
position in the self-reporting queue (i.e., each has a 50% chance to get the first position). In
the lab, some subjects might exhibit cognitive biases, such as self-serving bias (Babcock et al.,
1995), and believe that their chances to be the first to report are greater than the chances of
the other injurers (i.e., that their chances are greater than 50%). In the limiting case, some
subjects might believe that they will always be the first to report. As a result, they will consider

                                                       29
a fine equal to 300 instead of an expected fine equal to 600 when making their decisions about
participating in the harmful activity. Hence, they will also choose to participate in the harmful
activity when the benefits are lower than 600.58
       Regarding Mild Leniency, the low deterrence rate might be explained, in part, by the
decisions in Stage 2. Remember that, although the majority of subjects coordinated on the risk-
dominant N.E. (R, R), some subjects attempted to coordinate on the Pareto-dominant N.E.
(NR, NR). Subjects who expect to coordinate on (NR, NR) will consider a lower deterrence
threshold (360 instead of 660). Hence, they will also choose to commit the act when the benefits
are lower than 660. The low deterrence rate might be also explained by the presence of self-
serving bias on the subjects’ beliefs about their chances to be the first to report. Some subjects
might believe that they will always be the first to report. As a result, they will consider a fine
equal to 420 instead of an expected fine equal to 660. Hence, they will also choose to commit
the act when the benefits are lower than 660.59
       Finally, the relatively high deterrence rate under No Leniency for b-values below the the-
oretical threshold (75 versus 47 and 31% for Strong and Mild Leniency) might be explained
by the degree of ambiguity across strategic environments. As argued by Kunda (1990, 1987),
environments characterized by strong ambiguity are more prone to elicit self-serving bias. In
our experiment, subjects might perceive a stronger degree of ambiguity under the Strong and
Mild Leniency conditions because the expected payoffs depend also on the subjects’ beliefs
about their likelihoods to get the first position in the self-reporting queue. As a result, we
might expect that self-serving bias would be more prominent in the Strong and Mild Leniency
conditions.
       We now assess the effect of ordered leniency on the deterrence rate. Table 9 summarizes our
results. Remember first that, in theory, when the benefit from committing the harmful act is
not greater than 600, the deterrence rate under Strong Leniency is higher than the deterrence
rate under No Leniency (100 and 27%, for Strong Leniency and No Leniency, respectively);60
when the benefit is greater than 600, Strong Leniency and No Leniency exhibit the same
zero deterrence rate. Second, in theory, when the benefit from committing the harmful act is
  58
       See Section 6 for further discussion.
  59
       Failure to apply backward induction due to limited computational abilities might explain some of the
deviations from the theoretical predictions on deterrence, under Strong, Mild and No Leniency. Camerer and
Johnson (2004) state, “motivated intelligent subjects behave sensibly, but do not exhibit the extent of strategic
reasoning which is commonly assumed when game theory is applied” (p. 15). See also Johnson et al. (2002).
  60
     Given the number of pairs per b-value segment, the deterrence rate for No Leniency is equal to 4/15.


                                                       30
                              Table 9 – Effect of Ordered Leniency on Deterrencea

                 Conditions                             Number of        Deterrence       p-valuec
                                                            Pairsb          Rate
                 Strong Leniency v. No Leniency
                 b ∈ [200, 600]                             15, 15       .47 v. .47      p = .642
                 b ∈ (600, 1600]                            33, 33       .06 v. .18      p = .129
                 Across b-values                            48, 48       .19 v. .27      p = .233


                 Mild Leniency v. No Leniency
                 b ∈ [200, 660]                             26, 26       .31 v. .38      p = .386
                 b ∈ (660, 1600]                            22, 22       .00 v. .14      p = .116
                 Across b-values                            48, 48       .17 v. .27      p = .162


                 Mild Leniency v. Strong Leniency
                 b ∈ [200, 660]                             26, 26       .31 v. .31      p = .618
                 b ∈ (660, 1600]                            22, 22       .00 v. .05      p = .500
                 Across b-values                            48, 48       .17 v. .19      p = .500

Notes: a “v.” denotes “versus;” b total number of pairs; c p-value corresponds to one-sided Fisher’s exact test.


not greater than 660 and the risk-dominance refinement is applied, the deterrence rate under
Mild Leniency is higher than the deterrence rate under Strong Leniency and No Leniency
(100, 58 and 15%, for Mild, Strong, and No Leniency, respectively);61 when the benefit from
committing the harmful act is greater than 660 and the risk-dominance refinement is applied,
Strong Leniency, Mild Leniency and No Leniency exhibit a zero deterrence rate.62 Although the
behaviors of subjects in the self-reporting stage, and hence, the actual fines, are aligned with
the theory, the deterrence rates across conditions are not significantly different. These results
might be explained by the relatively low deterrence rates for b-values below the theoretical
thresholds under Strong and Mild Leniency due, for instance, to self-serving bias. As a result,
acts are committed more frequently than predicted. These findings are aligned with previous
literature on crime and deterrence (Nagin and Pogarsky, 2003; Kleck et al., 2005; Kleck and
  61
       Given the number of pairs per b-value segment, the deterrence rates under Strong and No Leniency are
equal to 15/26 and 4/26, respectively.
  62
     In theory, across b-values, the deterrence rates under Strong Leniency, Mild Leniency and No Leniency
are equal to 31, 54, and 8%, respectively. Given the number of pairs per b-value segment, across b-values, the
deterrence rates for Strong Leniency, Mild Leniency and No-Leniency are equal to 4/48, 15/48, and 26/48,
respectively.


                                                       31
Barnes, 2014; Lochner, 2007).63

       In sum, our experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of ordered-leniency policies
as detection mechanisms. In particular, the implementation of either Strong or Mild Leniency
policies significantly increases the likelihood of self-reporting. These findings provide support
for the theoretical predictions under the risk-dominance refinement. We provide empirical
evidence of a race-to-the-courthouse effect of ordered-leniency policies: Prompt self-reporting
is observed when Strong or Mild Leniency policies are implemented. Importantly, ordered-
leniency policies significantly raise the likelihood of detection of harmful acts. As a consequence,
the average fines significantly increase. As predicted under the risk-dominance refinement, Mild
Leniency exhibits the highest average fine. Overall, our results are aligned with the theoretical
predictions.
       Our findings provide important insights for the design of enforcement policies with ordered
leniency. We present strong evidence that the injurers also confront “the dilemma” of choosing
self-reporting instead of no reporting (their preferred outcome) in coordination-game environ-
ments (Mild Leniency). These results suggest that the enforcement agency does not need to
rely on strong penalty reductions (i.e., on the implementation of Strong Leniency) to elicit
self-reporting of harmful activities. Mild Leniency might also induce cooperation with the en-
forcement agency when the injurers are sufficiently distrustful of each other after committing
the act.


6        Discussion and Conclusions
Can an enforcement authority strengthen detection and deterrence of socially harmful activities
by implementing ordered-leniency policies? Landeo and Spier (2018) consider a theoretical
model of law enforcement with ordered leniency, where the design of optimal policies depends
crucially on the equilibrium refinement applied in case of multiplicity of equilibria. When
the risk-dominance refinement is applied, they demonstrate that the enforcement authority
can induce all injurers to immediately self-report by offering only small penalty discounts. If
the Pareto-dominance refinement is applied instead, the enforcement agency must offer bigger
penalty discounts to induce self-reporting. As a result of the high self-reporting rates under
  63
       See Chalfin and Mc Crary (2017) for a survey on the literature on crime and deterrence. See Section 6 for
further discussion.


                                                        32
ordered leniency, detection of harmful acts is enhanced without increasing investigatory costs.
Given the higher detection rates under ordered leniency, the expected sanctions rise, and hence,
deterrence and social welfare are enhanced.
       Our experimental findings suggest that ordered-leniency policies are effective detection
mechanisms. In particular, Strong and Mild Leniency significantly increase the likelihood
of self-reporting. These results suggest that the subjects’ choices are aligned with the risk-
dominance refinement. We provide empirical evidence of a race-to-the-courthouse effect of
ordered-leniency policies: Prompt self-reporting is observed when Strong or Mild Leniency
policies are implemented. Importantly, ordered-leniency policies raise the likelihood of detec-
tion: Harmful acts are detected with (almost) certainty when Strong or Mild Leniency are
implemented. Given the high detection rates under ordered leniency, the average fines rise.
Our results on deterrence indicate that some subjects systematically underestimate the likeli-
hood and severity of sanctions when making their decisions about participating in the harmful
act. These findings might suggest the presence of self-serving bias on subjects’ beliefs about
getting the first position in the self-reporting queue. As a result, deterrence is weakened, and
harmful acts are committed more frequently than predicted.
       Importantly, our findings are aligned with previous literature on crime and deterrence. In
particular, in a recent Journal of Economic Literature survey on the economics and criminology
literature on crime and deterrence, Chalfin and McCrary (2017) point out the importance of
perceptual deterrence (i.e., the individual’s perception of the risk associated with the partici-
pation in an illegal activity).64 This literature provides significant insights for the assessment
of law enforcement policies with ordered leniency. First, the findings from the crime and de-
terrence literature about the association between perceptual deterrence, self-serving bias and
crime participation provide support for our claim that the relatively low deterrence rate under
ordered leniency might be explained by the individuals’ biased perceptions of the risks associ-
ated with the participation in the harmful activity. Second, the findings from this literature on
the sensitivity of perceptual deterrence to crime detection experiences suggest that ordered-
  64
       Apel (2013) and Pogarsky (2009) provide two other excellent surveys on this literature. Three important
findings from this literature deserve special attention: (1) The difference between perceptual deterrence (sub-
jective risk) and actual risk (Kleck et al., 2005; Kleck and Barnes, 2014; Lochner, 2007); (2) the malleability
of perceptual deterrence and the sensitivity of perceptual deterrence to crime detection experiences (Pogarsky
et al, 2005, 2004); and, (3) the association between perceptual deterrence, self-serving bias, and participation
in harmful activities (Nagin and Pogarsky, 2003).



                                                       33
leniency policies might have an additional welfare-enhancing effect associated with deterrence:
By increasing the likelihood of detection, ordered-leniency policies might help align individu-
als’ subjective perceptions of risk and actual risk. As a result, a higher deterrence of unlawful
activities committed by former wrongdoers might be observed.
      Significant policy implications are derived from our study. We demonstrate that the en-
forcement agency might generate optimal detection of harmful activities by implementing a
coordination game or a prisoners’ dilemma game through Mild and Strong Leniency, respec-
tively. In particular, when Mild Leniency is implemented, although the injurers are jointly
better off by refusing to cooperate with the enforcement authority, they are individually in-
duced to cooperate due to strategic uncertainty. As a result, immediate self-reporting and
optimal detection are also elicited under Mild Leniency. Our findings challenge the common
view among legal practitioners and policy makers that only the prisoners’ dilemma game is
relevant for the design of enforcement policies and cooperation agreements, and provide rele-
vant insights for the design of enforcement policies with self-reporting in a variety of real-world
environments.65
      Our analysis focuses on environments where the harmful acts are committed by pairs of
injurers. In some real-world applications, the groups of injurers might involve more than
two members. It might be interesting to experimentally study environments with more than
two potential injurers, and to assess how the group size affects self-reporting, detection and
deterrence. In theory, immediate self-reporting by all injurers is robust to group size (Landeo
and Spier, 2018). In the lab, however, larger groups may find even harder to coordinate their
actions on their preferred outcome. As a result, the detection power of Mild Leniency policies
might be stronger than observed here.
      In our experimental setting, both injurers receive the same benefits from participating in
the harmful act. A possible extension might experimentally assess the performance of ordered-
leniency policies in environments with asymmetric private benefits from committing the act.
Landeo and Spier (2018) demonstrate that, in theory, the results derived from the benchmark
model are robust to asymmetric benefits as long as the injurers can write side contracts with
each other and negotiate transfer payments. In experimental settings, however, including a
transfer negotiation stage might also affect the participation and self-reporting decisions of the
injurers. These, and other extensions, may be fruitful topics for future research.

 65
      See Section 1 for further discussion.


                                                34
References
Andreoni, James. 1991. “The Desirability of a Permanent Tax Amnesty.” Journal of Public
   Economics, 45: 143–159.
Apel, Robert. 2013. “Sanctions, Perceptions, and Crime: Implications for Criminal Deter-
    rence.” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 29: 67–101.
Apesteguia, Jose, Martin Dufwenberg, and Reinhard Selten. 2007. “Blowing the Whistle.”
    Economic Theory, 31: 143–166.
Arlen, Jennifer and Reinier Kraakman. 1997. “Controlling Corporate Misconduct: An Anal-
    ysis of Corporate Liability Regimes.” New York University Law Review, 72: 687–779.
Aubert, Cécile, Patrick Rey, and William E. Kovacic. 2006. “The Impact of Leniency and
   Whistle-Blowing Programs on Cartels.” International Journal of Industrial Organization,
   24: 1241–1266.
Babcock, Linda, George Loewenstein, Samuel Issacharoff, and Colin Camerer. 1995. “Biased
   Judgments of Fairness in Bargaining.” American Economic Review, 11: 109–26.
Becker, Gary S. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.” Journal of Political
    Economy, 76: 169–217.
Bigoni, Maria, Sven-Olof Fridolfsson, Chloe Le Coq, and Giancarlo Spagnolo. 2015. “Trust,
    Leniency, and Deterrence.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 31: 663–689.
Bigoni, Maria, Sven-Olof Fridolfsson, Chloe Le Coq, and Giancarlo Spagnolo. 2012. “Fines,
    Leniency, and Rewards in Antitrust.” RAND Journal of Economics, 43: 368–90.
Buccirossi, Paolo and Giancarlo Spagnolo. 2006. “Leniency Policies and Illegal Transactions.”
    Journal of Public Economics, 90: 1281–1297.
Burton, Anthony and Martin Sefton. 2004. “Risk, Pre-Play Communication and Equilib-
    rium.” Games and Economic Behavior, 46: 23–40.
Camerer, Colin and Eric J. Johnson. 2004. “Thinking about Attention in Games: Backward
   and Forward Induction.” In Isabelle Brocas and Juan D. Carrillo, eds., The Psychology of
   Economic Decisions. Volume Two: Reasons and Choices. New York: Oxford University
   Press Inc.
Chalfin, Aaron and Justin McCrary. 2017. “Criminal Deterrence: A Review of the Litera-
    ture.” Journal of Economic Literature, 55: 5–48.
Chen, Zhijun and Patrick Rey. 2013. “On the Design of Leniency Programs.” Journal of
   Law and Economics, 56: 917–957.
Cooper, Russell W., Douglas V. DeJong, Robert Forsythe, and Thomas W. Ross. 1992.
   “Communication in Coordination Games.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107: 739–
   771.
Feess, Eberhardt and Markus Walzl. 2004. “Self-Reporting in Optimal Law Enforcement
    When There Are Criminal Teams.” Economica, 71: 333-348.
Feltovich, Nick and Yasuyo Hamaguchi. 2018. “The Effect of Leniency Programmes on
     Anti-Competitive Behaviour: An Experimental Study.” Southern Economic Journal, 84:
     1024–1049.

                                            35
Greenberg, Michael D. 2011. For Whom the Whistle Blows. Advancing Corporate Compli-
    ance and Integrity Efforts in the Era of Dodd-Frank. California: The RAND Corporation.
Grossman, Gene M. and Michael L. Katz. 1983. “Plea Bargaining and Social Welfare.”
    American Economic Review, 73: 749–757.
Harsanyi, John C. and Reinhard Selten. 1988. A General Theory of Equilibrium Selection in
    Games. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hinloopen, Jeroen and Adriaan R. Soetevent. 2008. “Laboratory Evidence on the Effective-
    ness of Corporate Leniency Programs.” RAND Journal of Economics, 39: 607–616.
Innes, Robert. 1999. “Remediation and Self-reporting in Optimal Law Enforcement.” Journal
    of Public Economics, 72: 379-393.
Johnson, Eric J., Colin Camerer, Sankar Sen, and Talya Rymon. 2002. “Detecting Failures of
    Backward Induction: Monitoring Information Search in Sequential Bargaining.” Journal
    of Economic Theory, 104: 16–47.
Kaplow, Louis and Steven Shavell. 1994. “Optimal Law Enforcement with Self-Reporting of
    Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy, 102: 583–606.
Kobayashi, Bruce. 1992. “Deterrence with Multiple Defendants: An Explanation for “Unfair”
   Plea Bargains.” RAND Journal of Economics, 23: 507–517.
Kraakman, Reinier H. 1986. “Gatekeepers: The Anatomy of a Third-Party Enforcement
    Strategy.” Journal of Law, Economics & Organization, 2: 53–104.
Kleck, Gary, and J. C. Barnes. 2014. “Do More Police Lead to More Crime Deterrence?”
    Crime and Delinquency, 60: 716–38.
Kleck, Gary, Brion Sever, Spencer Li, and Marc Gertz. 2005. “The Missing Link in General
    Deterrence Research.” Criminology, 43: 623–60.
Kunda, Ziva. 1990. “The Case of Motivated Reasoning.” Psychological Bulletin, 108: 480–98.
Kunda, Ziva. 1987. “Motivated Inference: Self-Serving Generation and Evaluation of Causal
   Theories.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53: 636–47.
Landeo, Claudia M. 2018. “Law and Economics and Tort Litigation Institutions: Theory
    and Experiments.” Chapter 9. In Kathryn Zeiler and Joshua Teitelbaum, eds., Research
    Handbook on Behavioral Law and Economics. Massachusetts: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Landeo, Claudia M. 2009. “Cognitive Coherence and Tort Reform.” Journal of Economic
    Psychology, 6: 898–912.
Landeo, Claudia M. and Kathryn E. Spier. 2018. “Optimal Law Enforcement with Ordered
    Leniency.” Mimeo. University of Alberta and Harvard University.
Landeo, Claudia M. and Kathryn E. Spier. 2015. “Incentive Contracts for Teams: Experi-
    mental Evidence.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 119: 496–511.
Landeo, Claudia M. and Kathryn E. Spier. 2012. “Exclusive Dealing and Market Foreclosure:
    Further Experimental Results.” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 168:
    150–170.

                                           36
Landeo, Claudia M. and Kathryn E. Spier. 2009. “Naked Exclusion: An Experimental Study
    of Contracts with Externalities.” American Economic Review, 99: 1850–1877.
Landeo, Claudia M., Maxim Nikitin, and Sergei Izmalkov. 2013. “Incentives for Care, Liti-
    gation, and Tort Reform under Self-Serving Bias.” In Thomas J. Miceli and Matthew J.
    Baker, eds., Research Handbook on Economic Models of Law. Massachusetts: Edward
    Elgar Publishing.
Landes, William M. 1971. “An Economic Analysis of the Courts.” Journal of Law and
    Economics, 14: 61–108.
Livernois, John and C.J. McKenna. 1999. “Truth or Consequences: Enforcing Pollution
    Standards with Self-Reporting.” Journal of Public Economics, 71: 415–440.
Lochner, Lance. 2007. “Individual Perceptions of the Criminal Justice System.” American
    Economic Review, 97: 444–6 0.
Malik, Arun S. 1993. “Self-Reporting and the Design of Policies for Regulating Stochastic
    Pollution.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 24: 241–257.
Malik, Arun S. and Robert M. Schwab. 1991. “The Economics of Tax Amnesties.” Journal
    of Public Economics, 46: 29–49.
Motta, Massimo and Michele Polo. 2003. “Leniency Programs and Cartel Prosecution.”
    International Journal of Industrial Organization, 21: 347–379.
Nagin, Daniel S. and Greg Pogarsky. 2003. “An Experimental Investigation of Deterrence:
    Cheating, Self-Serving Bias, and Impulsivity.” Criminology, 41: 167–194.
Ochs, Jack. 1995. “Coordination Problems.” In J.H. Kagel and A.E. Roth, eds., Handbook
    of Experimental Economics. New Jersey: Princeton University Press Inc.
Pogarsky, Greg. 2009. “Deterrence and Decision Making: Research Questions and Theoretical
    Refinement.” In Krohn, Marvin D., Alan J. Lizzote and Gina Penly Hall, eds., Handbook
    on Crime and Deviance. New York: Springer.
Pogarsky, Greg, KiDeuk Kim, and Ray Paternoster. 2005. “Perceptual Change in the Na-
    tional Youth Survey: Lessons for Deterrence Theory and Offender Decision-Making.”
    Justice Quarterly, 22: 1–29.
Pogarsky, Greg, Alex R. Piquero, and Ray Paternoster. 2004. “Modeling Change in Percep-
    tions about Sanction Threats: The Neglected Linkage in Deterrence Theory.” Journal of
    Quantitative Criminology, 20: 343–69.
Polinsky, A. Mitchell and Steven Shavell. 1984. “The Optimal Use of Fines and Imprison-
     ment.” Journal of Public Economics, 24: 89–99.
Smith, Angela S. . 2011. “An Experimental Study of Exclusive Contracts.” International
    Journal of Industrial Organization, 29: 4–13.
Spagnolo, Giancarlo. 2005. “Divide et Impera: Optimal Leniency Programs.” Mimeo,
    Stockholm School of Economics.
Spagnolo, Giancarlo and Catarina Marvão. 2016. “Cartels and Leniency: Taking Stock of
    What We Learnt.” In Luis C. Corchón and Marco A. Marini, eds., Handbook of Game
    Theory and Industrial Organization. Massachusetts: Edward Elgar Publishing.


                                          37
Appendix: Sample Instructions (Mild-Leniency Condition)

         PLEASE GIVE THIS MATERIAL TO THE EXPERIMENTER
                        AT THE END OF THE EXPERIMENT




                               INSTRUCTIONS
This is an experiment in the economics of decision-making. The National Science Foundation has provided
the funds for this research.


In this experiment you will be asked to play an economic decision-making computer game. The experiment
currency is the “token.” The instructions are simple. If you follow them closely and make appropriate
decisions, you may make a large amount of money. At the end of the session you will be paid your game
earnings in CASH. If you have any questions at any time, please raise your hand and the experimenter will
go to your desk.




                      PROBABILITY OR CHANCE
The concept of probability or chance will be used in this experiment. PROBABILITY OR CHANCE
(EXPRESSED IN PERCENTAGES) indicates the likelihood of occurrence of uncertain events. The
concept of probability or chance can be illustrated as follows. Suppose that an urn contains 100 balls: 20 out
of 100 balls are white, and 80 out of 100 balls are black. Suppose that you randomly extract one ball from the
urn. The chance that the ball will be white is equal to 20% because 20 out of 100 balls in the urn are white.
Similarly, the chance that the ball will be black is equal to 80%, because 80 out of 100 balls in the urn are
black.




                                                       1
                         SESSION AND PLAYERS

The session is made up of 6 matches. The first 5 matches are practice matches. After the last practice match,
ONE ACTUAL MATCH will be played.


1)   At the beginning of the session, every participant will be randomly assigned a role. The equally likely
     roles are: Player B1 and Player B2.


     The ROLES WILL REMAIN THE SAME until the end of the session.


2)   Before the beginning of EACH PRACTICE MATCH, the computer will randomly form pairs of
     TWO PEOPLE: Player B1 and Player B2.


     YOU WILL NOT KNOW THE IDENTITY OF YOUR PARTNER.
     YOU WILL PLAY WITH A DIFFERENT PARTNER IN EVERY PRACTICE MATCH.




3)   Before the beginning of the ACTUAL MATCH, the computer will randomly form pairs of TWO
     PEOPLE: Player B1 and Player B2.


     YOU WILL NOT KNOW THE IDENTITY OF YOUR PARTNER.
     YOU WILL NOT PLAY WITH ANY OF YOUR PREVIOUS PARTNERS.




                                                      2
                                 MATCH STAGES


        STAGE 1: DECISION WHETHER TO JOINTLY
                   COMMIT THE ACT


1)   Each player has an initial endowment equal to 700 tokens.




2)   THE DECISION TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT refers to an economic decision involving
     potential economic benefits and potential economic losses.


          •   ECONOMIC BENEFITS might occur in STAGE 1.
          •   ECONOMIC LOSSES might occur in STAGE 2.




3)   THE COMPUTER randomly determines the NUMBER OF TOKENS X that each player will get IF
     BOTH PLAYERS AGREE TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT. Both players will receive the
     same number of tokens X.


          •   The number of tokens X can be equal to 200, …, 1598, 1599, 1600 tokens.
          •   The number of tokens X will be revealed to both players.




                                                    3
4)   Player B1 and Player B2 decide whether to JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT


            •     Each player will have 90 SECONDS TO DECIDE WHETHER TO AGREE TO
                  JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT OR NOT AGREE TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE
                  ACT AND PRESS THE NEXT BUTTON.


                      o If a player FAILS TO MAKE A CHOICE AND TO PRESS THE NEXT
                         BUTTON WITHIN THE 90-SECOND PERIOD, it will be implied that he/she
                         decided NOT TO AGREE TO JOINTLY COMMIT the act.




5)   The possible outcomes are as follows.


        •       BOTH PLAYERS AGREE TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT: Each player gets X
                TOKENS (in addition to the initial endowment of 700 tokens) and STAGE 2 BEGINS.


        •       ONLY ONE PLAYER AGREES TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT: Each player gets
                ZERO TOKENS and the MATCH ENDS. The match payoff for each player will be 700
                tokens (initial endowment).


        •       NEITHER PLAYER AGREES TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT: Each player gets
                ZERO TOKENS and the MATCH ENDS. The match payoff for each player will be 700
                tokens (initial endowment).




                                                    4
STAGE 2: DECISION WHETHER TO REPORT THE ACT


1) If both payers agreed to jointly commit the act, then Stage 2 begins.




2) A FINE EQUAL TO 900 TOKENS MIGHT BE DEDUCTED FROM A PLAYER’S TOKEN
   BALANCE AS A CONSEQUENCE OF JOINTLY COMMITTING THE ACT.


           •    A player’s decision to report the act MIGHT DECREASE THE FINE HE/SHE WILL PAY
                from 900 tokens to 420 tokens.


           •    A player’s decision to report the act MIGHT INCREASE HIS/HER PARTNER’S CHANCE
                TO PAY A FINE from 40% to 90% or from 40% to 100%.


   THE SPECIFIC FINE AND THE CHANCE OF PAYING THAT FINE DEPEND ON THE
   DECISIONS OF BOTH PLAYERS ABOUT REPORTING THE ACT.




3) Each player will have 90 SECONDS TO DECIDE WHETHER TO REPORT OR NOT TO
   REPORT THE ACT AND PRESS THE NEXT BUTTON.


       •       If a player FAILS TO MAKE A CHOICE AND TO PRESS THE NEXT BUTTON WITHIN
               THE 90-SECOND PERIOD, it will be implied that he/she decided NOT REPORT the act.




4) The possible outcomes and match payoffs are presented below.




                                                    5
POSSIBLE OUTCOME 1: BOTH PLAYERS DECIDE NOT TO
                                REPORT THE ACT



  o NEITHER PLAYER GETS A FINE REDUCTION
  o EACH PLAYER’S CHANCE OF PAYING A FINE EQUAL TO 900 TOKENS IS 40%:
     Each player pays a fine equal to 900 tokens with 40% chance and does not pay any fine with
     60% chance.


  Hence, the match payoffs are as follows.


  With a 40% CHANCE, the match payoffs will be:
  Player B1’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 900 tokens
  Player B2’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 900 tokens




  With a 60% CHANCE, the match payoffs will be:
  Player B1’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 0 tokens
  Player B2’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 0 tokens




                                                 6
POSSIBLE OUTCOME 2: ONLY PLAYER B1 DECIDES TO
                              REPORT THE ACT


   o ONLY PLAYER B1 GETS A FINE REDUCTION: Instead of paying a fine equal to 900
      tokens, Player B1 always pays only 420 tokens.
   o PLAYER B2’S CHANCE OF PAYING A FINE EQUAL TO 900 TOKENS IS 90%:
      Player B2 pays a fine equal to 900 tokens with 90% chance and does not pay any fine with
      10% chance.


   Hence, the match payoffs are as follows.


   With a 90% CHANCE, the match payoffs will be:
    Player B1’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 420 tokens
    Player B2’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 900 tokens




   With a 10% CHANCE, the match payoffs will be:
    Player B1’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 420 tokens
    Player B2’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 0 tokens




                                              7
POSSIBLE OUTCOME 3: ONLY PLAYER B2 DECIDES TO
                              REPORT THE ACT



   o ONLY PLAYER B2 WILL GET A FINE REDUCTION: Instead of paying a fine equal to
      900 tokens, Player B2 always pays only 420 tokens.
   o PLAYER B1’S CHANCE OF PAYING A FINE EQUAL TO 900 TOKENS IS 90%:
      Player B1 pays a fine equal to 900 tokens with 90% chance and does not pay any fine with
      10% chance.


   Hence, the match payoffs are as follows.


   With a 90% CHANCE, the match payoffs will be:
    Player B1’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 900 tokens
    Player B2’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 420 tokens




   With a 10% CHANCE, the match payoffs will be:
    Player B1’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 0 tokens
    Player B2’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 420 tokens




                                              8
  POSSIBLE OUTCOME 4: BOTH PLAYERS DECIDE TO
                                  REPORT THE ACT




• IF PLAYER B1 REPORTS FIRST
    o     ONLY PLAYER B1 GETS A FINE REDUCTION: Instead of paying a fine equal to 900
          tokens, Player B1 always pays only 420 tokens.
    o PLAYER B2’S CHANCE OF PAYING A FINE EQUAL TO 900 TOKENS IS 100%:
          Player B2 always pays a fine equal to 900 tokens.


    Hence, the match payoffs are as follows.


    With a 100% CHANCE, the match payoffs will be:
        Player B1’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 420 tokens
        Player B2’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 900 tokens




• IF PLAYER B2 REPORTS FIRST
    o     ONLY PLAYER B2 GETS A FINE REDUCTION: Instead of paying a fine equal to 900
          tokens, Player B2 always pays only 420 tokens.
    o PLAYER B1’S CHANCE OF PAYING A FINE EQUAL TO 900 TOKENS IS 100%:
          Player B1 always pays a fine equal to 900 tokens.


    Hence, the match payoffs are as follows.


    With a 100% CHANCE, the match payoffs will be:
        Player B1’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 900 tokens
        Player B2’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 420 tokens



                                                  9
• IF BOTH PLAYERS REPORT AT THE SAME TIME
    o EACH PLAYER GETS A FINE REDUCTION WITH 50% CHANCE: Instead of paying
       a fine equal to 900 tokens, each player pays only 420 tokens with 50% chance.
    o EACH PLAYER’S CHANCE OF PAYING A FINE EQUAL TO 900 TOKENS IS 50%:
       Each player pays a fine equal to 900 tokens with 50% chance.




    Hence, the match payoffs are as follows.


    With a 50% CHANCE, the match payoffs will be:
     Player B1’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 420 tokens
     Player B2’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 900 tokens


    With a 50% CHANCE, the match payoffs will be:
     Player B1’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 900 tokens
     Player B2’s match payoff = 700 tokens + X tokens – 420 tokens




                                               10
                                            EXERCISES

Suppose that the number of tokens that each player gets IF BOTH PLAYERS AGREE TO JOINTLY
COMMIT THE ACT is equal to X tokens.


Nine exercises, based on the possible outcomes, are presented below. Please fill the blanks.




Exercise 1
Suppose that BOTH PLAYERS AGREE TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT. Then, each player gets
________________________________________ tokens. Suppose also that Player B1 decides NOT TO
REPORT the act and Player B2 decides NOT TO REPORT the act.


The MATCH PAYOFFS (IN TOKENS) are as follows.


Player B1:
 Chance         Payoff                            Chance        Payoff




Player B2:
 Chance         Payoff                            Chance        Payoff




                                                     11
Exercise 2
Suppose that BOTH PLAYERS AGREE TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT. Then, each player gets
______________________________________ tokens. Suppose also that Player B1 decides TO REPORT
the act and Player B2 decides NOT TO REPORT the act.


The MATCH PAYOFFS (IN TOKENS) are as follows.


Player B1:
 Chance       Payoff                       Chance      Payoff




Player B2:
 Chance       Payoff                       Chance      Payoff




Exercise 3
Suppose that BOTH PLAYERS AGREE TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT. Then, each player gets
________________________________________ tokens. Suppose also that Player B1 decides NOT TO
REPORT the act and Player B2 decides TO REPORT the act.


The MATCH PAYOFFS (IN TOKENS) are as follows.


Player B1:
 Chance       Payoff                       Chance      Payoff




Player B2:
 Chance       Payoff                       Chance      Payoff




                                              12
Exercise 4
Suppose that BOTH PLAYERS AGREE TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT. Then, each player gets
_______________________________________ tokens. Suppose also that Player B1 decides TO REPORT
the act and Player B2 decides TO REPORT the act, and that Player B1 IS THE FIRST TO REPORT.


The MATCH PAYOFFS (IN TOKENS) are as follows.


Player B1:
 Chance       Payoff                      Chance       Payoff




Player B2:
 Chance       Payoff                      Chance       Payoff




Exercise 5
Suppose that BOTH PLAYERS AGREE TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT. Then, each player gets
_______________________________________ tokens. Suppose also that Player B1 decides TO REPORT
the act and Player B2 decides TO REPORT the act, and that Player B2 IS THE FIRST TO REPORT.


The MATCH PAYOFFS (IN TOKENS) are as follows.


Player B1:
 Chance       Payoff                      Chance       Payoff




Player B2:
 Chance       Payoff                      Chance       Payoff




                                              13
Exercise 6
Suppose that BOTH PLAYERS AGREE TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT. Then, each player gets
_______________________________________ tokens. Suppose also that Player B1 decides TO REPORT
the act and Player B2 decides TO REPORT the act, and that BOTH PLAYERS REPORT AT THE
SAME TIME.


The MATCH PAYOFFS (IN TOKENS) are as follows.


Player B1:
 Chance       Payoff                      Chance      Payoff




Player B2:
 Chance       Payoff                      Chance      Payoff




Exercise 7
Suppose that Player B1 AGREES TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT and Player B2 DOES NOT
AGREE TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT.


The MATCH PAYOFFS (IN TOKENS) are as follows.


Player B1:
 Chance       Payoff                      Chance      Payoff




Player B2:
 Chance       Payoff                      Chance      Payoff




                                             14
Exercise 8
Suppose that Player B1 DOES NOT AGREE TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT and Player B2
AGREES TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT.




The MATCH PAYOFFS (IN TOKENS) are as follows.


Player B1:
 Chance      Payoff                    Chance   Payoff




Player B2:
 Chance      Payoff                    Chance   Payoff




Exercise 9
Suppose that NEITHER PLAYER AGREES TO JOINTLY COMMIT THE ACT.




The MATCH PAYOFFS (IN TOKENS) are as follows.


Player B1:
 Chance      Payoff                    Chance   Payoff




Player B2:
 Chance      Payoff                    Chance   Payoff




                                         15
                                  SESSION PAYOFF
       The game earnings in tokens will be equal to the PAYOFF FOR THE ACTUAL MATCH. The
game earnings in dollars will be equal to: (game earnings in tokens)/29 (29 tokens = 1 dollar). The session
payoff will be equal to the game earnings in dollars plus the $10 participation fee.




                                GAME SOFTWARE
       The game will be played using a computer terminal. You will need to enter your decisions by using
the mouse. In some instances, you will need to wait until the other players make their decisions before
moving to the next screen. Please BE PATIENT. There will be a box, displayed in the upper right-hand side
of your screen, which indicates the “Match Number,” “Your Role,” and “Your Balance.”
       Please press the NEXT >> button to move to the next screen. DO NOT TRY TO GO BACK TO
THE PREVIOUS SCREEN AND DO NOT CLOSE THE BROWSER: The software will stop working.


       Next, the 5 PRACTICE MATCHES will begin. After that, the ACTUAL MATCH will be played.
YOU CAN CONSULT THESE INSTRUCTIONS AT ANY TIME DURING THE EXPERIMENT.




                    THANKS FOR YOUR
      PARTICIPATION IN THIS
                                       STUDY!!
         PLEASE GIVE THIS MATERIAL TO THE EXPERIMENTER
                        AT THE END OF THE EXPERIMENT
                                                      16
