NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MAJORITY CHOICE OF TAXATION AND REDISTRIBUTION IN A FEDERATION
Stephen Calabrese
Dennis Epple
Richard Romano
Working Paper 25099
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25099

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

The authors thank Roland Benabou and Thomas Nechyba for his comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Stephen Calabrese, Dennis Epple, and Richard Romano. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Majority Choice of Taxation and Redistribution in a Federation
Stephen Calabrese, Dennis Epple, and Richard Romano
NBER Working Paper No. 25099
September 2018
JEL No. H2,H7,H71
ABSTRACT
We provide a model with a federal government and multiple local governments, the former with
power to levy an income tax for redistribution, and the latter choosing a local income tax,
property tax, lump-sum tax or subsidy, and a local public good. Policy is set by majority choice
at each tier of government by households that differ by income and ability to move across
communities. We provide sufficient conditions for existence of equilibrium and examine its
properties. Central findings are federal income distribution, little local redistribution, and local
preference for property taxation over income taxation to fund local public goods.

Stephen Calabrese
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Posner Hall, Room 243
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
sc45@qatar.cmu.edu
Dennis Epple
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Posner Hall, Room 257B
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
epple@cmu.edu

Richard Romano
University of Florida
Department of Economics
PO Box 117140
Gainesville, FL 32611
richard.romano@warrington.ufl.edu

1. Introduction
The division of responsibility for redistribution between federal and local governments has been an issue
of longstanding interest within economics. In his submission to the Joint Economic Committee on Federal
Expenditure Policy for Economic Growth and Stability, Stigler (1957) argued that “redistribution is
intrinsically a national policy.” In making his case, he commented that “If 99 communities tax the rich to
aid the poor, the rich may congregate in the hundredth community, so this uncooperative community sets
the tune.” Echoing this theme Musgrave (1971) states “Policies to adjust the distribution of income
among individuals must be conducted on a nationwide basis. Unless such adjustments are very minor,
regional differentiation leads to severe locational inefficiencies. Moreover, regional measures are selfdefeating, as the rich will leave and the poor will move to the more egalitarian-minded jurisdictions.”
Formalizing these ideas in a positive collective choice model has proven elusive. Meltzer and
Richard (1981) develop a positive model with majority choice of redistribution by a national government.
Epple and Romer (1991) develop a positive model with majority choice of redistribution by local
governments in a multi-community setting with mobile households. The challenge of combining these
elements in a single model is compounded by the requirement that a realistic positive model also take
account of the important role of local jurisdictions in providing local public goods. In addition, a positive
model needs to reflect the ability of local governments to choose how much to rely on property versus
income taxation. Combining these elements requires confronting the well-known result (Plott, 1967) that
existence of majority voting equilibrium with multiple policy instruments is problematic, even in a single
jurisdiction. Our goal in this paper is to develop and draw out the implications of a model with majority
choice that embodies all of the elements just enumerated: 1) The model endows national governments
with the authority to tax income and redistribute. 2) The model endows local governments with the
authority to levy property, income, and lump-sum taxes, provide local public goods, and redistribute. 3)
Decisions at both governmental levels are made by majority rule.
More specifically, our model has two tiers of government, a federal government and multiple
local jurisdictions. Policy is determined by majority choice of tax instruments by each government in the
federation. At the federal level, the electorate is the entire population. The federal government can
impose an income tax and use the funds for redistribution. At the local level, eligibility to vote in a
jurisdiction is limited to residents. Each local jurisdiction has purview over a defined geographic area,
with housing supply constrained by the given developable land. The government of each jurisdiction has
access to four policy instruments: property tax, income tax, lump-sum tax or local income subsidy, and
provision of a local (congested) public good. Households are mobile and heterogeneous in incomes.

1

Of course, despite this array of features, the model does not embody all elements of U.S. governmental
structure. For example, the model has two governmental tiers whereas the U.S. has three. Our goal is to
provide a framework that permits tractable and insightful analysis while avoiding excessive complexity.
We hope that readers will see this balance as being struck judiciously.
We provide conditions sufficient for existence of equilibrium in our theoretical analysis, and we
find those conditions to be satisfied in a quantitative counterpart to our theoretical model. As we noted
above, (Plott, 1967) shows that existence of majority voting equilibrium with multiple policy instruments
is problematic, even in a single jurisdiction. Hence, it may be surprising that existence of majority voting
equilibrium can be established with two independent levels of government, and with multiple local
jurisdictions each of which uses majority rule to choose the values of multiple policy instruments. We
adopt a preference structure that preserves empirically relevant features of the policy environment while
permitting existence and characterization of equilibrium with multiple communities voting over multiple
policy instruments. We view our approach to demonstration of existence to be a key contribution that is
of interest in its own right.
Our analysis provides new insights into the role of household choice of community of residence.
This choice is captured in our model in two ways. Households choose a jurisdiction prior to voting on
local tax-expenditure policies. This gives rise to income stratification. Hence, we refer to this initial
community choice as “sorting.” We also study the effects of potential relocation following voting. We
refer to the latter as “mobility”, and we investigate the effect of varying the proportion of households that
are mobile.1 Thus, our model permits us to examine the differential effects of sorting and mobility, which
we show to be important.
Four key positive implications from our theoretical and quantitative analysis accord well with
features observed in the U.S.2 1) At the federal level, an income tax is adopted to fund income
redistribution. 2) At the local level, there is income stratification across jurisdictions. 3) When use of
lump-sum taxes is constitutionally limited, as observed in practice, localities other than the central city
rely on property taxation to fund provision of local public goods. They eschew use of income taxes, and
they do not redistribute. 4) Within the central city, revenue is raised with property taxes supplemented
with very modest income taxation. This revenue is used to provide local public goods and to provide
some limited income redistribution.

Kessler and Lufesmann (2005) likewise model household locational choice and examine redistribution in a Tiebout
model with one tier of government.
2
See Baicker, Clemens, and Singhal (2012) for U.S. evidence regarding federal vs. local public expenditure and
taxation policies.
1

2

As we noted above, the traditional argument, going back to Stigler (1957) and Musgrave (1971),
is that households’ ability to relocate among local jurisdictions curtails the incentive to attempt local
redistribution; an attempt by the pivotal voter in a community to redistribute would cause richer
households to emigrate and poorer households to immigrate, with dire consequences for the tax base. Our
findings support the prediction that localities will not redistribute, but, interestingly, the mechanism
giving rise to this outcome is somewhat different from that suggested by Stigler and Musgrave. The
mechanism is as follows. Households sort across communities because of differing preferences for local
public goods. This gives rise to income stratification across communities. Median income is typically less
than the mean in communities, seemingly setting the stage for pivotal voters in all communities to tax for
redistribution. However, because of sorting, the difference between median and mean income within
communities is relatively small. In addition, any local taxes for redistribution come atop taxes that fund
the local public good and atop the federal income tax. Such additional local taxes would create an
additional deadweight loss larger than the gain that the pivotal voter would obtain from the redistribution.
Thus, we find that local redistributive taxes would not arise even if voters could not relocate to avoid such
a tax. In short, it is not mobility that precludes local redistribution, rather it is sorting. The sorting effects
and implied differences in voter preferences for redistribution at the federal and local levels also imply
contrasting findings to those of Boadway, Marchand, and Vigneault (1998) and Gordon and Cullen
(2011), discussed below.
We also undertake quantitative comparison of normative properties of equilibrium in federal
systems to cases of one-tiered government. The main results here are: 1) Permitting federal taxation for
redistribution increases equity but reduces efficiency as a result of their redistributive policy; and 2)
Household sorting across localities in a federal system is highly inefficient unless local lump-sum
taxation is unrestricted, this a generalization of the key finding in Calabrese, Epple, and Romano (2012).
As noted, a key theoretical challenge is the “Plott (1967) problem” that arises with majority
choice equilibrium over multiple policy variables. The preference function we adopt permits us to map
preferences over a 6-element policy and price vector into a simple linear indirect utility function over two
“composite public goods.” This greatly simplifies the analysis and provides intuition about relative
policy preference of households with differing incomes. It facilitates proving existence of majority
choice in the local jurisdictions and also facilitates the analysis of household sorting.3 In addition, this
characterization permits development of sufficient conditions for existence of majority choice of the
federal income tax for direct redistribution. This approach may in turn prove valuable in other
applications with multiple policy instruments, discussed in the Conclusion.
This simplification permits us to use single-crossing properties to establish existence results, placing the Plott
existence conditions in the background.

3

3

This paper bridges two literatures in public finance. The equilibrium among the local
jurisdictions in our model conforms to a Tiebout equilibrium, so this paper relates to the large theoretical
Tiebout (1956) literature on multi-jurisdictional economies with endogenous policy determination.4
Much of this literature is focused on efficiency issues, while our key contribution about existence is
positive. There is limited positive research on multiple tax instruments, surely because of the Plott
existence problem, with the following exceptions. Along the lines of the Plott conditions, Bucovetsky
(1991) provides sufficient restrictions on voters’ utility function that imply existence of majority choice
equilibrium in a single jurisdiction setting with multiple policy instruments. Krelove (1993) examines the
preferred tax form in a multi-jurisdictional model assuming identical households. Henderson (1994) also
studies choice of tax instruments in a multi-jurisdictional setting with identical households, comparing
voting equilibrium to developer equilibrium. The assumption of identical households resolves the
existence problem among voters in the latter two papers. Nechyba (1997) shows in a multi-jurisdictional
model with mobile heterogeneous households that, with availability of both income and property taxes to
finance public goods, only property taxation arises unless jurisdictions collude (or there is another
centralized tier of government). Voting is over just the property tax with community planners (or a
central authority) setting income taxes. The dominance of property taxes absent collusion is due to
household mobility. Our models differ in several ways, including our examination of majority choice in
both tiers of government and of direct redistribution.5 The utility specification used here to establish
existence of majority choice equilibrium is presented in Calabrese, Cassidy, and Epple (2002). We
generalized the latter analysis in Calabrese, Epple, and Romano (2015; CER henceforth). In this paper,
we generalize the CER (2015) model to include a centralized government.6 Adding a central government
is essential for providing a positive analysis of tax and expenditure instruments chosen at different
government levels, for explaining the extent of redistribution that arises in reality, and for analyzing how
local majority choice is affected by the central government. Adding a multi-layered governmental
structure poses new theoretical challenges that we address in this paper. Epple and Romer (1991) show
local redistribution can characterize equilibrium in a single-tiered Tiebout model that assumes local
property taxation, in contrast to our findings. As summarized above and discussed further below, the key

Important references not noted elsewhere are Ellickson (1971), Hamilton (1975), Westhoff (1977), Wooders
(1980), Wildasin (1980), Boadway (1982), Brueckner (1983,2004), Zodrow (1984), Epple, Filimon, and romer
(1984), Inman (1989), deBartolome (1990), Benabou (1993,1996), Wilson (1997), Nechyba (1999,2000), Fernandez
and Rogerson (1996,1998), and Epple and Platt (1998), and Epple and Romano (2003). A strand of the literature
concerns taxation of mobile capital which is not an element of our model.
5
Nechyba’s model includes a national public good, which we do not have. Nechyba’s consideration of state income
taxation with local property taxation relates to the fiscal federalism literature discussed below.
6
For tractability in the more complex setting here, we use a “utility taking” assumption concerning voter’s beliefs,
while a Nash assumption in made in CER (2015). This is explained below.
4

4

difference explaining the alternative findings about local redistribution is the existence of local public
goods in our model: Local public good provision increases the distortion from property taxation,
deterring local property taxation to redistribute.7
Another large literature on fiscal federalism concerns the vertical relationship between tiers of
government. Much of the fiscal federalism literature is intended to explain decentralized (local) versus
centralized (federal) provision of public goods, with Oates’ (1972a, 1972b) Decentralization Theorem the
centerpiece.8 Within the fiscal federalism literature, papers most closely related to ours are those that
examine equilibrium choice with two tiers of government. In particular, Boadway, Marchand, and
Vigneault (1998; BMV henceforth) and Gordon and Cullen (2011; GC henceforth) make headway in
modeling redistributive income taxation in two tiered government employing an alternative to majority
decision making.9 BMV and GC both assume the objective of the central government’s decision maker
weighs all households, with an incentive to redistribute wealth, and local government decision makers
have the same form of objective but place weight only on residents in their locality.10 Assuming imperfect
mobility of households between local jurisdictions and some taxation and redistribution by the central
government, the local government decision makers have one incentive to engage in excessive local
redistribution since part of the efficiency costs spill over to other localities through the effects on central
redistribution – a vertical externality - but they (sometimes in BMV) have a counter-incentive to
redistribute too little to attract (repel) wealthier (poorer) households – a horizontal externality. The
central government engenders the efficient allocation by taxing and redistributing so that the vertical
externality localities face offsets the horizontal externality. Then equilibrium has both federal and local
income taxation and redistribution, in sharp contrast to our findings. What underlies the contrasting
Hansen and Kessler (2001) examine mobility, redistribution, and income sorting assuming income taxation with
one tier of government and two jurisdictions. If one jurisdiction is sufficiently small, then income stratification
results in equilibrium with the rich clustered in the small jurisdiction and very limited redistribution there. The latter
finding is akin to the lack of local redistribution we find resulting from sorting. In a very similar model, Rohrs and
Stadelmann (2014) show that a sufficiently large immobile population (equated to home owners in their model)
supports equilibrium income sorting and local redistribution can arise. Like in Epple and Romer (1991), these
models have no local public good.
8
The thrust of the Theorem is that public good provision should be locally determined whenever no externalities
outside the locality arise, this to facilitate local preference matching. See Oates (1999) for discussion and references
and Nechyba and Epple (2004) for a wider survey and additional references. A second wave of research on
centralization v. decentralization begins with the observation that centralized provision can vary across localities,
thus expanding the inquiry about the relative advantage of decentralized provision. This strand of the literature
shows alternative political regimes can explain whether centralization or decentralization is relatively efficient. See
Lockwood (2006) for a survey and references.
9
See also Gordon (1983), Johnson (1988), Wildasin (1991), Inman and Rubinfeld (1996), and Feldstein and Wrobel
(1998).
10
For expositional efficiency, our discussion of these two papers suggests the papers are essentially the same, when
in fact GC significantly advance the analysis. BMV assumes linear income taxation, while GC examine fully
nonlinear taxation. GC use a more general objective function of the government decision makers. GC evaluate their
more complete predictions empirically.
7

5

findings? While several differences characterize the models (e.g., we consider multiple local tax
instruments), the crucial distinction is our examination of majority choice at each government tier
combined with equilibrium household sorting across local jurisdictions. The effective federal decision
maker in our model, who is the pivotal federal voter, has median income, strong incentive to redistribute,
and then does so. The effective local decision makers, the local pivotal voters, have much weaker
incentives to redistribute as a result of equilibrium income stratification and tax distortions from federal
taxation and local provision of public goods. Their net incentives typically imply no local redistribution.
In the main models of BMV and GC, the federal and local decision makers have the same strong
objective to redistribute, though face different constraints. Equilibrium then has both engage in some
redistribution.
To summarize our contributions, first we show existence of equilibrium for a federation with two
tiers of government and majority choice of tax instruments and redistribution at both tiers. Second, our
model explains how redistribution emerges as the purview of the federal government when there is
majority choice at two tiers of. In particular, we demonstrate that sorting across local jurisdictions is of
first-order importance in driving this division of responsibility across tiers, and we also demonstrate that
this division of responsibility is little affected by the potential for households to relocate after policy is
set. Third, we show a strong preference for not taxing income locally, either to provide local public goods
or to redistribute. Instead, voters prefer relying on property taxation and lump-sum taxes (if allowed).
Finally, we generalize a result (Calabrese, Epple, and Romano, 2012) concerning the inefficiency of
household sorting in Tiebout equilibria that proscribes lump-sum taxation and relies on property taxation.
This paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we present the model. General theoretical
results are presented in Section 3. The quantitative analysis makes up Section 4, including analysis of
variations in the main model. Section 5 concludes. Some technical analysis is collected in an on-line
appendix.
2. The Model
Here we develop the main federal system model.
2.1 Households. The economy consists of a continuum of households that differ in their endowed income
y and whether they are mobile. The economy pdf of income is denoted f(y), positive on its support

S  [y min , y max ]  R  . Normalize the economy’s population to equal 1. An exogenous proportion
(y)[0,1] of income y households are mobile, the precise meaning clarified below. Households obtain

utility from consumption of a local public good, g, the quality/quantity of housing consumed, h, and
numeraire consumption, b. Households have the same utility function of form:

6

U(g, h, b)  v(g)u(h, b)

(1)

with all functions increasing and twice differentiable, and with u(h,b) quasi-concave and homogeneous of
degree 1.11 While obviously restrictive, (1) permits substantial variation in preferences, and income
affects demands in a realistic way. There is variation in estimates of the income elasticity of housing
demand, but unitary elasticity implied by this specification falls well within the range of empirical
estimates (e.g., Harmon 1988). Higher income households obtain a higher marginal benefit from
increases in the local public good.
2.2 Jurisdictions and Housing Supplies. The economy is divided into an integer number of jurisdictions, J,
each characterized by a non-decreasing housing supply function: H sj (p hj ), j  1, 2,...J; where p hj denotes
the supplier price of housing services. Throughout we use a j superscript to indicate a value for
jurisdiction j, though dropping it where obvious by context. The notation ‘  j ’ indicates the set of
jurisdictions other than j. Households rent housing in their local competitive housing market. We assume
housing suppliers are absentee for simplicity. We later show the main results carry over to a case with
housing owners. We frequently refer to a jurisdiction alternatively as a “community.”
2.3 Policy and Timing of Choices. We first give a brief overview of the timing of choices, and then
provide the detail. Equilibrium unfolds in five stages (see Figure 1). In Stage 1, households choose by
f

majority vote an economy-wide or federal income tax m  0, the proceeds of which are used for a lumpsum income transfer, rf. Second, in Stage 2, households select a jurisdiction where they plan to live and
will vote on local policy. Third, in Stage 3, households vote on local policy consisting of a property tax,

t j  0; local income tax, mj  0; and local lump-sum transfer (or tax if negative), rj; with net tax revenues
used to provide a local public good, gj. Fourth, in Stage 4, mobile households can costlessly relocate to
another jurisdiction.12 Fifth, in Stage 5, housing is chosen and local housing markets clear, federal and
local budgets balance determining respectively rf and gj, and households consume.
We can now provide a more detailed description, working backward from Stage 5. Entering
j

j

j

j

f

Stage 5, the policy vector P  (m ,t ,r ,m ) in each jurisdiction j is given, where we include the federal
income tax rate in the vector. Each jurisdiction’s measure of income types, denoted fj(y), is also
determined prior to Stage 5. Let n j   f j (y)dy denote the “number” of households residing in j. In
S

j

j

Stage 5, the values of individual housing consumption, hd (y), numeraire consumption, bd (y), taxable
Our results apply to an extended version of the utility function with U = vꞏ(u+φ), with φ a constant.
We use the expression “mobility” here to refer to the ability to move between jurisdictions following initial
community choice, in contrast to Epple and Romer (1991) who use mobility to refer to the ability to select a
jurisdiction in which to live prior to local policy choices. The present model also assumes the latter “mobility.”

11

12

7

j

j

j

income, x (y), the gross and net housing prices, (p ,ph ), local public good levels, and the federal
transfer are determined, satisfying the following set of equations.

(2)

(h dj , bdj )  ARGMAX h j ,b j v(g j )u(h j , b j )
s.t. b j  p j h j  r j  r f  y{1  [1  (m f  m j )](mf  m j )}

y  {1  [1  (mf  m j )](mf  m j )}
.
1  mf  m j

(3)

x j (y) 

(4)

h

(5)

pj (1 t j )phj

S

j
d

(y)f j (y)dy  Hsj (p hj )

(6)

n j (r j  g j )   m j x j (y)f j (y)dy  t j p j Hs (p hj )

(7)

r f   j1  mf x j (y)[f j (y) / n j ]dy

S

J

S

Equations (2) and (3) describe individual consumption, where ()  0 is a non-decreasing and continuous
income tax distortion function. This specification follows Feldstein (1999). Feldstein (1999) shows that
the deadweight loss of tax avoidance through changes in forms of compensation (e.g., provision of health
insurance by employers) and through changes in the patterns of consumption that avoid taxation (e.g.,
leisure consumption) can be evaluated as the deadweight loss of an excise tax on non-deductible
consumption. Total non-deductible consumption is given by housing expenditures (pjhj) plus
consumption of the composite good bj, but subtracting the lump-sum transfers rj +rf that we assume are
not taxed. Thus, the household’s budget constraint is as stated in (2). In turn, taxed income, xj, satisfies
(3). Our subscripts d on the consumption values are to denote Marshallian demand.
Equations (4) is the housing-market clearance condition, with (5) the identity between gross and
net housing price. Equation (6) is the local government budget balance condition. Equation (7) is the
federal government budget balance condition.
With our assumption on the utility function and the housing supply functions, all values
determined in Stage 5 are unique given the input vector (Pj,fj(y)).
In Stage 4, mobile households can costlessly relocate to another community. The 1  (y)
immobile households with income y are locked into the community they choose in Stage 2. We
investigate computationally how varying (y) affects equilibrium. Following the literature on club
goods, we assume mobile households are “utility takers” in making their own relocation choice and in
8

anticipating relocation choices of others. To clarify this simplifying assumption, note first that no one
relocates in equilibrium as explained below, but relocation can occur off the equilibrium path. Utility
taking means that households in community j take the equilibrium policies and prices in communities

k  j as given, and then compute utilities of any mobile households under this assumption in predicting
moving. This is an approximation since this utility would not generally equal the continuation utility if
there is a finite population change in community k.13 Note that households correctly anticipate all
continuation equilibrium values in their initially chosen community given the latter relocations.
Entering Stage 3, initial locations and the federal tax rate are fixed. In each community j,
majority choice of the local policy vector (mj,tj,rj) occurs, with all households anticipating the
continuation values in Stages 4 and 5.
In Stage 2, given mf, households choose their “initial” communities, anticipating how equilibrium
will unfold. Since households are atomistic and thus individually have no effect on policy, mobile
households are actually indifferent to their initial community choice. We then restrict attention to “norelocation equilibria,” which assumes mobile households select the community where they will ultimately
reside. As noted above, no household relocates on the equilibrium path. A no-relocation equilibrium is
also the only type of equilibrium if households discover whether they are mobile after having chosen their
initial community.14
In Stage 1, majority choice by all households of the federal income tax occurs, with households
anticipating the resulting equilibrium from Stage 2 forward. In Section 5 we analyze some variations in
the model and discuss further some of our modelling assumptions.
2.4 Existence of Equilibrium, Community Differentiation, and Equilibrium Selection. We do not have a
general existence proof, but develop sufficient conditions for existence that can be checked
computationally. We confirm that these conditions hold in our quantitative analysis. We also
demonstrate in our computational analysis that equilibrium exhibits stratification of households by
income across all jurisdictions. By contrast, in many multi-jurisdictional models where equilibria with
differentiated communities exists, equilibria also exist in which two or more jurisdictions have the same
income distributions and the same policies.15 We do not find such “clone community” equilibria due to

Since P-j is committed before Stage 4, it is the values of g-j and rf that can change following finite relocations and
then change utility from the models’ equilibrium utility. Utility taking then means that households do not have
fully rational expectations off the equilibrium path. This assumption greatly simplifies computation of equilibrium
and some proofs, and we have found it in closely related analysis (e.g., CER, 2015) to have very minor quantitative
effects relative to assuming full rationality and subgame perfection.
14
Specifically, then let (y) denote the known probability that a household with income y will be mobile, an
individual’s mobility discovered following initial location but before Stage 3 commences.
15
Models where this arises that include housing markets assume that jurisdictional housing supplies are
proportional, e.g., the same. This permits equilibrium housing prices to be the same in every jurisdiction.
13

9

household mobility. In such equilibria, households anticipate the same populations and policies, and then
are indifferent to where they locate initially, thus are content to sort to have clone communities.
Moreover, with the same community populations, equilibrium policy choices will be the same. However,
provided some households are mobile (i.e.,  (y) is bounded above 0) and the same local policies and
populations characterize communities, then a marginal policy change in one jurisdiction will induce finite
population relocation. We find that the pivotal voter would generally prefer a small policy change to
induce “massive” desirable household relocations (e.g., increasing the local lump-sum tax to draw in
richer households, while driving out poorer households). With jurisdictions stratified by income,
marginal local policy changes induce marginal relocations so that equilibrium can exist.
Regarding equilibria with income stratification, a multiplicity issue arises if jurisdictional housing
supplies differ. Suppose, for example, that J= 2 and one jurisdiction has rightward shifted housing supply
relative to the other. Any stratified equilibrium has a rich and poor jurisdiction. Two such equilibria can
then arise, one with the “larger” community being the rich one, and the other with the larger community
the poor one. The threshold income separating the two income strata in the two equilibria will generally
differ. More generally, there can be J! alternative stratified equilibria. We resolve this issue by assuming
the largest jurisdiction (i.e., with most rightward shifted housing supply) is the poorest (the central city),
the second largest is the second poorest (poorest suburb), and so on. Thus, when voting in Stage 1 on the
federal income tax rate and when making their initial community choices in Stage 2, households
anticipate among any multiplicity of stratified equilibria the latter type equilibrium. Note, too, that if each
jurisdiction has the same housing supply, this multiplicity issue does not arise.
3. Theoretical Results
3.1 Indirect Utility over Composite Public Goods. The form of the utility function in (1) underlies
existence of equilibrium, especially with regard to existence of majority choice equilibrium over local
policies. Lemma 1 describes an indirect utility function that facilitates showing our main results.
Lemma 1. Indirect utility of household y living in community j is given by:

V( j ,  j , y)  y   j   j ;

(8)

 j  v(g j )  [1  (1  (mf  m j ))(mf  m j )]  w(p j );
 j  v(g j )  (r f  r j )  w(p j );
where w (p j )  0.

10

Lemma 1 is shown by solving the maximization in (2) using the assumed form of utility in (1).16 Lemma
1 is closely related to Proposition 1a in CER (2015).17 A proof is provided in the on-line appendix, which
closely tracks the proof in the latter paper.
The value of Lemma 1 is that for given policies (Pj,gj,rf) and housing price pj, whether set or
j

j

anticipated, utility is a simple linear form in the “composite public goods” ( ,  ) and income. In
j

addition, it is implied that higher income households have a relative preference for  , with indifference
j

j

j

j

curves V( ,  ,y)  const. linear if drawn in the ( ,  ) plane and satisfying single crossing in income.
Higher income households are willing to give up more  j for  j at any ( ,  ); the indifference curves
j

j

flatten as income rises. As one can see by inspection of (8), higher income households are more averse to
income taxes, while lower income households place a higher relative value on lump-sum positive income
transfers. Note, though, that the converse of the latter observation is that higher income households have
a relative preference for a local lump sum tax (i.e., rj < 0).18 Aversion to property taxes is implied by (5)
and that w(p )  0 in (8).19 This simple form of the indirect utility function plays a central role in all the
j

propositions that follow.
3.2 Jurisdictional Majority Choice Equilibrium. The first proposition regards majority choice
equilibrium of local policies in the J jurisdictions, or the continuation equilibrium of the model at the
beginning of Stage 3. To characterize and understand this continuation equilibrium, define jurisdiction j’s
j

j

government budget constraint (GBCj) as the locus of values of ( ,  ) as policies (mj,tj,rj) vary over their
feasible values. Along a GBCj, mf is given (pre-determined), and with (gj,pj,rf) satisfying (2)-(6) given
initial locations and anticipated relocations by community j residents that satisfy the utility taking
j

j

j

f

assumption (determining fj(y)). We write the locus as GBC ( ,  ;m )  0. Figure 2 shows an example
of a GBC.
A voter in jurisdiction j has preferred policy that solves:

(9)

MAX  j , j y j   j
s.t. GBC j ( j ,  j ;mf )  0

The indirect utility function is an example of what Grandmont (1978) termed “intermediate preferences.”
In CER (2015), there is no federal government, hence no federal income tax and transfer. Lemma 1 generalizes
Proposition 1a in CER (2015) to the presence of a federal policy.
18
 j is negative if community j has a lump sum tax that is higher than the federal income transfer rf.
19
Aversion to property taxes assumes a non-zero housing supply elasticity so that housing suppliers do not bear the
full incidence of a property tax.
16
17

11

The main result here is:
Proposition 1. For any mf, majority choice equilibrium of policy exists in each jurisdiction j, and an
equilibrium policy in jurisdiction j is a preferred policy of the median income household residing there.
Proof of Proposition 1. To make the argument, first assume that when voting every resident of
jurisdiction j does not itself plan to relocate for any policy in jurisdiction j, though anticipating all others’
relocations under the utility taking assumption. Then, using the single-crossing property of the indirect
utility function, a standard argument implies the results in the Proposition regardless of the shape of the
GBC.20 We must argue that this pseudo-equilibrium continues to be the majority choice equilibrium
when mobile voters contemplate their own relocation if optimal. No one household’s relocation choice
affects the GBC, so the GBC is the same as in the pseudo-equilibrium. The pseudo-equilibrium is in fact
an equilibrium, for the following reason. All those in the majority that vote against any alternative policy
to the candidate equilibrium policy in the pseudo-equilibrium would continue to do so allowing them to
move if they prefer. Obviously, any in this majority would continue to vote against an alternative policy
if they would not relocate under the alternative policy. If they would relocate, then they anticipate lower
utility than in the candidate equilibrium. This follows because their initial community choice maximizes
utility among the policies that arise in equilibrium in all communities (by the no-move element of
equilibrium on the equilibrium path). Thus, all in the majority would continue to prefer the candidate
equilibrium policy and vote against the alternative. Thus, the candidate equilibrium policy continues to
garner a majority against all other policies and is therefore an equilibrium.
To complete the proof we must show that only a preferred choice of the median income
household in the community is a majority choice equilibrium. Again, first assuming no voter
contemplates their own moving when voting, the single-crossing property implies a preferred choice of
the median income household is majority preferred to any other feasible policy (on or below the GBC).
But since no one relocates in equilibrium and relocating out of equilibrium implies lower utility than in
equilibrium, the majority preference for a median income household’s preferred policy over any other is
sustained. ▀
Given household sorting and mf, equilibrium in any jurisdiction is generically unique since the
preferred policy of a median income household is generically unique. This follows since the equilibrium
is a tangency between the median income household’s indifference curve and the GBC (see Figure 2), and
multiple tangencies between the GBC and the given indifference curve will not arise generically as the
GBC depends on the entire population of the community.
20

See, e.g., Epple and Romer (1991).

12

While dependent on the assumed form of the utility function, the generality of existence of the
community majority choice equilibrium bears emphasis. In particular, equilibrium will exist regardless of
the shape of the GBC, thus regardless of the incomes of households that make up the community and the
federal income tax rate. This is because existence depends only on the single-crossing property of the
indifference curves. Likewise, exogenous restrictions on tax rates (e.g., a property tax limit) or on tax
forms (e.g., disallowance of a local lump-sum tax) does not disrupt Proposition 1 because only the GBC
is affected.
Corollary to Proposition 1. For any mf and restrictions on local taxes, majority choice equilibrium of
policy exists in each jurisdiction j, and an equilibrium policy in jurisdiction j is a preferred policy of the
median income household residing there.
3.3 Household Sorting. Now we develop the main result about household sorting in Stage 2, assuming
community differentiation arises. In equilibrium entering Stage 2, households anticipate the equilibrium
j

j

j

j

values of ( ,  ), j  1,2,...,J. Households optimally select a community that maximizes V( ,  ,y).
The main result here is stated next.
J

J 1

Proposition 2. Assume  
J

J1

(i)   

 ... 1 and all communities are occupied. Then:

 ...  1; (ii) those with income on (yj-1,yj) select community j  1, 2,..., J  1, where y0 =

ymin and V( j ,  j , y j )  V( j1 ,  j1 , y j ), j  1, 2,..., J  1; and those with income y  y J 1 select community

J.
j

Proof of Proposition 2. (i) If   

j1

for any communities j and j-1, then everyone would prefer

community j to j-1, and j-1 would attract no residents. (ii) Using (i), this follows by a simple singlecrossing argument using that higher income types have flatter indifference curves in the (, ) plane. ▀
When differentiated communities arise, income stratification across communities arises, with
higher  communities attracting richer income strata. The threshold yj households are indifferent
between communities j and j+1, and equilibrium is unaffected by where they reside due to atomism of
households. We illustrate these equilibria in the next section.
3.4 Majority Choice of the Federal Income Tax. The next proposition provides sufficient conditions for
existence of a majority choice equilibrium of the federal income tax rate, given continuation equilibrium
exists for all mf. Given satisfaction of the conditions, equilibrium in the entire model exists. We show
such computationally in well-motivated cases below. If multiple continuation equilibria exist for any

13

given mf, then we assume the equilibrium selection discussed above.21 Number the J communities so that

J J1  ... 1 in all continuation equilibria. Let ym denote median income in the population, and let
mfm denote the median income type’s preferred federal income tax. Let k  J denote the number of the
community that the median income type chooses to reside in in the continuation equilibrium with

mf  mfm .
f

Proposition 3. mm is a majority choice of the federal income tax rate if: (i) ymax and all

y j , j  k, k  1,...,J  1, are worse off in any continuation equilibrium with mf  mfm ; and (ii) ymin and all
y j , j  1, 2,...,k  1, are worse off in any continuation equilibrium with mf  mfm .
Comment: Recall that yj denotes an income type that is indifferent between residing in communities j and
j+1. The number of yj values in the conditions of Proposition 3 depends on J and k. In the main cases
we examine below, J =3 and the median income household resides in community 2, i.e., k = 2. Then
there is one value of yj in Condition (i), the household indifferent between residing in communities 2 and
3, and one value of yj in Condition (ii), the household indifferent between residing in communities 1 and
2.
Proof of Proposition 3. Refer to Figure 3. It shows the values of the composite public goods in
community k and in community k+1 in the candidate equilibrium, assuming a community k+1 exists. It
also shows the equilibrium indifference curve of the median income household (I y ), the equilibrium
m

indifference curve of yk, and the equilibrium indifference curve of a household with income y  (y m , y k ).
We next argue that Condition (i) implies any households with incomes in the range [ym,yk] would vote
f

f

f

against any values of m  mm . Obviously this holds for y = ym, since mm is ym’s preferred federal
income tax. Any value of mf implies a continuation equilibrium with a set of community choices and
j

j

f

f

corresponding composite public good pairs ( ,  ), j 1,2,...,J. All these points, for any m  mm must
lie below I y m in Figure 3, or the preference of the median income type is contradicted. Condition (i)
implies all these points must also lie below Iyk , or the assumed preference of yk is contradicted.
Obviously, yk votes against any increase in mf. From Proposition 2, all those with income on (ym,yk)
reside in community k in the candidate equilibrium, and so their equilibrium indifference curve goes

Proposition 3 that follows does not require this selection criteria, but only that there is some selection criterion that
is common knowledge among households.

21

14

k

k

through ( ,  ), with slope between that of Iym and Iyk . Thus, one can see that any of these household
f

f

would also vote against any m  mm .
Storing the latter result for the moment, now suppose instead that there is no community k+1, i.e.,
the median income household in the candidate equilibrium resides in the community with the highest .
Then, by Proposition 2, the highest income household ymax resides in that community, and has flatter
k

k

equilibrium indifference curve through ( ,  ) than does ym. The graph of this is analogous to Figure 3
k1

k1

but with the equilibrium indifference curve of ymax replacing that of yk and with no point ( ,  ).
Using Condition (i), a parallel argument to that in the latter paragraph implies all those with income on
[ym,ymax] would vote against any federal income tax increase, which is a majority.
Now return to the previous case where a community k+1 exists in the candidate equilibrium.
There are two possibilities. One is where there is no community k+2, i.e., community k+1 has the highest

 in the candidate equilibrium. Then ymax lives in community k+1, and one can use Condition (i) and the
equilibrium indifference curves of yk and ymax to make the parallel argument as in the previous paragraph
to show that all those with income [yk ,ymax] would vote against any increase in the federal income tax
rate. Again, using the earlier result, a majority then vote against any increase in the federal income tax.
k 2

In the second case there exists another community k+2, with 

k1. Using Condition (i) and the

indifference curves of the indifferent households yk and yk+1, one can make the parallel argument that all
those with income on [yk,yk+1] would vote against any increase in the federal income tax. Making this
argument successively until all communities with higher  than  k implies a majority would vote
against a federal income tax increase.
An analogous argument using Condition (ii) shows that a majority consisting of households with
income below ym vote against any federal income tax decrease, completing the proof. ▀
The conditions in Proposition 3 are fairly intuitive and can be applied. Regarding intuition, one
would expect relatively higher income households to be averse to federal income tax increases, and the
reverse for relatively lower income households, keeping in mind revenues are used for a lump-sum
income transfer. Proposition 3 pins down a subset of households such that if the latter preferences hold,
the preference of the median type is an equilibrium. Regarding application, we use these conditions to
confirm equilibrium in non-trivial cases in the next section.
While the proof uses the single crossing property of the indirect preferences over composite
public goods, it bears emphasis that this is not a standard single crossing argument. In the standard single
crossing argument for existence of majority choice equilibrium, any policy alternative leads to the same

15

point in the relevant policy space determining utility for every voter. This is not the case here. Rather, a
j

j

policy (mf) leads to a set of outcomes, namely ( ,  ), j 1,2,...,J, over which voters choose. Generally,
voters choose different alternatives in the set. The theoretical argument for existence of majority choice
equilibrium is new to our knowledge and has potential to be applied in other public choice problems with
stages of choices.
4 Quantitative Model

4.1 Model Calibration. To show existence and develop more specific implications about the features of
equilibrium, we specify and calibrate a quantitative model. The parameterization utilizes functional
forms and parameter values that are broadly consistent with empirical evidence on housing supply,
demand functions, government expenditures, and the distribution of income in the U.S.
We assume a Cobb-Douglas utility function, with parameters that satisfy the homogeneity
assumption required of (1):

U(g,h,b)  ghb1 .

(10)

We choose values for  and  such that, if g, h, and b were all privately purchased goods, the gross-oftax expenditure on housing would be 20%22 and the fraction spent on local public goods would be 9%,
which is approximately the share of GDP spent on local public goods.23 This yields = 0.21978 and  =
0.098901.
To calibrate the housing supply functions, we assume price taking housing producers combine the
community’s given developable land and perfectly elastically supplied non-land factors to produce
housing according to a constant returns to scale Cobb-Douglas production function. Under these
assumptions, a community’s housing supply is given by a constant elasticity supply function:24
(11)

j
s

j

j

j
h

H (p )  L  (p )

1


1  


 w 

1


, H 

1 
;


where Lj is the land area of community j as a proportion of total (developable) land area in the economy
(normalized to 1),  is the ratio of non-land to land expenditure in the production of housing,  H is the
housing supply elasticity, and w is the price per unit of non-land factors. Based on available evidence
regarding the share of land and non-land inputs in housing (Epple, Gordon, and Sieg, 2010),  H is set

The share of aggregate income spent on housing of 20% is in the range of values estimated in the literature.
Data for this approximation are from the 2008 Statistical Abstract Tables 442 and 645 for 2004.
24
See Epple and Zelenitz (1981). This derivation is also provided in the on-line appendix.
22

23

16

equal to three. Since the choice of w does not affect equilibrium variable values that impact households’
1  
25
relative utilities, we choose w so that 
 1 when  H  3. This implies w  3 / 4.
 w 

We assume the economy’s income distribution is lognormal. The distribution is calibrated using
the 2010 U.S. Census findings of mean and median household income of $67,392 and $49,276,
respectively.26 These values imply ln y ~ N(10.805, 0.791).
f

j

To calibrate the income tax distortion function, we assume for simplicity that (m  m )   is
constant. We then compute a value of

 that produces an empirically relevant equilibrium for a single

community model (J = 1), which we refer to as the “Unitary State.” Of course, in this Unitary State
equilibrium, the median income household is pivotal on all the policy variables, namely (mf, tj, rj, mj),
which imply the values of (rf,gj,pj) . It can be shown that since mf only finances rf, the pivotal voter is
indifferent between combinations of mf and mj such that mf + mj = m*, and combinations of rf and rj such
that rf + rj = r*, where m* is the pivotal voter’s optimal income tax rate and r* is the pivotal voter’s optimal
lump-sum grant. That is, the Unitary State equilibrium can be characterized by one m and one r.27 Using
the 2010 U.S. Census, we calculate aggregate household income of $7,865,744 million. Total U.S.
Federal Income tax receipts in 2010 were $898,549 million.28 Hence, we estimate the average 2010
household income tax rate as 11.4%. Given the other calibrated parameters, we then find the
the equilibrium has m = 11.4%. This implies

 = 0.2471.

 such that

The first column of reports key variable

values of this Unitary State computational equilibrium, which are the same as in CER (2015). We report
the equilibrium population proportion (n), property tax rate (t), the income tax rate (m), the lump-sum
income transfer (r, or lump-sum tax if negative), and the per capita expenditure on the public good (g).29
The equilibrium has a positive lump-sum income transfer of $9,415, with $7,438 financed by the income
tax rate and the remainder financed by part of the proceeds from the property tax rate. The positive
transfer results because the pivotal voter has lower income than the mean, implying an income tax price to
finance a transfer less than 1, but with the transfer limited by the tax distortion. Property taxes not
contributed to the transfer finance the local public good, with expenditure of $4,799 per capita. Part of
the incidence of the property tax falls on the absentee housing suppliers, but higher housing rents as taxes

The choice of w does not affect equilibrium relative utilities because the percentage of income households spend
on housing is independent of the price of housing, given the adopted utility function in equation (10).
26
U.S. Census Bureau, 2011, Table H-6 from Historical Income Tables.
27
This result will be provided upon request.
28
Budget of the U.S. Government, Fiscal Year 2015, Historical tables, Table 2.1 Receipts by Source: 1934-2019.
29
The income tax rate can be described as the federal or local rate or their sum, and we report it as the federal rate in
the tables for the Unitary State cases. To be clear, the total rate (mf +mj) is 11.4%. We do the same for the lumpsum transfer.
25

17

rise curtail property taxation by the pivotal voter. The property tax rate of 85% may appear very high, but
this is a tax rate on services (rent), not value.30 Using Poterba’s (1992) conversion, a .85 tax on rent
translates to a .09 tax on value.31 This equilibrium will be used as the baseline case in examining the
positive and normative impacts of multi-community federal systems.
In computation of federal systems with multiple local communities, we assume the number of
local jurisdictions is J = 3. The idea is to have a central city and two suburbs. We must calibrate the land
areas. As mentioned above, if the land areas and thus housing supplies differ, then multiple stratified
equilibria can result that differ with respect to which income strata live in the variably “sized”
communities. To resolve this multiplicity, we designate the largest community to be the city and assume
it is the poorest jurisdiction.32 We calibrate the land shares in the city and in the suburbs so that the
population proportions in the city and both suburbs approximate empirical values. Based on the results of
the 2010 U.S. Census, the total U.S. population living in Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA’s) was
258,317,763, of which 39%, or 100,742,583, live in principle MSA cities. Hence, to calibrate land shares
in the baseline federal system computational equilibrium, we constrain the city’s population to 40% of the
total population, while assuming the population shares in the two suburbs to be equal and thus 30% each.
In addition, in our calibration, we assume full household mobility (  (y)  1 ), and we constrain any local
lump-sum taxes (rj) to be less than 5% of the total expenditure on public goods (gj) in a community. We
do not assume a constraint on local lump-sum grants should the pivotal voter in a community find this
optimal. Given these assumptions and constraints, and the other already calibrated parameter values, the
baseline federal system computation results in the city having 67.45% of the land area, the poor suburb
having 20.59% of the land area, and the rich suburb having 11.96% of the land area.
4.2 Computational Findings.
4.2.1 Positive Analysis. The second through fifth columns of Table 1 report equilibrium values for four
multi-community specifications, with the positive results in the upper part of the table and normative
values in the lower part. In this Table, all households are mobile. We first discuss the positive values.
Though we view the third column as the preferred case because it limits local lump-sum taxation (and
which we used to calibrate the land areas), we first discuss the second column of the table, which is the
To save space, we do not report equilibrium housing prices, but these are available on request.
In his analysis of housing user cost, Poterba (1992) derives a conversion for which annualized rent (i.e., ph) on
housing services is 11% of housing value. Letting z denote the “user cost factor” and W the value of housing, the
equilibrium rental rate of housing equals its user cost, according to: p h  z  W. The user cost factor is the sum of
four values, z = z1+z2+z3+z4, where z1 is the real interest rate, z2 the risk premium from housing investment, z3 is
proportional maintenance cost, and z4 is depreciation. Poterba’s calculation yields z  .11, the value for the
conversion reported in the text.
32
DeBartolome and Ross (2002) provide a dynamic analysis that predicts the relative wealth of the city as compared
to the suburbs.
30
31

18

federal model with no limits on taxes. A key finding is that equilibrium exists. To our knowledge, we are
the first to find equilibrium with majority choice with two tiers of government and heterogeneous
households. Using the Propositions above, we are able to write and execute a program that confirms and
identifies equilibrium.33 Numerous examples of this existence are provided as we continue the
discussion.
A specific property of the equilibrium that bears emphasis is that no redistribution nor income
taxation arises in the local jurisdictions, though substantial federal income taxation and redistribution
arises, more than in the Unitary State. Local taxation, which finances the local public goods, combines
local lump-sum taxation and property taxation. We will see that no or very limited local redistribution
and no or very limited local income taxation arises as we consider alternative cases (e.g., with tax limits).
This is in contrast to the findings of BMV (1998) and GC (2011), who show local redistribution arises in
a federal system due to the vertical externality that part of the burden of local income taxation is born by
other jurisdictions as federal tax collection is reduced from the distortion of local taxation. What differs
here? In BMV and GC the effective federal and local policy makers have similar redistribution
incentives, facing the same tax bases (income distributions) and as if they have the same incomes,34 their
incentives differing somewhat due to the vertical externality and the horizontal externality as local
taxation induces relocations. The key difference in our model is that the effective federal and local policy
makers, i.e., the relevant pivotal voters, have different incomes and face different tax bases, as a result of
the equilibrium income sorting and endogenous determination of the local pivotal voters. The
equilibrium has income stratification, with the poorest 71.6% living in the city, the middle-income 23.0 %
living in the poorer suburb, and the richest 5.4% living in the rich suburb. In this column and in most of
the examples we present, the local pivotal voter has income below the local mean income, implying some
incentive to redistribute locally, but this incentive is relatively weak and largely (or completely) offset by
the income tax distortion.35 The on-line appendix provides theoretical analysis that confirms this. Note
that the vertical externality in BMV and GC is present here, reinforcing the incentive to employ local
income taxation. But it still does not occur. One might also expect that the mobility of households, i.e.,
the horizontal externality, is what underlies no or limited local income taxation: Local redistribution

The program is outlined in the on-line appendix.
Their models do not specify decision makers, rather specify the federal and local objective functions that
determine policies. The federal and local objective functions contain a redistribution incentive and are the same
except the local objective function only weighs utilities of local residents.
35
In Table 1 and the other tables, the community percentage is bolded if the median income is above the mean, these
few cases implying no local incentive to redistribute using an income tax. For home renters, an incentive to employ
property taxation to redistribute arises because partial incidence of the tax on the absentee housing suppliers.
33
34

19

would attract (repel) poorer (richer) households that are mobile, lowering the tax base.36 But this is not
what drives the lack of local redistribution. We know this because the same outcome arises as mobility is
reduced, even to when only 1% of households are mobile. This is shown in Tables 2 and A1, which we
discuss shortly. To our knowledge, we are the first to clarify that local income sorting that can result in a
federated economy itself curtails local incentives to redistribute, independent of household potential to
subsequently flee jurisdictions that impose significant redistribution.
Column 3 of Table 1 reports equilibrium values for our preferred case, the federal system with
local lump-sum taxes constrained to not exceed 5% of expenditure on the local public good. One can see
in Column 2 by comparing the lump-sum taxes to the per capita expenditures on the local public goods
that lump-sum taxation is the predominant form of local finance in the suburbs if allowed. In fact, local
jurisdictions in the U.S. generally do not seem to have the authority to impose lump-sum taxes.37
However, Hamilton (1975) argued some time ago that zoning restrictions on housing consumption
combined with a property tax can provide a substitute for local lump-sum taxation. Building on this idea,
we (2007) showed the near equivalence of political equilibrium with local lump-sum taxes to that with
property taxes and minimum housing quality restrictions in a model with multiple jurisdictions. This
provides an argument for the legitimacy of considering lump-sum taxes even in the presence of legal
barriers, but the near equivalence breaks down when property taxes would also be enacted to appropriate
housing supplier surplus as arises in the present model. More research is needed here.38 We take the
position that a small amount of local expenditure might effectively be financed by lump-sum taxation,
specifically assuming 5%.39
We provide a graphical illustration of the workings of the model following initial community
choice using the city for our preferred case in column (3) of Table 1. Figure 4 shows the government
The likelihood that mobility would limit the scope for local distribution was noted in early writings, including
Stigler (1957) and Oates (1972). We should note that there is a counter-incentive to repel rich households, in fact all
households, to keep down the equilibrium housing rents.
37
Local taxing authority in the U.S. varies by state, with some federal constitutional restrictions. The disallowance
of local lump-sum taxes we claim in the text is implicit in the character of what taxation is permitted in state
constitutions. There are “occupational privilege taxes” used in localities of some states, which are also sometimes of
a fixed amount. But these are collected by employers, on employees that earn a minimum amount, and generally
linked to location of the employer rather than the employee’s residence. It is an interesting legal question as to
whether use of local lump-sum taxes would satisfy federal law. Federal law requires that taxes are
nondiscriminatory, but whether local lump-sum taxes would be legally discriminatory is unclear.
38
We have seen that with multiple tax instruments, renter households combine lump-sum taxes and property taxes,
the latter due to incidence on housing suppliers. If lump-sum taxes are unavailable but minimum housing
consumption can be required, renter households would face a trade off in undoing appropriation with minimum
housing consumption requirements while approximating lump-sum taxation. In our 2007 paper, we did not consider
multiple tax instruments so this trade off did not arise.
39
To be clear, the choice of 5% is arbitrary, just a low amount. The essential findings carry over for other “low
amounts.” Note, however, that shutting down completely lump-sum taxation causes existence problems unless we
modify the utility function.
36

20

budget constraint for the city. Utility is increasing as the composite public goods increase so no voter
would want policies that would lead to an outcome on the upward-sloping part of the GBC. As shown in
Figure 3, voter indifference curves become flatter as income rises. Hence, as voter income rises, the
voter’s most-preferred point on the GBC moves upward to the left.
In Figure 5, we illustrate how city government policies most-preferred by voters change as voter
income increases. The horizontal axis in each graph in Figure 5 is the income percentile of the voter. In
equilibrium, 40% of the voter population lives in the city. Hence, the maximum value on the horizontal
axis is .4. The pivotal voter has median income, and hence is at the middle of the horizontal axis, the 20th
income percentile. The equilibrium policy choice is thus the preferred policy of that voter. From the left
panel of Figure 5, we see that low income voters would opt for a very high local income tax rate, on the
order of 20 percent, and a property tax rate of 65%.40 As voter income rises, the preferred income tax rate
declines rapidly while the preferred property tax rate rises by a relatively modest amount. The right panel
of Figure 5 shows that the preferred total local per capita spending does not change much as voter income
increases, but the mix of preferred spending changes very markedly. As voter income rises, the preferred
amount of local redistribution declines rapidly, and the preferred level of spending on the local public
good increases rapidly.
The implications of the variation in preferred voter policy for city population and housing prices
are shown in Figure 6. We saw in Figure 5 that poor voters prefer a high income tax rate to support high
local redistribution and low local public good spending. The left panel of Figure 6 shows that, if these
policies were adopted, only a small fraction of the metropolitan population would choose to locate in the
city. As voter income rises, preferred policy becomes increasingly attractive to higher income households,
and more households choose to locate in the city. The vertical line in the left panel of Figure 6 illustrates
that the preferred policy of the voter at the 20th income percentile attracts 40% of the metropolitan area
population, the equilibrium allocation being the preferred policy of that voter. The right panel of Figure 6
illustrates the effect of preferred voter policies on housing prices. As voter income rises and the
associated preferred policies attract more households to locate in the city, housing demand rises, bidding
up the gross-of-tax housing price. Net-of-tax housing prices rise as well, inducing higher housing supply.
Returning to the equilibrium analysis, comparing Columns 2 and 3 of Table 1, note that limiting
lump-sum taxation implies a “less stratified” equilibrium, with the city less populated and poorer but then
with more populated and less elite suburbs. A small amount of local redistribution occurs in the city and

Recall that this is the tax rate on annualized rent. As we noted earlier, the analysis by Poterba (1992) suggest that
annualized property tax rate should be multiplied by approximately .11 to convert to a rate on property value.
40

21

a very small amount in the poorer suburb, with a low income tax of 2.14% in the city.41 The pivotal voter
in the city is quite poor and has income slightly above the mean, choosing a tax package that deters richer
households to keep down the rental price of housing. The federal income tax drops by about 3%, and less
redistribution takes place overall. Property taxes rise everywhere substantially to finance the local public
good, not surprisingly given the loss of potential tax revenues from the lump-sum tax and the reluctance
to tax income. Some of the proceeds of the property tax are used to finance the small redistribution in the
city and the smaller yet redistribution in the poorer suburb. It bears emphasis that, when lump-sum taxes
are limited, we find the property tax rather than the income tax to be the local tax of choice. Comparing

Columns 2 and 3, we see that limiting lump sum taxation results in a decline in the levels of the local
public good in all communities, but the declines in the local values are somewhat misleading as the
sorting changes imply the economy per capita average level of local public good consumption declines by
only $241 (e.g., the rich suburb has many more households consuming a relatively large amount).
Motivated by the passage of property tax limits in some jurisdictions in the U.S., we also consider
the equilibrium with the same limit on local lump-sum taxes and with property taxes restricted to be no
higher than 35%, which, recall implies a much lower limit of about 3.2% on property value using the
Poterba conversion. This restriction on property taxes is in the range of observed property tax rates in the
U.S., which vary between about 0.2% and 4.5% of home value.42 Also, 48 states do limit property taxes,
the exceptions being Connecticut, Hawaii, New Hampshire, and Vermont. Rate limits impose maximum
rates on jurisdictions (e.g., counties, municipalities, and school districts) and apply to property market
value.43 Maximum authorized property tax rates range from 0.5 percent (Kentucky) to 5% (Michigan) of
property value.44 Hence, this 3.2% limit we impose is also within the range of actual property tax limits.
Equilibrium values with this property tax limit are reported in Column 4 of Table 1. Stratification is very

Although most local jurisdictions do not impose a local income tax, they are imposed by 4,943 jurisdictions in 17
states, or approximately 13% of all local jurisdiction. As mentioned above, the local income tax rates that arise in
our model are within the range of empirically observed rates, which range from very 0.1% to almost 4.0%. In
addition, in general local income taxes are levied by the central cities of metropolitan areas and not the suburbs. For
instance, of these 17 states that have local income taxes, eight of them each have a total of 3 or less jurisdictions
with income taxes, and almost all of these particular jurisdictions are central cities in metropolitan areas. If suburbs
in a metropolitan area do impose income taxes, the rates for the most part are less than the central city’s. For
instance, almost 60% of the local jurisdictions that impose income taxes are in Pennsylvania and most of these 2,621
jurisdictions impose income taxes not exceeding 2%. The six cities that impose higher rates (Philadelphia 3.98%,
Scranton 3.4%, Pittsburgh 3%, Wilkes-Barre 2.85%, and Reading 2.7%) are all central cities in metropolitan areas.
In Kentucky, where 218 local jurisdictions impose income taxes, the highest rates are in the central cities of the two
major metropolitan areas, which are Louisville 2.2% and Lexington 2.25% (Henchman and Sapia, 2011).
42
Siniavskaia, 2016.
43
Tax Policy Center Foundation, Urban Institute and Brookings Institution, Tax Policy Center Briefing Book, Sate
(and Local) Taxes, http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/briefing-book/what-are-tax-and-expenditure-limits
44
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, 1995(a). Tax and Expenditure Limits on local
Governments. Washington, D.C.
41

22

similar to the previous case. Property taxes are at the bound in each local jurisdiction. A moderate local
income tax of 3.62% arises in the city, with per capita revenues of $882 split between financing a small
local redistribution ($500) and the rest put toward financing the local public good. No local redistribution
takes place in either suburb, though a small income tax arises in the poorer suburb to help finance the
local public good there. Both suburbs have lump-sum taxation, with the rich suburb at the bound. Local
public good levels decline given the restrictions on tax instruments and the reluctance to tax income,
especially in the suburbs.45 Property taxation still dominates local finance. The federal tax increases a
little as the pivotal federal voter (i.e., median income household) anticipates less (negative) redistribution
in his community, the poorer suburb.
Ignoring the fifth column for the moment, which is mainly of interest for its normative
implications, consider the effects of reducing mobility. Table 2 presents equilibrium values as in Table 1
for the several policy regimes but assuming one-half of each income type are mobile (  (y)  .5 ) , i.e.,
can costlessly relocate jurisdictions after their initial choice and local voting. Table A1 in the appendix
presents the same with only 1% of each income type mobile (i.e., with  (y)  .01 ). The main point is
that the same fundamentals carry over, i.e., little or no local redistribution and little or no local income
taxation. Focusing on the case of 50% mobility, considering the main cases of interest in Columns 2,3,
and 4, observe that in only the two cases with lump-sum taxation restricted does any local redistribution
arise and only in the city. For example, with just a restriction on local lump-sum taxation (Column 3),
city residents obtain a locally financed lump-sum redistribution of $695, financed by a small local income
tax just below 1% and with some of the proceeds from the local property tax. Imposing also the property
tax ceiling of 35% (Column 4), the city lump-sum redistribution drops to just $263. The income tax rises
in the city to 2.82%, but about half of the proceeds from it are used to help finance the local public good
given the property tax limit. The only other case of any local income tax is in the latter case in the poorer
suburb, but with all the proceeds from the 1.65% local income tax supplementing provision of the local
public good. The lack of local redistribution carries over to the case of virtually no mobility (see Table
A1): With only 1% mobile, in none of the cases we examine is there any local redistribution. With both
the local lump-sum tax and property tax restrictions, small local income taxes arise, but to help finance
the local public goods. We can infer that the potential for relocation is not the explanation for limited or
no local redistribution. As we have discussed, it is the weak incentive to redistribute locally resulting

from income sorting that explains this finding.

The economy per capita local public good consumption equals $4,244 in this case, as compared to $6,273 in the
previous case with just the local lump-sum tax constrained. These per capita consumption levels for all cases are
available from the authors.

45

23

Restricting mobility does have some other equilibrium effects. Sorting is a bit different, but not
much. Interestingly, the federal income tax rate rises some, e.g., from 11.7% to 13.5% as mobility drops
form 100% to 50% for the case with just the restriction on the local lump-sum tax (Columns 3 in Tables 1
and 2). The higher federal income tax discourages local income taxation because it exacerbates the
income tax distortion. Actually, the net effects yield higher income redistribution as mobility is reduced.
4.2.2. Normative Analysis. We return to the case of 100% mobility with a normative focus. Using the
unitary state as the baseline, we measure welfare as the sum of average EV plus the change in housing
rents, the latter since we have absentee housing owners. Refer to the lower entries in Table 1. Note that
in all cases either the welfare effect on households and housing owners is the same sign, or the effect on
households dominates. In any case, we report both effects (i.e., we report EV and EV plus housing rents).
We also report the income range that is worse off with the regime change, and, in Figure 4, graph EV as a
function of income. As seen in Column 2 of Table 1, the federal system with no tax restrictions leads to
an average welfare gain, but a large majority of poorer households (82.3%) are worse off. Average
welfare rises because of the efficiencies from Tiebout-type sorting, also with relatively efficient taxation,
in particular heavy reliance on local lump-sum taxes. Local lump sum taxes are efficient both because
they are non-distortionary and because they induce relatively efficient household sorting, the latter
because they efficiently price community access in as much as they equal the cost of the local public good
(see, e.g., Calabrese, Epple, and Romano, 2012). Direct redistribution is a little higher in the federal
equilibrium than in the unitary state, but all those in the city in the former regime (71.6%) consume
substantially less of the local public good, implying a net welfare loss.46 In short, there is an equityefficiency trade off in this comparison.
Examining Columns 3 and 4 of Table 1, one sees that in the cases of the federation with the lumpsum tax restrictions, welfare is lower than in the unitary state and either everyone or almost everyone is
worse off! This finding generalizes the main result in Calabrese, Epple, and Romano (2012). In the
latter, we show that Tiebout equilibria that restrict local taxes to property taxes are inefficient. We show
that this is explained by inefficient sorting that results, which increases the costs of free riding in
consumption of local public goods, to the determinant of almost everyone. This is shown by
demonstrating that directly restricting access of poorer households to richer jurisdictions, with otherwise
equilibrium choices (e.g., majority choice of local property taxes), produces welfare gains. The welfare
losses we find here generalize this finding in two ways. The present model also has a central government,
not presents in our 2012 paper. Here, choice of local property taxation is endogenous, i.e., in these cases
local income taxation is an option, while we assumed only property taxation in the 2012 paper.
The housing price in the city in the federal equilibrium is lower than in the unitary state, so this effect pulls for
gains to the poorer households.

46

24

Consider last the equilibrium in Column 5 of Table 1. This is a Tiebout equilibrium, with no
central government, and with no restrictions on the local tax instruments.47 We study such equilibria in
CER (2015). Observe that this is the most efficient allocation, which means that having a central
government with power to redistribute is inefficient. It is natural to compare this equilibrium to that in
Column 2, with the latter adding the federal government to the Tiebout equilibrium. One can see that the
equilibria are quite similar (e.g., sorting is close), the key difference just being the federal income tax and
associated redistribution in the federal case. Creating scope for central government to redistribute lowers
efficiency and also hurts the rich and upper middle class. However, poorer households, specifically those
with income below $52,150 are better off in the case with the federal government. Introducing the federal
government entails, again, an equity-efficiency trade off.
Another normative perspective, presented in Figure 5, shows the distribution of “generalized
consumption” in the policy regimes, which we define to equal expenditure on private goods plus
consumption of the local public good. We omit the federal regime with both of the tax limits just to
reduce clutter. One can see that, relative to the unitary state (this distribution included in the graph), the
two federal regimes and the pure Tiebout regime (no central government) have a greater proportion of
households with very low generalized consumption, with the Tiebout regime the least equitable in this
regard. The federal regime with restricted lump-sum taxation has the most households with generalized
consumption above $83,387.48 One might expect the federal regime with no tax restrictions and the pure
Tiebout regime would have the largest group with very high generalized consumption, but the substantial
lump-sum tax in the rich suburb in these regimes curtails very high consumption by other than the very
rich. One can also see that the pure Tiebout regime has the widest generalized consumption distribution
followed by the federal regime with limited lump-sum taxation.
All the normative comparisons are qualitatively analogous in the cases of restricted mobility, as
can been seen in Tables 2 and A1.

47
To compare our findings on redistribution to Epple and Romer (1991), another model variation we have
considered is that with no central government and with the restriction on local lump-sum taxation. Epple and Romer
(1991) find significant local income redistribution in a one-tiered multi-community Tiebout model that assumes
local property taxation. Our model with no central government, limited lump-sum taxation, and 100% mobility is
most similar, though it allows local income taxation in addition to property taxation. Nevertheless, we obtain
substantially less local redistribution than Epple and Romer (1991). The explanation is that our model has a local
public good whereas Epple and Romer (1991) does not. In our equilibrium, provision of the local public good
increases the distortion if property taxes are to be increased to provide local redistribution, and hardly any results.
Nor are income taxes used due to their distortion. We confirm this logic by showing that local redistribution
increases as the weight on the local public good in the utility function declines. This analysis is available on request.
48
The $83,387 is the minimum generalized consumption among residents in the richest suburb in this regime, at the
rightward jump in the distribution (see Figure 5). In the cases with multiple communities (i.e., other than the unitary
state), jumps in the distribution occur at community boundary incomes, but, in the cases with significant lump-sum
taxation, they are not very apparent.

25

4.2.3. Housing Owners. We have so far assumed households rent housing. Housing owners will have
weaker incentives to tax property, so it is of interest to examine whether home ownership alters our main
findings, especially the reluctance to employ local income taxes. To investigate this, we adapt the homeownership specification in CER (2015) to the present model. We assume all households are owners, or,
otherwise, existence issues arise. Refer to Figure 1. Stage 1 is the same. Stage 2 is modified to have
households sign a contract with a competitive housing supplier in the community they initially select to
build them a house in Stage 5 of quality/quantity h, at agreed upon price per unit of h. The contract may
be renegotiated in Stage 5 when housing is actually built and consumed. The price in the contract must
equal the ultimate equilibrium housing price since all agents have rational expectations, but it is
j

convenient to have different notation for the equilibrium contract price, ph1. Stages 3 and 4 are the same
as with renters. While no capital gains or losses arise on the equilibrium path, relocation by mobile
households and consumption adjustments for out-of-equilibrium policies could change the supplier price
j

j

of housing. Specifically, housing value would change by (ph  ph1 )h, out of equilibrium. In Stage 5,
households optimally “buy out” of their housing contract and adjust consumption to the level of h equal to
j

j

j

j

demand at price (1  t )ph and with income including capital gain/loss equal to (ph  ph1 )h. Housing
j

j

suppliers are just as well off under the buy-out, and owners are better off.49 If ph  ph1 , owners
j

j

experience a capital gain. The housing supplier is just as well off paying the buyer (ph  ph1 )h to not
j

j

j

build since the supplier can instead supply h at equilibrium price ph . If ph  ph1, then the buyer must
j

j

compensate the supplier (ph1  ph )h to not build as agreed upon. Buyers are better off since they can
adjust their housing consumption reflecting the change in housing price. Note that these prospective
capital gains/losses imply the full incidence of property taxes falls on buyers. For tractability, we maintain
the utility taking assumption regarding how a voter assesses utility in other jurisdictions of movers.
The only difference in the primitive equations (i.e., (2)-(7)) is that

y[1  (1  ω(mf  mj ))(mf  mj )] is replaced for non-movers everywhere by
j
y[1  (1  ω(mf  mj )(mf  mj )] (phj  ph1
)hd (y,pj ), where we assume households contract for their

equilibrium preferred level of housing initially.50 While no capital gain/loss arises in equilibrium, the
potential for a gain or loss will have a marked effect on equilibrium policies. In particular, in

One might alternatively assume suppliers and buyers share in capital gains/losses, by specifying the capital
j
gain/loss to buyers equal to θ  (p hj  p h1
)h, with θ  (0,1); and with the remainder accruing to the supplier.
50
This is an optimal choice since no capital gains or losses actually materialize in equilibrium. As above, we
continue to write hd(y,p) for housing demand, but the relevant y is after taxes and any capital gains.
49

26

contemplating the effects of voting on the property tax, the capital gains/losses that arise out-ofequilibrium make owners relatively averse to property taxation. As shown in the on-line appendix,
indirect utility is modified to be:
V(Γoj ,Ω oj , y)  y  Γoj  Ω oj ;

(12)

j
Γoj  v(g j )  [1  (1  ω(m f  m j ))(m f  m j )]  [1  (p hj  p h1
)G(p j )]  w(p j );
j
Ω oj  v(g j )  r j  [1  (p hj  p h1
)G(p j )]  w(p j );

where G (p j )  0.
The analysis and above propositions for the case of renters’ carries over to the owners’ case with  oj and
oj everywhere replacing respectively  j and  j .

Turning to the computational analysis, we use the same calibration for a cleaner comparison to
the renters’ case, and we focus on the case with all households mobile. For tractability in the
computational analysis, we assume households consider only their own capital gains/losses and that their
housing contracts are voided if they relocate.51 Table 3 summarizes positive and normative properties of
equilibrium in the same policy regimes as in Tables 2 and 3, but omitting the case with no central
government (available from the authors). Equilibrium exists in all the cases presented here, so we again
find equilibrium in interesting cases. The Unitary State Case is presented in Column 1 and the federal
case with no tax restrictions in Column 2. Comparing these respectively to Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1
for renters, a salient effect is lower property tax rates, with the exception of the richest suburb in the
federal cases. The property tax rate is, however, quite low in the latter cases. No local redistribution
arises in the federal case with owners, and local property taxes are 0 in each jurisdiction. The federal
income tax rates change little. Considering restrictions on local taxes, existence of equilibrium fails if the
local lump-sum tax level is severely restricted. We then examine the case with local lump-sum taxes
restricted to be no higher than 20% of expenditure on the local public good, where equilibrium exists.
Equilibrium values for owners with just this restriction in the federal system are presented in Column 3 of
Table 3. For comparison, the equilibrium with renters and the same restriction is presented in Column 5.
No local redistribution results with owners. A small property tax (1.88%) arises in the richer suburb,
which helps to finance the local public good there. Property tax rates are lower in the city and in the
richer suburb in the owners’ case, though somewhat higher in the poorer suburb with owners. The federal
income tax is about the same. Imposing the property tax rate restriction (Column 4), lowers the property

The first part of this simplification means that voters do not anticipate income effects of others’ capital gains or
losses off the equilibrium path. The second simplification means that voters do not realize capital gains or losses if
they relocate, again off the equilibrium path, this consistent with the utility taking assumption (though not to suggest
this is realistic).
51

27

tax to the bound in the city and poorer suburb, induces small local income taxes, and leads to less of the
local public good provided in these two jurisdictions.
The normative comparisons and interpretations are the same as with renters. Restricting mobility
has similar effects to doing so with renters, and, in particular, does not lead to local redistribution.52 In
short, all the main qualitative results regarding renters carry over to owners.
5. Concluding Remarks

We have provided a model with two tiers of government, multiple local jurisdictions, households that
differ by income with at least some able to move among local jurisdictions, and with majority choice of a
redistributive linear income tax at both tiers. In addition, property taxation and lump-sum taxes in local
jurisdictions are majority selected, in some cases with limits, the proceeds used to finance a local public
good and/or local redistribution. Assuming a household utility function that is homogenous of degree 1 in
the numeraire and housing consumption and multiplicative in the local public good, we show theoretically
that: (i) an indirect utility function that is linear in income over two composite public goods arises, their
values depending on all taxes, the level of the housing price, and expenditure on the local public good; (ii)
majority choice of local tax instruments exists given the federal income tax and federal redistribution; and
(iii) income stratification across jurisdictions arises assuming equilibrium exists; and (iv) we provide an
algorithm for determining and confirming majority choice of the federal income tax. We then specify a
quantitative model that we use to confirm equilibrium and explore its properties. We show equilibrium
does exist in a series of examples that vary with respect to the degree of mobility of households, whether
there are tax limits, and whether households rent or own housing. We find the equilibrium has little or no
local redistribution and very limited use of local income taxation. We show that the explanation for the
lack of local redistribution is weak local incentives to do so, this driven by income sorting. We show a
preference for local property taxation over local income taxation, whether or not households rent of own
housing. Normative findings are these: (v) assuming local lump-sum taxes are permitted, equilibrium
with no central government is more efficient but less equitable than the federal system equilibrium; (vi)
the latter federal system is, however, more efficient but less equitable than having just a central
government; and (vii) a federal system with highly constrained local lump-sum taxes is inefficient and
inequitable relative to having just a central government.
The model has limitations, and we conclude with discussion of some of these and challenges that
arise in addressing them. In our model, household heterogeneity is just with respect to income and
whether or not a household can costlessly relocate. Introducing preference heterogeneity over local

52

This analysis is available from the authors, as well as the analogues to Figures 4 and 5.

28

public goods or for locations can be expected to induce some degree of income mixing. This might
increase incentives for local redistribution. The challenge in extending our model to have such difference
in preferences regards existence of equilibrium. We have not considered taxation of the numeraire, i.e.,
sales taxes, at either the federal of local level. As discussed in CER (2015), local majority choice of sales
taxes does not disrupt local majority choice equilibrium, but it would not arise if households can travel
costlessly among local jurisdictions to consume the numeraire. We have not considered a model with
frictions in this. Federal sales taxation or any other federal taxation is of interest to examine. One might
also consider provision of a national public good and/or federal subsidies to local public goods. We think
that Proposition 3 can be extended to investigate a greater federal role, though existence is not assured
and the problem is challenging computationally. We believe that progress can be made on these various
extensions, but are topics for future research.

29

References

Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, Tax and Expenditure Limits on local
Governments. Washington, D.C. (1995).
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, Local Revenue Diversification: Local Income
Taxes. Staff report, Washington, D.C (1988).
Baicker, Katherine, Jeffrey Clemens, and Monica Singhal, “The Rise of the States: U.S. Fiscal
Decentralization in the Postwar Period,” Journal of Public Economics, 96 (2012), 1079-1091.
Benabou, Roland, “Equity and Efficiency in Human Capital Investment: The Local Connection,” Review
of Economic Studies, 63 (1996), 237-264.
_______, “Workings of a City: Location, Education, and Production,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
108 (1993), 619-652.
Boadway, Robin, 1982. “The method of taxation and the provision of local public goods: comment. Am.
Econ. Rev. 72(4), 846-851.
Boadway, Robin, Maurice Marchand, and Marianne Vigneaulty, “The Consequences of Overlapping Tax
Bases for Redistribution and Public Spending in a Federation,” Journal of Public Economics, 68(1998),
453-478.
Brueckner, Jan, 1983. Property value maximization and public sector efficiency. J. Urban Econ. 14(1), 115.
__________, 2004. Fiscal decentralization with distortionary taxation: Tiebout vs. tax competition.
International Tax and Public Finance 11(2), 133-153.
Bucovetsky, Sam, “Choosing Tax Rates and Public Expenditure Levels Using Majority Rule,” Journal of
Public Economics, 46 (1991), 113-131.
Calabrese, Stephen, Glenn Cassidy, and Dennis Epple, “Local Government Fiscal Structure and
Metropolitan Consolidation,” Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 2002, 1-43.
Calabrese, Steve, Dennis Epple, and Richard Romano, “On the Political Economy of Zoning,” Journal of
Public Economics, 91 (February 2007), 25-49.
____________________________, “Inefficiencies from Metropolitan Political and Fiscal
Decentralization: Failures of Tiebout Competition,” Review of Economic Studies, 79 (July 2012), 10811111.
____________________________, “Majority Choice of Tax Systems in Single- and Multi-Jurisdictional
Economies,” Journal of Public Economics, 131 (November 2015), 58-70.
deBartolome, Charles, “Equilibrium and Inefficiency in a Community with Peer Group Effects,” Journal
of Political Economy, 98 (1990), 110-133.
deBartolome, Charles and Stephen L. Ross, “The Race to the Suburb: The Location of the Poor in a
Metropolitan,” 2002, University of Connecticut Working Paper #2002-02.
Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census, Historical Statistics on Governmental Finances and
Employment, an annual report, Government Finances (1968).
30

Ellickson, Robert C., “Jurisdictional Fragmentation and Residential Choice,” American Economic
Review, 61, 2 (1971), 334-339.
Epple, Dennis, Filimon, Radu, and Romer, Thomas, 1984. Equilibrium among local jurisdictions: toward
an integrated treatment of voting and residential choice. J. Public Econ. 24(3), 281-399.
Epple, Dennis, Brett Gordon, and Holger Sieg, “A New Approach for Estimating the Housing Production
Function,” American Economic Review, 100, 1(June 2010), 905-924.
Epple, Dennis and Glenn Platt, “Equilibrium and Local Redistribution in an Urban Economy when
Households Differ in both Preferences and Incomes,” Journal of Urban Economics, 43,1 (1998), 23-51.
Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano, “Public School Choice and Finance Policies, Neighborhood
Formation, and the Distribution of Educational Benefits,” Chapter 7 in The Economics of School Choice,
Caroline Hoxby, ed., National Bureau of Economic Research, University of Chicago Press, 2003, 227286.
Epple, Dennis, Richard Romano, and Holger Sieg, “The Intergenerational Conflict over the Provision of
Public Education,” Journal of Public Economics, 96 (April 2012), 255-268.
Epple, Dennis and Thomas Romer, “Mobility and Redistribution,” Journal of Political Economy, 99
(August 1991), 828-858.
Epple, Dennis and Allan Zelenitz, “The Implications of Competition among Jurisdictions: Does Tiebout
Need Politics?” Journal of Political Economy, 89, 6 (1981), 1197-1217.
Feldstein, Martin, “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 81, 4 (November 1999), 674-680.
Feldstein, Martin and Marian Wrobel, “Can State Taxes Redistribute Income,” Journal of Public
Economics, 68 (1998), 369-396.
Fernandez, Raquel and Richard Rogerson, “Income Distribution, Communities, and the Quality of Public
Education,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 1(February 1996), 135-164.
________________________ , “Public Education and Income Distribution: A Quantitative Analysis of
Education Finance Reform,” American Economic Review, 88 (1998), 813-833.
Goodspeed, Timothy J., “Local Income Taxation: An Externality, Pigouvian Solution, and Public
Policies,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 25 (1995), 279-296.
Gordon, Roger H., “An Optimal Taxation Approach to Fiscal Federalism,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 98 (1983), 567-586.
Gordon, Roger H. and Julie Cullen, “Income Redistribution in a Federal System of Governments,”
Journal of Public Economics, 96 (2012), 1100-1109.
Grandmont, Jean-Michel, “Intermediate Preferences and the Majority Rule,” Econometrica, 46, 2 (March
1978), 317-330.
Hamilton, Bruce, “Zoning and Property Taxation in a System of Local Governments,” Urban Studies, 1-2
(June 1975), 205-211.

31

Hansen, Nico and Anke Kessler, “The Political Geography of Tax H(e)avens and Tax Hells,” American
Economic Review, 91 (September 2001), 1103-1115.
Harmon, Oskar R., “The Income Elasticity of Demand for Single-Family Owner-Occupied Housing: An
Empirical Reconciliation,” Journal of Urban Economics, 38 (1988), 75-85.
Henchman, Joseph and Jason Sapia, “Local Income Taxes: City- and County-Level Income and Wage
Taxes Continue to Wane,” Fiscal Fact, Tax Foundation, August 31, 2011, https://taxfoundation.org/localincome-taxes-city-and-county-level-income-and-wage-taxes-continue-wane/
Henderson, J. Vernon, “Community Choice of Revenue Instruments,” Regional Science and Urban
Economics, 24, 2 (1994), 159-183.
Inman, Robert, “The Local Decision to Tax: Evidence from Large U.S. Cities,” Regional Science and
Urban Economics, 19, 3(1989), 455-491.
Inman, Robert and Daniel Rubinfeld, “Designing Tax Policies in Federalist Economies: An Overview,”
Journal of Public Economics, 60 (1996), 307-334.
Johnson, William, “Income Redistribution in a Federal system,” American Economic Review, 78 (June
1988), 57-573.
Kessler, Anke and Chritoph Lulfesmann, “Tiebout and Redistribution in a Model of Residential and
Political Choice,” Journal of Public Economics, 89 (2005), 501-528.
Krelove, Russell, “The Persistence and Inefficiency of Property Tax Finance of Local Public
Expenditures,” Journal of Public Economics, 51 (July 1993), 415-435.
Lockwood, Ben, “Fiscal Decentralization: A Political Economy Perspective,” Handbook of Fiscal
Federalism, E. Ahmad and G. Brosio, eds., Edward Elgar, 2006.
Meltzer, Alan and Scott Richard, “A Rational Theory of the Size of Government,” Journal of Political
Economy, 89 (1981), 914-927.
Musgrave, Richard A., “Economics of Fiscal Federalism,” Nebraska Journal of Economics and Business,
10 (1971), 3-13.
Nechyba, Thomas, “Local Property and State Income Taxes: The Role of Interjurisdictional Competition
and Collusion,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 2 (1997), 351-384.
__________, “School Finance Induced Migration Patterns: The Impact of Private School Vouchers,”
Journal of Public Economic Theory, 1,1 (1999), 5-50.
__________, “Mobility, Targeting, and Private School Vouchers,” American Economic Review, 90, 1
(2000), 130-46.
Oates, Wallace E, Fiscal Federalism, 1972a, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
___________, “An Economist’s Perspective on Fiscal Federalism,” in Oates, W.E. (Ed), The Political
Economy of Fiscal Federalism, Lexington, MA, D.C. Heath, 1972b, 3-20.
___________, “An Essay on Fiscal Federalism,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37 (September 1999),
1120-1149.
32

Plott, Charles, “A Notion of Equilibrium and its Possibility under Majority Rule,” American Economic
Review, 57, 4 (September 1967), 787-806.
Poterba, James, “Taxation and Housing: Old Questions, New Answers,” American Economic Review, 82,
2 (1992), 237-242.
Rohrs, Sigrid and David Stadelmann, “Homeownership, Mobility, and Local Income Redistribution,”
Journal of Public Economic Theory, 16 (August 2014), 569-605.
Siniavskaia, Natalia, “Property Tax Rates in and Within Counties,” Economics and Housing Policy Group,
National Association of Home Builders, Special Studies, April 1, 2016 www.nahb.org
Stigler, George, “The Tenable Range of Functions of Local Government,” Joint Economic Committee,
Federal Expenditure Policy for Economic Growth and Stability. U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C., 1957, 213-219.
Tax Policy Center Foundation, Urban Institute and Brookings Institution, Tax Policy Center Briefing
Book, Sate (and Local) Taxes, http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/briefing-book/what-are-tax-andexpenditure-limits
Tax Foundation, Local Income Tax Rates by Jurisdiction, 2011.
departments and other sources. www.TaxFoundation.org

Compilation from State revenue

Tiebout, Charles. M., “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures,” Journal of Political Economy, 64 (1956),
416-424.
Westhoff, Frank, “Existence of Equilibrium in Economies with a Local Public Good,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 14 (February 1977), 84-112.
Wildasin, David, “Locational Efficiency in a Federal System,” Regional Science and Urban Economics,
10 (1980), 453-471.
____________, “Income Redistribution in a Common Labor Market,” American Economic Review, 81
(September 1991), 757-774.
Wilson, J., “Property Taxation, Congestion, and Local Public Goods,” Journal of Public Economics, 64
(1997), 207-217.
Wooders, Myrna, “The Tiebout Hypothesis: Near-optimality in Local Public Good Economies,”
Econometrica, 48 (1980), 1467-1485.
Zodrow, George, “The Incidence of Metropolitan Property Tax Base Sharing and Rate Equalization,”
Journal of Urban Economics, 15, 2(1984), 210-229.

33

Stage 1
All Households
Vote on Federal
Income Tax

Stage 2
Households
Choose Initial
Local
Jurisdiction

Figure 1
Stage 3
Households Vote
Over Local Policy

Stage 4
Mobile
Households
Costlessly
Relocate

Stage 5
Households
Consume,
Government
Budgets Balance,
Markets Clear

Γj

Indifference Curve of
Median Income Household
in Community j

.

Equilibrium
GBCj

Ωj
Figure 2: Equilibrium in Community j

34

35

Government Budget Constraint for the City

























Figure 4

36

Preferred City Per Capita Expenditures
As a Function of Voter Income Percentile

Preferred City Income and Property Tax Rates
As a Function of Voter Income Percentile
3,500

.8

Total Per Capita

Property Tax Rate
.7

Expenditure Per Capita

3,000

Tax Rates

.6
.5
.4
.3
.2

2,000
1,500
Redistribution
1,000

Income Tax Rate

.1

Public Good Provision

2,500

500

.0
.00

.05

.10

.15

.20

.25

.30

.35

.00

.40

.05

.10

.15

.20

.25

.30

.35

.40

Income Percentile

Income Percentile

Figure 5
City Population Share
As a Function of Voter Income

Prices Per Unit of Housing Services
As a Function of Voter Income

.6

14
Price Per Unit of Housing Services

City Population Share

.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
.0
.00

.05

.10

.15

.20

.25

.30

.35

.40

Voter Income Percentile

12
Gross-of-Tax Price
10
8
Net-of-Tax Price

6
4
2
.0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

Voter Income Percentile

Figure 6

37

34

35

Table 1: Renters' Model w. 100% Mobility*

Unitary State

Fed. System
No Tax Limits

Fed. System
Lump‐Sum
Tax Limits**

Fed. System
Local Lump‐
Sum and
Property
Tax Limits***

No Central
Government

Positive Properties
n1 =

100%

71.6%

40.0%****

41.6%****

70.8%

n2 =

n/a

23.0%

30.0%

28.6%

23.7%

3

n/a

5.4%

30.0%

29.8%

5.6%

1

t =

84.7%

54.0%

71.4%

35.0%

53.1%

t2 =

n/a

15.8%

61.3%

35.0%

17.1%

t =

n/a

4.9%

79.5%

35.0%

6.4%

1

m =

n/a

0.0%

2.1%

3.6%

0.0%

m2 =

n/a

0.0%

0.0%

1.9%

0.0%

3

m =

n/a

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

1

r =

n/a

($349)

$939

$500

($378)

r2 =

n/a

($7,779)

$96

($69)

($8,168)

3

r =

n/a

($22,845)

($630)

($369)

($25,506)

1

g =
g2 =

$4,799
n/a

$3,500
$10,549

$2,248
$4,500

$2,031
$4,187

$3,276
$11,424

g3 =

n/a

$24,832

$12,609

$7,383

$28,553

f

m =

11.4%

14.8%

11.7%

12.3%

n/a

f

$9,415

$9,535

$7,641

$7,940

n/a

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

$553
$1,167
< $102,800
82.4%

($1,250)
($1,182)
< $228,000
97.4%

($1,581)
($965)
All Incomes
100.0%

$3,967
$4,723
< $59,700
59.5%

n =

3

r =
Norm. Props.*****
EV =
EV+ΔHouse Rents=
Interval Worse Off
% Worse Off =
*

Utility is g.10h.22b.78. Economy income lognormal with mean $67,392 and median $49,267. Tax distortion
parameter ω = .247. Community housing supply elasticities equal 3. Community areas are L1 = .675, L2 = .206, and
L3 = .120. Median community income below mean except where community proportion bolded.
** j
r ≥ ‐.05gj, j = 1,2,3.
*** j
r ≥ ‐.05gj, tj ≤ 35%, j = 1,2,3.
****
Median community income exceeds mean.
*****
Positive (negative) EV and EV + ΔHouse Rents indicate average welfare gains (losses).

36

Table 2: Renters' Model w. 50% Mobility*

Unitary State

Fed. System
No Tax Limits

Fed. System
Lump‐Sum
Tax Limits**

Fed. System
Local Lump‐
Sum and
Property
Tax Limits***

No Central
Government

Positive Properties
n1 =

100%

67.7%

43.6%****

44.9%****

66.5%

2

n =

n/a

24.1%

28.1%

27.5%

24.8%

3

n =

n/a

8.3%

28.3%

27.6%

8.6%

t1 =

84.7%

50.7%

71.4%

35.0%

50.2%

2

n/a

22.9%

59.6%

35.0%

24.0%

3

t =

n/a

16.1%

69.6%

35.0%

17.7%

m1 =

n/a

0.0%

1.0%

2.8%

0.0%

2

m =

n/a

0.0%

0.0%

1.7%

0.0%

3

m =

n/a

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

r1 =

n/a

($528)

$695

$263

($515)

2

r =

n/a

($5638)

$(34)

($195)

($5,830)

3

r =

n/a

($14,804)

($590)

($338)

($16,225)

g1 =
g2 =

$4,799
n/a

$3,416
$9,113

$2,388
$4,736

$2,184
$4,375

$3,138
$9,728

g3 =

n/a

$20,213

$11,804

$7,554

$22,989

mf =

11.4%

14.9%

13.5%

13.7%

n/a

f

$9,415

$9,590

$8,733

$8,574

n/a

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

$459
$1,031
< $98,900
81.1%

($1,295)
($1,168)
All Incomes
100%

($1,520)
($914)
All Incomes
100.0%

$3,828
$4,531
< $58,500
58.5%

t =

r =
Norm. Props.*****
EV =
EV+ΔHouse Rents=
Interval Worse Off
% Worse Off =
*

Utility is g.10h.22b.78. Economy income lognormal with mean $67,392 and median $49,267. Tax distortion
parameter ω = .247. Community housing supply elasticities equal 3. Community areas are L1 = .675, L2 = .206, and
L3 = .120. Median community income below mean except where community proportion bolded.
** j
r ≥ ‐.05gj, j = 1,2,3.
*** j
r ≥ ‐.05gj, tj ≤ 35%, j = 1,2,3.
****
Median community income exceeds mean.
*****
Positive (negative) EV and EV + ΔHouse Rents indicate average welfare gains (losses).

37

Table 3: Owners' Model w. 100% Mobility*

Unitary State

Fed. System
No Tax Limits

Fed. System
Lump‐Sum
Tax Limits**

Fed. System
Local Lump‐
Sum and
Property
Tax Limits***

Renters’
Fed. System
Lump‐Sum
Tax Limits**

Positive Properties
n1 =

100%

79.0%

59.8%

55.8%

51.5%

2

n =

n/a

15.4%

22.8%

24.9%

30.0%

n3 =

n/a

5.6%

17.4%

19.3%

18.6%

1

53.1%

9.3%

43.3%

35.0%

73.7%

2

t =

n/a

2.1%

76.9%

35.0%

53.6%

t3 =

n/a

8.4%

20.9%

25.7%

85.9%

1

m =

n/a

0.0%

0.0%

0.1%

0.0%

2

m =

n/a

0.0%

0.0%

0.5%

0.0%

m3 =

n/a

0.0%

1.9%

1.2%

0.0%

1

r =

n/a

($3,099)

($594)

($502)

$594

2

r =

n/a

($9,400)

($1,717)

($1,049)

($1,267)

r3 =

n/a

($14,871)

($2,132)

($1,998)

($3,596)

1

g =
g2 =

$4,642
n/a

$3,878
$9,854

$2,968
$8,586

$2,512
$5,243

$2,599
$6,336

g3 =

n/a

$18,366

$10,659

$9,990

$17,981

f

m =

11.3%

13.9%

14.1%

16.2%

15.0%

f

$7,755

$8,960

$9,067

$10,340

$964

n/a
n/a

$568
$1,288

($738)
($626)

($1,416)
($1,143)

n/a
n/a

< $95,600
79.9%

> $27,100
72.4%

> $37,400
63.6%

($959)
($915)
> $19,350
<$302,900
87.0%

t =

r =
Norm. Props.****
EV =
EV+ΔHouse Rents=
Interval Worse
Off
% Worse Off =
*

Utility is g.10h.22b.78. Economy income lognormal with mean $67,392 and median $49,267. Tax distortion
parameter ω = .247. Community housing supply elasticities equal 3. Community areas are L1 = .675, L2 = .206,
and L3 = .120. Median community income is less than mean in all cases.

** j

r ≥ ‐.20gj, j = 1,2,3.
r ≥ ‐.20gj, tj ≤ 35%, j = 1,2,3.
****
Positive (negative) EV and EV + ΔHouse Rents indicate average welfare gains (losses).
*** j

38

