                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           WHY DO PENSIONS REDUCE MOBILITY?




                                    Steven G. Allen

                                    Robert L. Clark

                                   Ann A. McDermed




                                Working Paper No. 2509




                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 1988




This paper was presented at the Fortieth Annual Meeting of the Industrial Relations
Research Association. The Department of Labor supported this research under contract
no. J-9-M—5—0049. Linda Shumaker, Myra Ragland, and Fred Gale provided research assistance.
The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #2509
                                                     February 1988




                          Why Do Pensions Reduce Mobility?




                                      ABSTRACT



     Previous studies have found that workers who are covered by pensions are

much less likely than other workers to leave their jobs, but the evidence on

how specific pension characteristics affect turnover is inconclusive. This

paper examines how mobility is affected by vesting standards, the compensation

level, and the capital loss of pension wealth for job changers. In two

different data sets, we find that the capital loss is strongly associated with

lower turnover rates, whereas vesting and the compensation level have

relatively little impact. Large capital losses are mainly associated with

lower layoff rates rather than lower quit rates.




                                        Steven C. Allen
                                        Robert L. Clark
                                        Ann A. McDermed
                                        Department of Economics and Business
                                        North Carolina State University
                                        Box 8110
                                        Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
     Academics and practitioners in the industrial relations field have long

known that workers who are covered by defined benefit pension plans are less

likely to leave their employer than those who are not covered. Most

discussions have attributed this to vesting provisions, which prevent workers

from collecting a pension if they leave the firm before meeting certain age and

years of service criteria. Previous econometric studies of the relationship

between pensions and mobility have found much lower mobility among workers

covered by pensions, but the evidence on the role of vesting is inconclusive.1

In addition previous studies have not allowed for the possibility that even

among vested workers, defined benefit pension formulas penalize job changing.

In this paper we estimate a proportional hazards model over two different data

sets to determine how vesting and benefit formulas affect mobility among

workers covered by pensions.



Pension characteristics and mobility

     A person who leaves a job before becoming vested will not receive any

pension benefits from that employer upon retirement. This creates an obvious

incentive to stay on the job until vesting.

     Pension benefits for most persons covered by defined benefit plans are

determined by formulas which pay a percentage of final earnings for each year

of service. As long as earnings rise over time, the use of final earnings (or

the average of earnings In the final years with the employer) in the formula

penalizes those who leave the firm, even if they are fully vested.

    To see this, consider a worker who earns $40,000 after 20 years in the

labor market and $80,000 after 40 years. Assume that all employers pay an


      1Mitchell (1982) examines the overall effect of pensions on mobility;
 Schi].].er and Weiss (1979) and Wolf and Levy (1984) focus on the impact of
 vesting provisions.
                                                                                 2


annual pension equal to 1.5 percent of final earnings for each year of service

with that firm when one reaches age 65. If a worker stays with a single

employer throughout this period, the pension will be $48,000 (.015 x 40

x $80,000). Suppose instead that this person leaves his employer after    the

20th year and moves to another firm with an identical pension plan. Assuming

lifetime earnings remain the same, the total pension payments received from

both employers amount to only $36,000, of which $12,000 (.015 x 20 x $40,000)

comes from the first job and $24,000 comes from the second job

(.015 x 20 x $80,000). Anticipating this loss of pension benefits, workers

become much less likely to move to another job when they are covered by

pensions with this type of benefit formula.

     These explanations of the impact of vesting and benefit formulas on mobility

highlight the key forces at work in the relationship between pensions and

mobility, but they are misleadingly simple because they ignore the question of

how much earnings have been reduced to pay for the worker's pension. Suppose

that after 20 years the worker has paid for a pension benefit of $24,000 upon

retirement (half of the ultimate $48,000 benefit he would get if he stayed for

40 years), but is legally entitled to a benefit of only $12,000 if he leaves

after 20 years. In this situation the worker faces a capital loss of pension

benefits if a job change occurs. On the other hand, if after 20 years with the

firm the earnings reductions are just large enough to fund a benefit upon

retirement of $12,000, then the worker has nothing to lose by moving to

another firm.2




       21f the worker had stayed at his original job, then the remaining $36,000
  of annual pension benefits would have been paid for during the last 20 years
  with the firm under this assumption.
                                                                                 3

     The key issue is whether the pension is part of a series of short term

(e.g., one year) labor contracts or part of a lifetime contract with a bonding

mechanism to penalize mobility. In the former case, which is discussed in

Bulow (1982), a worker pays only for the benefits to which he is legally

entitled, namely those based on his earnings of $40,000 (which would be his

final earnings with the firm if he left after 20 years). In the latter case,

which is analyzed in Ippolito (1985, 1987), the worker pays for benefits

based on expected final salary ($80,000), but stands to collect a benefit

based only on his current salary if he leaves the firm before the end of the

contract. The difference between these two benefits represents a capital loss

to the worker if he leaves his employer before retirement, which should

discourage voluntary quits.

     In addition, large capital losses could be associated with lower layoff

rates. Lazear (1979) has argued that firms can increase productivity by

adopting payment schemes which pay workers less than the value of their output

at the beginning of the employment relationship and more than the value of

their output toward the end. This scheme is part of a long term contract

between the worker and the firm, under which the firm promises the worker a

long term job as long as the worker's performance is adequate. Those with

inadequate performance forfeit the option to receive the delayed payments,

which would include a capital loss of pension wealth. Although firms have an

incentive to fire workers and collect a capital gain on their pensions,

concern about labor market reputation and the ability to write similar

productivity-enhancing contracts in the future can prevent this from

happening. As a result, layoff rates could also be inversely related to the

size of the capital loss.
                                                                                  4

     The impact of vesting rules on mobility also hinges on the nature of the

pension contract. Under the strict legal interpretation, firms do not owe

workers any pension benefits until they are vested. If the pension is part of

a short term labor contract, then workers will not pay for pension benefits

until vesting and vesting per se should have no effect on the incentives for

mobility. If unvested workers have lifetime contracts under which their

salaries are reduced to pay for possible future benefits, then the guarantee of

benefits at vesting will reduce the capital loss by a modest amount and make

turnover more likely immediately after vesting than before.

     A final possibility is that the lower turnover rates observed for workers

covered by pensions merely reflect a higher overall level of compensation.

All previous studies of the impact of pensions on mobility have included wage

rates or earnings among the exogenous variables. Holding wages constant,

workers with pensions receive more total compensation than other workers

and are less likely to quit. The overall impact of pay levels on mobility is

ambiguous, however, because layoff probabilities could very well be higher for

more highly paid workers.



Methodolozy

     We have outlined three mechanisms through which pensions can reduce

mobility: capital losses, vesting provisions, and higher pay levels,       To

estimate the impact of each of' these variables on mobility, we estimate a

proportional hazards model.3 Let fi(t) be the probability that person i will

leave his employer at time t, Fj(t) be the cumulative probability that person i



       3For an introductory discussion of duration analysis and the proportional
  hazards model, see Allison (1984) and Kiefer (1987).
                                                                                        5

will have left at or before time t, and 1 -     Fi(t)   be the probability that

person i will still be with his employer at time t. Then the hazard rate for

person i is defined as Hj(t) —     fj(t)/[l F(t)].
                                            -            Increases in the hazard rate

are associated with a greater likelihood that a person will leave his

employer.

       In the proportional hazards model proposed by Cox (1972), Hi(t) is specified

as the product of an arbitrary function of time H(t) which is the same for

everyone and another function containing variables Xj with unknown coefficients

.     Generally   this latter function is specified as exp(Xfi), giving us

(1)         H(t) — H(t)exp(Xi).
This specification has two convenient properties. First, dlnHj(t)/dXj —

meaning that       indicates the relative change in the hazard in response to a one

unit change in Xj. Second, by not specifying a functional form for H(t), there

is less concern about the sensitivity of the results to distributional

assumptions. The estimates depend on only the rank order of the times workers

are observed leaving their employers. We estimate (1) with the unsupported SAS

supplementary procedure PHGU1, written by Frank Harrell of the Duke Medical

Center.

       Included among the variables in Xi are an indicator of whether or not

the worker was vested, an estimate of average hourly compensation which

includes pension compensation, and an estimate of the capital loss for each

worker if he leaves the job held at the beginning of the sample period. By

estimating (1) over a sample of workers covered by pensions, we will be able to

determine which, if any, of these three mechanisms is associated with lower

turnover.
                                                                                    6


Data

       Our estimates of (1) are obtained from the 1975-1982 Panel Survey of Income

Dynamics (PSID) and the 1971-1981 National Longitudinal Survey of Mature Men

(NLS). The samples are restricted to those covered by pensions. The hazard

rate estimates are based on the year in which workers leave the firm with which

they were employed at the beginning of the sample. Observations where the

worker is still at the same firm at the end of the sample period are called

right-censored, which simply means that the year in which they leave their job

is not observed in the data. Our main concern is with how pensions affect

quits and layoffs, but workers also leave their employers to retire or for

other reasons. To prevent factors associated with retirement decisions from

contaminating the results, we restrict the PSID sample to heads of household

under age 55 and treat the workers in the NLS sample who retire as

right-censored observations.

       In addition to examining overall turnover rates, we also estimate separate

proportional hazard models for quits and layoffs. In the quit model, cases

where the respondent left the job for any other reason (such as a layoff or

disability) are right-censored. The same type of adjustment is made in the

layoff model as well.

       The NLS and the PSID both report pension coverage, but the PSID does not

report vesting status and neither data set reports the capital loss. In our

analysis of the PSID, we assume that all workers become fully vested in their

tenth year with their employer. To estimate the impact of vesting on turnover,

we include a dummy variable equal to one if the worker was vested in 1975 and

another dummy equal to one if the worker was vested by 1980. If turnover is

greater for workers who were vested or for those who became vested during the
                                                                                    7


sample period, this would indicate that vesting provisions are an important

factor generating lower turnover among workers covered by pensions.

     The capital loss equals the difference between the pension income the

worker would receive if he stayed with his original employer and the pension

income he would receive if he left that firm and took another job with an

identical pension plan. A detailed discussion of how the capital loss was

estimated appears in Allen, Clark, and McDermed (1988). Here we focus on data

sources and key assumptions.

        Estimates of the pension benefit formula for each worker are derived from

the 1983 Employee benefit Survey (EBS). Plans in the EBS were sorted into

eight industry and three occupational classifications. Within each

industry-occupation cell there are as many as five different types of pension

formulas (e.g., simple earnings-based or dollar per year of service.) The

formula type which covered the largest proportion of participants within each

cell was assumed to apply to all participants in that cell. The mean parameter

values for that formula type are used as the estimate of the benefit formula

for all PSID and NLS respondents in a given industry-occupation category. For

earnings-based formulas, the key parameters are the generosity factor (percen-

tage of average earnings) and the length of the salary averaging period. Age

and service requirements for normal retirement in the EBS were assumed to be

equal to cell means, based on all plans in the cell regardless of formula

type.

        Given the benefit formula, it is straightforward to calculate the capital

loss with information on age, earnings history and years of service given by

PSID and NLS respondents. The value of a life annuity was calculated beginning

at the normal retirement age but discounted to the current age. The discount
                                                                                 8


factors used were 7 percent for the NLS and 9 percent for the PSID; these

values correspond to long term top-grade bond rates at the beginning of the

sample period. These rates were also used to make assumptions about nominal

salary growth, following Ippolito (1985).

     The benefit formula estimates are also used to calculate how much additional

pension wealth legally accrues to the worker if he stays on his job an extra

year. This amount, which is called pension compensation, represents the

additional pay that workers covered by pensions receive. It is based on

years of service and, in most cases, current and past salaries. To control

for the total amount of compensation received by workers with pensions, we

include a variable equal to the sum of the wage rate (or average hourly

earnings) and average hourly pension compensation. If the lower turnover

rates observed for workers covered by pensions are mainly attributable to

higher overall levels of compensation, then this variable should be inversely

related to turnover and the vesting and capital loss variables should be

unrelated to turnover.

     Other independent variables included in the proportional hazards model

include union membership, years of service and its square, age, education,

race, marital status, number of children, industry, occupation, and location.

These come directly from the NLS and PSID at the beginning of the sample

period.



Results

     The coefficient estimates of the proportional hazards models in Table 1

indicate the impact of each variable on the log of the hazard rate Hj(t). In

the PSID a $1000 increase in the capital loss is associated with a 6.2 percent
                                                                                        9

reduction in the hazard for turnover (6.2 —   exp(-.O64)   -
                                                               1).   The mean capital

loss for persons covered by pensions in the PSID is $5,024. Our estimates

indicate that if this were reduced to zero, the hazard would increase by 37.9

percent. Although estimated with less precision, the results for the NLS are

very comparable. For these older workers, a $1000 increase in the capital

loss is associated with a 2.8 percent reduction in turnover. because many

older workers were not vested in 1971 and entitled to no benefits if they left

their jobs, the average capital loss in this sample is much larger ($12,922)

than in the PSID. Reducing this capital loss to zero would increase the

hazard by 45.4 percent.

     The capital loss is much more strongly associated with reductions in the

layoff hazard than the quit hazard in both the NLS and PSID.         In terms of the

theories outlined above, this may indicate that capital losses influence

mobility mainly through being part of an underpay-early/overpay-later

compensation scheme. Another possibility is that it is very difficult to

distinguish between quits and layoffs in questionnaires where the worker is

asked what happened to a job that was held a year ago.

     The vesting variables are unrelated to turnover in the PSID. In the NLS

vested workers are much less likely to leave their jobs than unvested workers,

controlling for years of service with the 1971 employer. This is exactly the

opposite of what one would expect if vesting were the key pension

characteristic responsible for lower turnover.

     Higher overall compensation levels are associated with higher hazard

rates for turnover, quits, and layoffs in the NLS. This contradictory finding

is probably attributable to either a correlation between wages and some

unobserved variable (such as mobility costs or general human capital) or the
                                                                                 10

limited age range of the NLS sample, in which everyone was 50 to 64 in 1971.

Nonetheless, it is very difficult to use this evidence to claim that the higher

compensation level resulting from pension coverage is responsible for lower

turnover. In the PSID, the turnover hazard is unrelated to compensation

levels.

     As for the key control variables included in the model, there is no

correlation between years of service at the beginning of the sample period and

mobility in either the PSID or NLS. Except for a lower quit probability for

union members in the PSID, there is no relationship between union membership

and mobility.



Implications

     This paper has examined whether the lower turnover rates observed for

persons who are covered by pensions are attributable to capital losses, vesting

provisions, or compensation levels. The evidence indicates that the capital

loss is strongly associated with lower turnover rates, whereas vesting and

compensation levels have relatively little impact. Further, large capital

losses are mainly associated with lower layoff hazards rather than lower quit

hazards. Unless this is an anomaly resulting from mismeasurement of the causes

of separations, this evidence indicates either that deferred compensation

schemes increase productivity (and thus reduce layoffs) or that employers are

sufficiently concerned about labor market reputation and the ability to offer

deferred compensation schemes in the future to prevent them from laying off

workers and collecting a capital gain on their pensions.

     Another important mechanism through which pensions can reduce mobility is

by influencing the type of employee which the firm is able to attract. If
                                                                               11

some workers are inherently more prone to turnover than other workers, then

firms with pensions are more likely to attract those with low odds of

turnover. Because the data sets used here are restricted to workers covered

by pensions, this study has not been able to gauge the importance of this

factor. In the labor force, most turnover is concentrated among workers with

two or fewer years of service, a group for which the capital loss is quite

small and the results of this study may be of limited applicability.
                                                                               12

                                    REFERENCES


Allison, Paul. Event History Analysis. Beverly Hills: Sage, 1984.

Allen, Steven; Clark, Robert; and McDermed, Ann. "Pensions and Lifetime
   Jobs: The New Industrial Feudalism Revisited." Mimeographed.
   Raleigh: North Carolina State University, 1988.

Bulow, Jeremy. "What Are Corporate Pension Liabilities?" Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 97 (l982):435-452.

Ippolito, Richard. "The Labor Contract and True Economic Pension
   Liabilities." American Economic Review 75 (1985):103l-l043.

Ippolito, Richard. "Why Federal Workers Don't Quit." Journal of Human
   Resources 22 (l987):281-299.

Kiefer, Nicholas. "Hazard Functions and Economic Duration Data." Cornell
   University Center for Analytic Economics Working Paper 87-01, 1987.

Lazear, Edward. "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political
   Economy 87 (l979):1261-1284.

Mitchell, Olivia. "Fringe Benefits and Labor Mobility." Journal of Human
   Resources 17 (1982):286-298.

Schiller, Bradley and Randall Weiss. "The Impact of Private Pensions on Firm
   Attachment." Review of Economics and Statistics 61 (1979):369-380.

Wolf, Douglas and Frank Levy. "Pension Coverage, Pension Vesting, and the
   Distribution of Job Tenures." In Retirement and Economic Behavior, edited
   by Henry Aaron and Gary Burtless. Washington: Brookings, 1984.
</ref_section>
                                                                                      13

Table 1. Coefficient estimates for proportional hazards models of turnover,
          quits, and layoffs from 1975-82 PSID and 1971-1981 NLS.



                                    PSID                               NLS

                      Turnover      Quits     Layoffs     Turnover    Quits     Layoffs



Capital Loss            - .064     - .032     - .107       - .029      .034      - .058
                        (.026)     (.031)     (.043)       (.020)     (.032)     (.028)

Vested                  - .222     - .540      .012       -1.021      - .716    -1.170
                        (.489)     (.658)     (.789)       (.324)     (.558)     (.417)

Became vested           - .014     -.144       .153
                        (.248)     (.330)     (.404)

Average hourly          - .022     - .019     - .020        .113       .163       .022
 compensation           (.032)     (.040)     (.052)       (.044)     (.059)     (.090)

Years of service        - .027     - .006     - .001       - .005     - .115      .030
                        (.064)     (.084)     (.103)       (.048)     (.085)     (.061)

Years of service         .002       .001       .001        - .001     - .0002    - .001
 squared                (.001)     (.002)     (.002)       (.001)     (.0024)    (.002)

Union                   - .193     - .419      .122         .301       .250       .464
                        (.144)     (.198)     (.226)       (.305)     (.590)     (.384)

Sample size               774        774        774          764        764        764

Uncensored                304        175        118           91         30         58
 observations



Note:     Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Each equation also
          contains age, race, schooling, marital status, number of children,
          industry, occupation, and location as control variables. Sex is
          also included as a control in the PSID; labor force size and local
          unemployment rates are included in the NLS. The samples are
          restricted to persons covered by pensions. Turnover consists of
          quits, layoffs, and separations caused by other factors such as
          strikes or the end of a temporary job.
