                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             PERCEPTION OF HOUSE PRICE RISK AND HOMEOWNERSHIP

                                       Manuel Adelino
                                       Antoinette Schoar
                                        Felipe Severino

                                      Working Paper 25090
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25090


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2018




We thank Steven Deggendorf at Fannie Mae for access to the survey data used in this paper. We
also thank Andrea Eisfeldt, Andreas Fuster, Charlie Nathanson (discussant), Christopher Palmer,
Judie Ricks (discussant), Basit Zafar (discussant), Eric Zwick (discussant) as well as seminar
participants at the Third CFPB Research Conference on Consumer Finance, NBER Real Estate
(Summer 2018), NYU (Stern), Oxford (Saïd), SITE Summer Workshop on Financial Regulation,
Yale/RFS “Financial Crisis Ten Years Afterwards” conference and the WFA 2018 for comments.
Zaki Dernaoui and Jiantao Huang provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Manuel Adelino, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Perception of House Price Risk and Homeownership
Manuel Adelino, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino
NBER Working Paper No. 25090
September 2018
JEL No. G01,G4

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the importance of household perceptions of house price risk in explaining
homeownership choice. While a majority of US households (71%) believes that housing is a
“safe” investment, renters are much more likely to perceive housing as risky. Risk perceptions
vary across demographic groups, but significant differences persist after controlling for
observables, such as income, savings, or location. Current housing decisions and future intentions
to buy versus rent are strongly correlated with perceptions of house price risk. Households’
exposure to housing risk due to financial constraints, expected mobility or labor income risk
affect the decision to buy versus rent but do not mitigate the impact of risk perceptions on
housing choices. Finally, we show that all households update their beliefs about the riskiness of
housing in response to past (local) house price changes, but renters are much slower to update
than owners. Since renters’ decisions to buy are especially sensitive to their perception of house
price risk, it might explain their delayed entry into home ownership during a house price run-up
and even prolong the housing cycle.

Manuel Adelino                                  Felipe Severino
Fuqua School of Business                        Tuck School of Business
Duke University                                 Dartmouth College
100 Fuqua Drive                                 100 Tuck Hall
Durham, NC 27708                                Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER                                        felipe.severino@tuck.dartmouth.edu
manuel.adelino@duke.edu

Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu
There is growing consensus that beliefs play an important role in explaining house price dynamics
and the recent housing boom and bust cycles. Several influential studies have highlighted the
importance of beliefs in explaining key stylized facts of the housing market: House prices display
significant momentum (going back to the seminal paper by Case and Shiller (1989); or Guren
(2016)), have mean reversion at longer horizons (Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1991) or Glaeser
(2013)), excess variance relative to fundamentals (Glaeser, Gyourko and Saiz (2008), Head,
Lloyd-Ellis and Sun (2014)), and finally that households seem to extrapolate price expectations
from past changes in house prices (Case and Shiller (2003) or Case et al (2012). 1


The existing empirical literature on belief formation about house prices has focused predominantly
on how households form expectations about average returns but has paid much less attention to
the second moment of returns, households’ perceptions of house price risk. Yet many models of
portfolio choice highlight that housing risk is a key input in the household optimization problem
and the decision about whether to buy or rent (Heaton and Lucas (2000), Campbell and Cocco
(2003), or Cocco (2005)). They emphasize the special status of housing risk due to the non-
divisibility and illiquidity of this asset. This paucity of prior analysis about risk perceptions of
housing is largely driven by lack of available data.


In this paper we aim to complement the existing literature on house price expectations. We
document the importance that household perceptions of house price risk play in explaining housing
choices and intentions to buy versus rent and how these risk perceptions interact with expectations.
The results are based on a new, nationally representative housing survey of more than 50,000
households between 2010 and 2016 from Fannie Mae. We first show in the cross-section that there
are significant differences in how households perceive the riskiness of an investment in housing.
Older and richer people are significantly less likely to perceive housing as risky relative to younger
and lower income respondents, and more educated people also see housing as less risky, but even
conditioning on household characteristics there are significant differences in the perception of
house price risk.


1
 For the role of expectations in the recent crisis see for example Gerardi, Lehnert, Sherlund and Willen (2009),
Glaeser, Gottlieb and Gyourko (2013), Shiller (2013), Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2015), Adelino, Schoar and
Severino (2016, 2017)).



                                                                                                                   2
We can allay concerns that households’ answers about housing risk are driven by differences in
(risk) preference parameters, since perceptions of housing risk are not correlated with households’
views of the riskiness of other securities such as stocks, mutual funds or bonds. In fact, a large
majority of households (about 71%) view an investment in housing as safe (consistent with a high
share found across cities in Case and Shiller (2003)). Even shortly after the financial crisis in 2011,
66% of households perceived housing as safe. In contrast, only 18% of respondents consider stocks
a safe investment, and 55% of respondents consider (government and corporate) bonds safe. If
household weighted these risk assessments by their underlying risk preferences, we should see
more alignment in the rank ordering of the different securities within households. In addition, we
show that answers about the perception of housing risk are not just a proxy for one-year or 5-year
ahead mean house price expectations.


Second, this heterogeneity in risk perceptions across the population translates into differences in
revealed housing choices: People who perceive housing as risky are much more likely (about 12
percent) to be renters than owners, even conditional on their geographic location (including zip
code fixed effects), income, level of savings and future job prospects. The difference in risk
perception between renters and homeowners is about 13-14 percentage points, or about 20 percent
of the mean share who consider housing safe. Here again, we do not find differences in the risk
assessment of renters and owners towards stocks or bonds. We also show that demographic
characteristics like income, age, job stability are all strongly correlated with the choice to rent
versus buy, as would be predicted by theory, but controlling for these demographic characteristics
does not change the coefficient on housing risk.


Earlier papers have also highlighted that a household’s time horizon in a location should affect the
trade-off between house price versus rental price risk, see Sinai and Souleles (2005). To address
this question, we look at factors that influence horizon such as labor income risk and expected
mobility. We find that these factors have a direct effect on the decision to rent versus own, e.g.
households who plan to move soon are more likely to rent. But these are largely orthogonal to the
role of risk perceptions on past housing choice. In addition, we find that the perception of house
price risk is correlated with local house price volatility but not with rental price volatility. Taken



                                                                                                     3
together, our results suggest that disagreement between households about the risk of housing plays
an important role in their decisions about housing choices even after controlling for differences in
the exposure to risk.


In a third step, we show that beliefs about the risk of housing are strongly related not just with past
housing choice (revealed preferences), but also with stated intentions about buying versus renting
in the future. People who believe that housing is risky are much more likely to state that they would
rent, not buy, in their next move, again controlling for all demographics, house price expectations
and measures of financial constraints. However, we find an interesting asymmetry between home
owners and renters in how house prices expectations affect the rent versus buy decision. For the
sample of home owners, we find that the intention to buy versus rent in their next move varies
significantly with both perceptions of housing risk and house price expectations. In contrast, for
renters we find that the decision to rent versus buy is significantly affected by their perception of
housing risk but not by house price expectations. It is important to note, while renters are very
different from owners in their perception of housing risk, they have similar one-year ahead house
price growth estimates. These results suggest that while current home owners weigh both risk and
expected price changes when making house purchase choices, for renters their risk perception is
the predominant factor in the buy versus rent decision.


Finally, we analyze how perceptions about risk respond to past house prices. The share of
households who perceive housing as risky co-moves strongly with past local house price changes
and local house price volatility measures, i.e. beliefs about house price risk extrapolate from recent
experience, parallel to what has been shown for house price expectations (Nagel (2012), Kuchler
and Zafar (2017)). Interestingly, households update much more slowly about the riskiness of
housing than about one-year ahead house price changes. Lagged house prices even three years
prior to the survey still correlate strongly with perceived riskiness of housing. In contrast, house
price expectations only correlate with house prices lagged one year. In fact, respondents from
areas that were most affected by the financial crisis of 2007/08 are also more likely to classify
housing as risky than those living in areas that experienced small price drops. However, we do not
find the same long-term effects on house price expectations: households in areas more affected by
the financial crisis do not have consistently lower house price expectations years later, if anything



                                                                                                     4
we find that they have higher house price expectations; possibly in line with the idea that these
areas are due for a rebound in prices. In contrast, renters update more slowly about the riskiness
of housing (based on past house price movements) than owners, but they extrapolate about 12-
month house price changes from past prices similarly to owners (a result that is also consistent
with Kuchler and Zafar (2017)).


Our results suggest that cross sectional differences in the perceptions about housing risk are
centrally important in explaining observed housing choices and intentions to buy versus rent. In
addition, different groups seem to update differently about the risk of housing when the housing
market improves. Since renters are slower to change their perception that housing is risky in
response to past house price increases, they might also come into the market to buy houses at later
points in time. Given the stylized facts of price momentum and medium-term price reversal in the
housing market, the adaptive nature by which these households update, might make them more
vulnerable to buying close to the peak of a bubble and those being hurt by a housing downturn.
This dynamic in belief formation could explain why some sets of buyers enter the market at more
adverse times and potentially prolong a market upturns, as suggested by Piazzezi and Schneider
(2009).


One concern about the analysis above is that any study of household perceptions of risk has to rely
on survey measures from household responses. As Manski (2004, 2017) points out, significant
progress has been made in the development of survey instruments to elicit probabilistic
expectations. While this allows for direct measurement of the standard deviation of expected house
price changes, there is an inherent tradeoff between the simplicity of a question (which makes it
more likely to be well understood by respondents) and a question’s accuracy. The question used
in the Fannie Mae survey deliberately uses a simple formulation that asks households to assess
whether an investment in housing is risky (with a similar formulation to a question used in Case
and Shiller (2003)). In order to see if these answers match up with a measure of risk based on the
second moment a distribution of expectations, we repeat our main regressions using a housing
survey conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York which explicitly elicits a household’s
perception of the distribution of prices. We find that our main results are confirmed in this data:
households that give a wider distribution of house prices are more likely to rent than buy. In



                                                                                                 5
addition, we also conducted a separate (online) survey using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk tool,
which shows that households who assess housing as risky also perceive the house price distribution
as more skewed toward the left tail. While online surveys are naturally more difficult to interpret
due to the anonymous nature of the participants, the results suggest that the perception of housing
risk is related to the left tail of the distribution of expected prices.


Our results contribute to a series of recent papers that provide theories of home price expectations
that rely on extrapolation of expectations from past house price growth (Case, Shiller and
Thompson (2012), Barberis (2013), Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2015), Glaeser and Nathanson
(2017), and DeFusco, Nathanson and Zwick (2017)). Heterogeneity in beliefs can have important
implication for the propagation of shocks in the housing market, if the most optimistic agents in
the market can disproportionately express the intensity of their beliefs, see for example
Geanakopulous (1997) or Piazzesi and Schneider (2009), or Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo
(2016)).


Previous work has shown that expectations about mean house price appreciation extrapolate from
past local house price changes (Case and Shiller (1988, 2003), Nagel (2012), Kuchler and Zafar
(2017)), as well as from experiences of their social network (Bailey, Cao, Kuchler and Stroebel
(2017)). Makridis (2017) shows that attitudes towards the economy similarly track local economic
shocks. Armona, Fuster and Zafar (2017) show that mean house price expectations impact
hypothetical investment allocations as well as future purchase and sale decisions, and Bailey, Cao,
Kuchler and Stroebel (2017) find that transitions from renting to owning are related to the
experiences of individuals’ social networks. Homeowners also typically underestimate the year-
to-year house price increases, do not expect mean reversion (Armona, Fuster and Zafar (2017)),
and forecast errors are auto-correlated (Case, Shiller and Thompson (2012), and Coibion and
Gorodnichenko (2012), who confirm a similar pattern for inflation expectations).


Our findings are also consistent with recent behavioral models that create overshooting of
expectations. Bordalo, Gennaioli and Shleifer (2012) suggest that a household that operates with
a representativeness heuristic may, in fact, neglect downside risk as the upside becomes ever more
salient. Glaeser and Nathanson (2015) produce similar dynamics of expected house price risk in a



                                                                                                  6
model where households update based on a “naïve” rule which attributes all increases in house
prices to fundamental demand rather than speculation.


The rest of the paper proceeds as follows; we first describe the data and analyze the cross-sectional
differences in risk perceptions. The next two sections lay out the role of risk perceptions on the
choice to buy versus rent, and the interaction with household mobility. And finally, we document
how household update their perception of housing risk based on past experiences. Section 6
concludes.


1. Data


The data for this paper come primarily from the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey. The survey
is a nationally representative live telephone survey of approximately 1,000 individuals per month
(on average, just under 900 interviews per month have usable data). We use data from interviews
conducted between January of 2010 and March of 2016. The survey covers both owners and renters
(unlike, for example, Case and Shiller (1988) and Case, Shiller and Thompson (2012)) and
includes over 100 questions. The survey is the basis of the Home Purchase Sentiment Index
published monthly by Fannie Mae researchers. We use several demographic characteristics
available in the survey (including geography, homeownership status, income, age, education,
among others), as well as questions relating to: (i) expectations about future house price
appreciation; (ii) attitudes towards housing and other assets; (iii) intentions about buying and
renting; (iv) recent and expected future mobility; and (iv) personal financial situation. We list all
questions used in our analysis in Appendix 1 and discuss each in detail when we describe the
results.


We also use data from the NY Fed Housing Survey of Consumer Expectations to confirm the
results on how perceived risk relates to housing choice. The NY Fed survey covers the time period
from 2013 to 2018, but is significantly smaller with only about 8,500 participants in total with
answers to the relevant questions for our paper. The benefit of this survey for our purposes is that
it asks an explicit question about the expected distribution of house prices, which allows us to




                                                                                                   7
construct a measure of households’ risk assessment based on the reported second moment and also
skewness and kurtosis.


In addition, we conducted an online survey using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform. The
questionnaire is designed to elicit an expected distribution of one-year-ahead house price changes,
as well as the risk perception question available in the Fannie Mae survey. The survey helps us
relate the stated distributions with the risk perception question. The survey includes ten questions
about individuals’ age, income, geographical location, and gender, to be able to obtain the main
controls available on the Fannie Mae survey. The participants were offered a monetary
compensation of two dollars per survey and the study was conducted during July of 2018. The
filters for recruiting survey participants restricted users based on their location (USA users only),
as well as based on historical performance at Mechanical Turk tasks, specifically HIT (Human
Intelligence Task) Approval Rate greater than or equal to 99% and at least 500 completed HITs.
The exact questionnaire is available in the Online Appendix (Table A7).


House price data comes from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (for state-level house prices)
and from Zillow (for ZIP code-level prices).


1.1 Summary Statistics


We show summary statistics in Table 1. We list the text of all questions used in the paper as well
as the possible answers for each question in Appendix 1. The number of observations shown in
the last column of Table 1 corresponds to the number of non-missing observations for each variable
and all statistics and regressions are weighted by the sample weights. The median age in the sample
is 44 years, with about 25% of the sample below 30 years and 17% over 60 years of age. The
income cutoffs are $35,000 for the bottom tercile and $75,000 at the top of the second tercile.
Approximately 33% of respondents are renters, with a share that reaches 36% by 2015. Just over
50% of respondents have a college degree, about two thirds of the sample is white, and 30% is
black or Latino (both grouped under “minority” in the table). 20% of owners moved in the three
years prior to the survey, and about 20% of the sample is located in sand states. The statistics are




                                                                                                   8
broadly consistent with demographic data for the United States as a whole (see, for example, the
American Community Survey for a comparison). 2


Panel B of Table 1 includes the main outcomes of interest for our paper. The first eight rows of
the table refer to expectations about house prices obtained in the survey. The survey starts by
asking respondents whether they think house prices are likely to go up, down, or stay the same. It
then asks by how much respondents believe house prices will go up or down (only for those
respondents who do not answer “stay the same”). We impute a value of 0 for this last category
when we create the continuous measure of house price expectations. These correspond to questions
15-17 listed in Appendix 1.


In 2011, about 50% of respondents thought house prices would stay the same over the subsequent
12 months. This share goes down over time to about 39% in 2015. Also in 2011, 21% of
respondents say they think house prices will go down. This share also drops to 8% by 2015. This
reflects improving housing market conditions, and closely tracks recent experience in different
states, as we will discuss in more detail in Section 3. Overall, respondents believe house prices
will go up by about 1.7% over the subsequent 12 months. This reflects a combination of those who
think house prices will stay about the same (who receive a value of 0), and the expectations
conditional on house prices going up or down. An important part of the variation in average
expected home price appreciation over time comes from changes in the share of responses in each
of the three categories “prices will stay the same”, “down” and “up”, so we use both the continuous
measure and the indicator variables in the tables below. We also show the absolute value of the
expectation error, where the expectation error is computed as the difference between forward-
looking actual 12-month house price changes at the state level and the continuous measure of
house price expectations. This number hovers around 6 to 8% over our sample period.


We next show summary statistics for the “risk” and “potential” questions for housing and stocks
as investments. These correspond to questions 75-76 listed in Appendix 1. When asked about
whether they view an investment in housing as safe or risky, 71% of households answer that they
believe housing is a safe investment. This share reaches a minimum of 66% in 2011 and rises to

2
    Statistics available at https://factfinder.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/searchresults.xhtml?refresh=t


                                                                                                              9
75% by 2015. The response to the question about housing is in stark contrast to the views about
the riskiness of stocks, where only 18% of respondents believe they are a safe investment. The
perception of risk for stocks also moves over the business cycle, with a minimum of 15% saying
stocks are safe in 2011 and a maximum of 19% by 2015. The share of respondents who believe
housing is safe is close in magnitude to the results in Case and Shiller (1988, 2003), where over
50% of respondents considered that buying a home had “little” or “no risk” in boom markets
(Anaheim and San Francisco), and in all markets analyzed in that paper less than 6% of
respondents believed buying a home had a “great deal” of risk.


At the same time as respondents are asked about the riskiness of these asset classes, they are also
asked about the potential (of future appreciation) for the same asset classes. 61% believe that
housing has potential, with this share again moving year-to-year with recent house price
appreciation. About 69% of respondents believe stocks have potential.


Panel B of Table 1 also shows a variety of mobility and personal finance-related variables used in
the analysis. In our sample, about 40% of households plan on moving soon, where “soon” is
defined as the subsequent three years. This share is stable in the survey years, but the survey only
starts collecting answers to this question in 2012. When asked whether they were likely to buy or
rent a home if they were to move, 70% of respondents say they would buy.


In addition to the income question described above, the survey includes additional direct measures
of personal financial situation specifically geared towards capturing distress. These include asking
about the difficulty that households believe they would have in obtaining a mortgage (question 22
listed in Appendix 1), as well as questions about sufficient savings (question 111), sufficient
income (question 112), and current ability to make payments on debt (question 109). 56% of
respondents say they would have difficulty obtaining a mortgage in 2011, a number that drops to
47 percent by 2015, reflecting the overall trend in credit access during this period. Similarly, almost
1/3 of households were stressed to pay their debts in 2010 and 2011, dropping to about 26% of
them were in 2015. Only about 5% of respondents say they would consider defaulting on their
mortgage even at the peak of distress in the housing market in 2010 and 2011.




                                                                                                    10
We show summary statistics of the Mechanical Turk survey in Table A1 of the Online Appendix.
As we would expect given this is an online survey, respondents are generally younger and are more
likely to be renters relative to those on the Fannie Mae survey. Panel B of Table A1 shows average
shares assigned by respondents to each bin of house price changes.


2. Cross-sectional differences in attitudes towards risk


We now analyze how perceptions of housing risk vary across the population and compare attitudes
about housing to those about stocks and bonds. Table 2, Panel A shows how attitudes towards risk
and potential for housing varies with household characteristics and juxtapose the results with the
perception of risk of stocks. In panel B we analyze how house price expectations differ across the
population. We correlate the answers on riskiness of housing and on price expectations with
household demographics, controlling for year and state fixed effects to isolate the cross sectional
variation. We also cluster standard errors by state and year to capture potential cross-sectional and
time series correlations in the data.


Panel A of Table 2 shows the results when the survey asks about the risk of housing as an
investment, where we see large differences in the cross-section of survey respondents. Higher
income individuals perceive housing as significantly safer than low-income individuals (10
percentage points for the middle income tercile and 14 percentage points at the top). Similarly,
older respondents are much more likely to consider housing safe than younger ones (by 13
percentage points relative to the youngest category of under-30). We also find that college-
educated respondents consider housing less risky. These results might reflect the personal
experiences households had in the housing market, since older individuals might have experienced
less turbulence in the housing market over the long run, while younger people might be particularly
affected by the memory of recent house price shocks in the US housing market. Similarly, richer
and more educated people might find it easier to navigate the risks of housing market. This
interpretation is reminiscent of recent work that highlights the importance of personal experiences
for updating beliefs, see Malmendier and Nagel (2016).




                                                                                                  11
When asked about the future potential of housing as an investment, we find that there are small
differences along the income dimension (although they are not monotonic), older individuals see
lower potential in housing as an investment relative to the youngest category, and renters are also
close to two percentage points less optimistic along this dimension. Male respondents are 5
percentage points more likely to say housing has potential relative to women.


In the last two columns of Table 2, Panel A, we repeat the same analysis for households’ perception
about the riskiness and potential of stocks. Stocks provide an important comparison to housing as
an investment and it also allows us to observe if those demographic groups who are concerned
about the risk of housing are also concerned about risks in other asset classes. We see that the
responses about the riskiness of stocks are very different from housing. There are essentially no
differences in the perception of risk by income level of the respondents. Similarly, there are few
differences along the age dimension, although individuals over 60 years are about five percentage
points more likely to think stocks are safe investment relative to the other age groups. There are
large differences in the perception of future appreciation potential for stocks. This perception
increases with income and decreases very strongly with age. Finally, college-educated respondents
are seven percentage points more likely to answer that stocks have potential. We view this as
evidence that the differences between the groups are not about risk aversion, but rather about
differences in perception that are specific to housing as an asset class.


Panel B of Table 2 shows that the share of individuals who consider housing is risky relates to
local volatility measures. Across both the figures using state-level data (Figure 1 and Figure A1),
as well as in Table 2 using county-level measures of volatility, we find that perception of risk is
related to local volatility measures of house price growth. We also find that the perception of
owners is more strongly related to local volatility than that of renters, and that neither group seems
sensitive to local rental price volatility.


In Table A2 of the online appendix we look at house price expectations across different
demographic groups. We find that differences by age and income are generally not monotonic and
not always consistent across specifications, similar to the findings in in Kuchler and Zafar (2017).
College educated and minority respondents are somewhat optimistic relative to the baseline. These



                                                                                                   12
results suggest that the same demographic groups that shows very different perceptions of housing
risk have less disagreement about expected house price appreciation.


2.1 Risk perception and average one-year ahead expectations


In order to characterize in more detail how perceptions of risk correlate with 12-month
expectations about mean return to confirm that household answers about riskiness are not just a
proxy for house price expectations. In Table 3 we see that responses about one-year ahead mean
house price expectations have low correlation with perceived risk. In this table the main variable
of interest is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for households who believe housing is a risky
investment, and 0 otherwise. The risk dummy is associated with slightly lower average expected
house price changes, and with 5% more households believing prices will drop. Conditional on
believing house prices will drop, respondents who think housing is risky believe they will drop by
about one percentage point more. There is also an effect of 0.4 percentage points on the upside,
and 4% fewer households believe house prices will increase. Panel B shows that differences are in
the same direction, but smaller in magnitude, when we consider 5-year ahead expectations,
confirming that the measure risk is also not just a proxy for long term expectations about average
returns.


3. Risk perceptions of renters versus owners


To understand how risk perceptions affect actual choices in the housing market we now analyze
the difference in the answers about the riskiness of an investment in housing and price expectations
between owners and renters. Figures 1-3 show differences between owners and renters in their risk
perception sorted within age and income bins. Figure 2 shows the share of renters and owners who
consider housing a risky investment. Panels A and B show that across all income and age groups
renters are much more likely to perceive housing as risky than owners. There are also strong age
and income effects, with a lower share of high income and older respondents perceiving housing
as risky, which is in line with the results in Table 2 above. Panel C shows the difference between




                                                                                                  13
Panels A and B. We find a 10-20 percentage point difference between renters and owners in the
share that believe housing is a risky investment across all age and income bins.


Figure 3 shows differences between renters and owners in their perception of the risk of an
investment in housing, stocks and bonds. While we saw above that renters are much more likely
to consider housing risky than owners, this is not the case for stocks. In fact, across all income and
age bins, renters and owners look similar in their assessment of the risk of stocks. Similarly, they
also do not differ much (economically) when asked about the risk of bonds as an investment. This
result again supports the idea that there is something special about the evaluation of the risk of
housing, and that the differences we find are not just due to renters being more risk averse, lower
income, or younger than owners.


There are also marked differences between the assessment of the risk of housing and expectations
about one-year ahead house price growth. Consistent with the findings in Kuchler and Zafar
(2017), and unlike the results for risk, we find that renters and owners make similar predictions
about future house price increases, and that this holds even within fine income and age bins (Figure
4).


3.1. Past housing choice and the perception of risk of housing


One concern in interpreting the figures above could be that renters and homeowners are different
along other dimensions, in particular renters are more likely to be constrained, and thus more likely
not to be able to purchase a home (as opposed to choosing not to buy). In this section we analyze
if the conditional differences in the risk perception of renters help to explain the choice of not
owning a home.


We start by establishing that renters are different from homeowners in ways that match the findings
in the previous literature. Table A4 shows that renters on average have significantly lower income
than homeowners, a well-known cross-sectional fact and consistent with theories of limited
enforcement and collateral constraints (Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009) and Rampini and
Viswanathan (2013)). In addition, renters are younger and minorities are 8 percentage points more



                                                                                                   14
likely to be renters. In Column 2 we show that renters are 32% more likely to say they expect to
move soon and Columns 3, 4 and 5 use measures of household financial distress and relate them
to homeownership. In line with the results on income, all three measures are very strongly related
to homeownership status, as respondents who are stressed to pay their debts, have insufficient
savings, or are concerned about their jobs are all more likely to be renters.


Table 4 regresses homeownership status on demographic characteristics and a dummy for whether
the household perceives housing as risky. The results show that perceptions about housing risk are
strongly related to the choice to be a homeowner or a renter, conditional on all the observables
used in Table 2. In Column 1 we see that individuals who consider housing risky are 11 percentage
points more likely to be renters than owners (relative to a mean of 33% of respondents who are
renters). Columns 2 and 3 control for the perception about the riskiness of stocks and we see that
the answer to this question does not help explain housing choice. The estimated coefficient on the
dummy for whether stocks are risky is zero and statistically not significant. This result again
confirms that concerns about the riskiness of housing is not just an expression of the general risk
aversion of the household.


We add further controls in Columns 4 and 5 about the personal finances of the household in
addition to the demographic baseline controls included in columns 1 and 2. The idea is to control
for any variables that proxy for household financial and economic situation and thus could explain
homeownership choices and also be related to the perception of housing risk. More financially
constrained households or those concerned about the stability of their job are more likely to be
renters than owners, but the inclusion of these variables does not significantly alter the role of
perception of housing risk in explaining homeownership status. Even though renters are different
along a number of dimensions, and are much more likely to be constrained, have lower income
and less wealth, even conditional on these differences their perception of the riskiness of an
investment in housing is still higher than that of homeowners.


In the sixth column of Table 4 we add interactions of the type of job of respondents (split into 7
categories given in Appendix 1 under q133) with the share of employment in a county in non-
tradable industries (classified as NAICS codes 44-45 and 72). This means that we estimate the role



                                                                                                15
of risk perception within types of jobs, as well as controlling flexibly for the county-level share of
employment in non-tradable industries separately for each type of jobs. The correlation of labor
income with housing returns is an important element in homeownership choice (Cocco (2005) and
Davidoff (2006)), so we want to rule out that our results on renters and owners reflects differences
in how labor income of the two groups relate to housing. The results show that, even controlling
flexibly for types of jobs, the perception of the risk of an investment in housing still separates
renters and owners in the cross-section.


Finally, in the last column of the table we also control for house price expectations. The results are
unchanged: The coefficient on the indicator variable of housing risk is large and significant, while
the coefficient on house price expectations is generally insignificant. Table A3 includes more
detailed regressions relating one-year ahead expectations with homeownership status, including
with controls for measures of financial constraints.


3.2. Perception of risk and elicited probability distribution


As an additional validation of the difference in risk perceptions between renters and owners we
show in Panel B of Table 4 that renters and owners differ in the standard deviation of one-year
ahead house rice changes using the Survey of Consumer Expectations run by the New York
Federal Reserve Bank (the “NY Fed survey”) described in the data section above. Since the NY
Fed survey elicits the full house price distribution from respondents, we can compute the second
through fourth moments of this distribution. As in Table 4 Panel A, we regress current
homeownership status on these measures. We find that households that report a higher standard
deviation of one-year ahead changes are more likely to be renters. Similarly, households who
perceive the house price distribution as more skewed tend to own. In the last two columns we
control for house price expectations and find that the cross-sectional choice of being an owner
versus renter is not correlated with this variable.


In addition, we conduct a separate online survey to directly relate the question about perception of
risk with the full distribution of expected one-year returns. We describe the data in more detail in
data section above. We show in Table A1 (Panel C) of the online appendix that respondents who



                                                                                                   16
believe housing is risky put more probability on prices dropping in the next 12 months (consistent
with the results in Table 3), as well as on the possibility that prices will rise more than 4% (although
this result is not significant). We plot a more detailed distribution in Figure A2. Panel D of Table
A1 shows that there are no differences in mean expectations, but there are weak (and insignificant
with a t-stat of 1.2) differences in the standard deviation of house price changes across respondents
who believe housing is risky and those who believe housing is safe.


3.3. Intention to buy or rent


In the previous section we document that perceptions about the risk of an investment in housing
are important in explaining revealed housing choices. In this section we now analyze the relation
between future intentions to buy and rent, and expectations of appreciation and risk of the survey
respondents. While actual choice data is generally preferable to stated intentions (Manski (2017)),
we do not track the same respondents over time (i.e., our data is not a panel but a representative
repeated cross-section), so we cannot relate past survey answers to future choices. However, the
survey does elicit answers to questions about a household’s future stated intentions to buy or rent.


The main outcome of interest for this subsection is a question that asks whether respondents would
be more likely to buy or rent if they were to move now (question 31 in Appendix 1). This question
is posed to all respondents, irrespective of whether they are currently owners or renters. Figure 5
shows that both owners and renters are significantly more likely to say they want to rent than buy
if they consider housing a risky investment, within income tercile and age quartile bins. The gap
is somewhat larger in magnitude for renters, but it is also on the order of 10-20 percentage points
for owners.


Panel A of Table 5 shows that individuals who say that housing is risky investment are 14
percentage points less likely to say that they want to buy in the next move. This magnitude is very
significant since it explains almost half of the difference in the likelihood of wanting to rent versus
buy. Similarly, we find that households who think housing has potential are seven percentage
points more likely to want to buy. In column (3) we also include the forward-looking 12-month
expected house price changes as an explanatory variable. When included by itself, we find that a



                                                                                                     17
one percentage point higher12-month expectation about housing prices is related to a 0.1% higher
likelihood of intending to buy. Similarly, a belief that house prices will go down over the next 12
months is related with a two-percentage point lower likelihood of intending to buy. As in all other
tables, these results are conditional on the respondent characteristics shown in Table 2.


When we include both perceived risk of housing and expectations about the short-term
appreciation in column 5, we find that one-year ahead expectations about mean appreciation have
a reduced explanatory power for future intentions than responses about perception of risk. . This
is consistent with households’ perception of the risk and potential of an investment in housing as
a more relevant feature of their decision-making than short-term expectations about house price
growth. When we add other controls for financial constraints in Table 5 column 6, we again find
that risk and potential matter by themselves, and that there is a more limited role for short-term
expectations to explain the buy versus rent decisions in the future. Furthermore, the coefficient on
risk does not change after we control for long-term potential, which we interpret as evidence that
“perception of risk” is capturing the second moment of house price returns.


Panel B shows that perception of risk and potential matters for owners and renters similarly in their
intention to buy, although point estimates are slightly larger for renters. Forward looking
expectations have a stronger correlation with future intentions for owners than renters. Taken
together, these results imply that while renters and owners have starkly different views about the
riskiness of housing on average, conditional on their beliefs, risk perceptions feed similarly into
intentions to purchase homes in the future, whereas owners seem to also weigh mean future
expecations.


3.4. Mobility


One possible interpretation of the results on the risk perception of housing is that we are not fully
taking into account how the risk perception of respondents depends on their future expected
mobility and on the relevant risks that different households be subject to. This point is developed
in detail in Sinai and Souleles (2005). In that paper, housing provides a hedge against fluctuations
in housing cost, but has asset price risk. On the other hand, renting exposes households to changes



                                                                                                  18
in housing costs, but not price risk. Sinai and Souleles (2005) show that the risk of owning declines
with household expected horizon in a home. We address this issue directly in Table 6 using data
on expected mobility for both homeowners and renters, as well as the past mobility of owners we
do not have data on past mobility of renters).


When we look at expectations about future mobility, we find that, consistent with the argument in
Sinai and Souleles (2005), renters are much more likely to expect to move in the next five years.
We still find, however, that perception of risk is strongly associated with rental, and the interaction
of expected mobility and perception of risk is insignificant and close to zero, suggesting that it is
not just the higher expected mobility of renters that leads to their higher perception of risk.


We also consider the recency with which owners moved into their current home. This analysis
speaks to the results in Case and Shiller (1988, 2003), who focus on recent homebuyers. We do
not find that recent owners differ markedly from those that purchased their homes a longer time
ago, as the timing of an owner’s move does not seem to be associated with a higher likelihood of
intending to rent, and the recency of a move also does not interact with perception of risk in
predicting future intentions.


4. Recent experience and updating about risk


In this section we consider the role of recent house price experiences on both future house price
expectations, as well as attitudes towards the risk and potential of housing and stocks. We start by
relating the answers about housing risk and potential to past 12-month state-level house price
changes. This analysis follows the prior literature which has shown that house price expectations
seem to be adaptive and are influenced by past house price changes. The results in Table 7, Panel
A show that attitudes towards housing risk are strongly related with the prior local housing market
experience. A one percentage point change in local house prices over the previous 12 months is
associated with a drop of 0.28% in the share of individuals who believe housing is risky. But even
house price changes two and three years prior still have a strong effect on risk perceptions; there
is still an 18% drop in the percentage of households that believe housing is risky based on state
level house price three years ago. In column 2, we regress the potential of housing on lagged house



                                                                                                    19
prices, and again we find that prices several years ago still affect the view about the upside of
housing. Three year lagged house prices have a positive and significant effect for the fraction of
households that perceive housing as having potential, and positive but insignificant effects of the
more recent lags.


These results suggest that updating about the riskiness of housing follows a relatively slow moving,
adaptive process where even house price expectations three years ago influence today’s perception
of risk. In fact, in Table A5 of the online appendix, we also show that households who went through
the worst house price drops during the financial crisis still perceive housing as riskier during our
sample period than those households who were less affected by the crisis. In columns 3 and 4 of
Table 7 we also show that renters seem to update more slowly about the risk of housing in response
to house prices than owners. We find that the risk attitude of renters moves less with the house
price experience over the previous 12 months than that of owners (although the difference is not
statistically significant when we include all households in one regression with interactions), but it
reacts similarly to experiences farther in the past (the third lag in particular). These findings are
suggestive that different groups in the economy update differentially about the riskiness of
housing, and potentially with it about the likelihood that they might engage in a move or house
purchase. This is consistent with the patterns in Figure 6, Panel B where we show that the aggregate
renter perception of risk reacts more slowly to house price changes than that of homeowners. This
may be due to inattention on the part of renters, which leads them to react with a longer lag to
recent movements. We return to this point below when we discuss expectation errors.


In Panel B of Table 7 we now repeat the same set of regressions using house price expectations as
the dependent variable. There is recent evidence by Kuchler and Zafar (2017) that house price
expectations co-move with local lagged house price appreciation, and we obtain similar results in
Panel B of Table 7. A one percentage point increase in state-level house prices is associated with
a 0.18% increase in the expectations over the subsequent 12 months. However, we see that house
price expectation are mainly correlated with one year lagged house prices, and that the coefficients
on two and three year lagged prices are zero and not significant. These results suggest that
expectations about mean returns adapt more quickly in response to house price changes than risk
perceptions. When we unpack the expectations about mean returns, we see that lagged appreciation



                                                                                                  20
very strongly changes the share of respondents that believe house prices will either stay the same,
go up, or go down. A 1% increase in local house prices leads to a 1.4% increase in the share of
respondents that believe house prices will increase, and a simultaneous reduction in both the share
who believe prices will go down (of about 0.78%) and the share of those who think prices will
remain flat. This evidence is consistent with the extrapolative expectations hypothesis that has
been linked to household behavior before the housing crisis, namely in Barberis (2013), Gennaioli,
Shleifer and Vishny (2015), and Glaeser and Nathanson (2015). Columns 4 and 5 of Panel B
generally shows very small (and insignificant) differences across renters and owners, in the
adaptive nature of house price expectations of households


4.1. Expectation errors


One question that emerges from the previous tests is whether the different risk attitudes are related
to differences in the ability or desire of households to understand house price behavior, and, more
generally, their attention to local housing markets. In our final set of results we consider both time
series and cross-sectional evidence on the relation between expectations about future house prices
and realizations. In Table A6 we focus on a regression of realized forward-looking 12 month state-
level house price changes on the continuous measure of expectations from the survey. We find that
there is a positive relationship on average between the two, but we lose statistical significance
when we include both year and state fixed effects. A similar picture emerges when we use ZIP
Code level house prices instead (Panel A, columns 5-8). Panel B of Table A6 considers how
expectation errors vary in the cross-section with both beliefs about risk and potential and
respondent characteristics. We use as the dependent variable the absolute value of the expectation
error measured as the difference between realized house price appreciation over the subsequent 12
months and the continuous measure of house price changes. We find that respondents that believe
housing is risky tend to make systematically larger prediction errors than those who believe
housing is safe




                                                                                                   21
6. Conclusion


This paper analyzes how households’ perception of house price risk relates to housing choices and
future intentions to rent versus buy. Consistent with previous research, in particular Case and
Shiller (1988, 2003), we show that households in the United States tend to view housing as a safe
investment (71% of respondents); a much higher fraction than the proportion of individuals who
believe stocks or bonds are safe. We show that perceptions of housing risk are important to explain
revealed housing choices. Households which perceive housing as risky are more likely to be renters
than owners. Similarly, respondents are much more likely to want to rent in the future if their
believe housing is risky. These findings are not affected when we control for labor market exposure
or the expected mobility of households. The relevance of housing risk for the decision to buy or
rent is consistent with models of household portfolio choice with housing (such as Campbell and
Cocco (2003) and Cocco (2005)), whereby higher perceptions of the second moment of housing
returns should lead to a smaller allocation of wealth towards housing.
We also show that households update their perception of housing risk in response to past house
price increases, but there is an asymmetry between renters and owners in how fast they adjust
beliefs about house price risk. Renters respond to past house price increases only with a lag of
several years, while owners are more quickly to consider housing as safe when house prices go up.
This difference in the speed of updating may explain why renters may enter home ownership later
in the housing cycle, possibly prolonging boom periods, as suggested by Piazzesi and Schneider
(2009) or Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2016). Furthermore, if households update their
perception of housing risk adaptively, we would expect households to allocate more of their wealth
towards housing in response to an ongoing cycle, potentially even as investors in second homes,
which has been shown to correlate with more pronounced local housing cycles (Bhutta (2015), and
DeFusco, Nathanson and Zwick (2016)).




                                                                                                22
Bibliography


Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar and Felipe Severino. 2016. Loan Originations and Defaults
in the Mortgage Crisis: The Role of the Middle Class. The Review of Financial Studies (2016)
29 (7): 1635-1670.
Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar and Felipe Severino. 2017. Dynamics of Housing Debt in
the Recent Boom and Great Recession. Chapter in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2017, 32nd
Edition, edited by Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan Parker, Forthcoming.
Albanesi, Stefania, Giacamo DeGiorgi and Jaromic Nosal. 2016. Credit Growth and the
Financial Crisis: A New Narrative, Working Paper.
Armona, Luis, Andreas Fuster and Basit Zafar. 2017. Home Price Expectations and Behavior:
Evidence from a Randomized Information Experiment. Review of Economic Studies,
forthcoming.
Bailey, Mike, Ruiqing Cao, Theresa Kuchler and Johannes Stroebel. 2017. The Economic
Effects of Social Networks: Evidence from the Housing Market. Journal of Political Economy,
forthcoming.
Barberis, Nicholas. 2013. Psychology and the Financial Crisis of 2007-2008, in Financial
Innovation: Too Much or Too Little?, Michael Haliassos ed., MIT Press, 2013.
Bhutta, Neil. 2015. The ins and outs of mortgage debt during the housing boom and bust. Journal
of Monetary Economics 76 (2015): 284-298.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2012. “Salience theory of choice under
risk.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3): 1243-1285.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2016. Understanding Booms and Busts
in Housing Markets. Journal of Political Economy 2016 124:4, 1088-1147
Campbell, John and Joao F. Cocco. Household risk management and optimal mortgage choice.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118: 1149–1194, 2003
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller. 1988. The behavior of home buyers in boom and post-boom
markets. NBER Working Paper.
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller. 1989. The efficiency of the market for single-family homes. The
American Economic Review, pages 125-137, 1989.
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller. 2003. Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market? Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2:2003.
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Anne K. Thompson. 2012. What Have They Been Thinking?
Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
2012(2), pp.265-315.


                                                                                                23
Cocco, Joao F. 2005. Portfolio choice in the presence of housing. The Review of Financial
Studies, 18(2), pp.535-567.
Coibion, Oliver and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2012, What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about
Information Rigidities? Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 120, No. 1, pp. 116-159.
Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1991. Speculative dynamics.
The Review of Economic Studies 58.3 (1991): 529-546.
Davidoff, Thomas, 2006. Labor income, housing prices, and homeownership. Journal of Urban
Economics, 59, issue 2, p. 209-235.
DeFusco, Anthony A., Charles G. Nathanson and Eric Zwick. 2016. Speculative Dynamics of
Prices and Volume. Working Paper
Eisfeldt, Andrea and Adriano Rampini, 2009. Leasing, ability to repossess, and debt capacity.
Review of Financial Studies 22 (2009) 1621-1657.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2015. “Neglected Risks: The Psychology
of Financial Crises.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 105 (5): 310-314
Gerardi, Kristopher, Lehnert, Andreas, Sherlund, Shane M. and Willen, Paul. 2008. Making
sense of the subprime crisis. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2008(2), pp.69-159.
Glaeser, Edward L., 2013. A nation of gamblers: real estate speculation and American history.
The American Economic Review 103 (3), 1–42.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joshua Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko. 2013. Can cheap credit explain the
housing boom? In E. L. Glaeser and T. Sinai, editors, Housing and the Financial Crisis, pages
301-359. University of Chicago Press, 2013.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko and Albert Saiz. 2008. Housing supply and housing
bubbles. Journal of urban Economics, 64(2), pp.198-217.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Nathanson, Charles G., 2015. Housing Bubbles. Handbook of Regional
& Urban Economics, Vol. 5 (2015).
Glaeser, Edward L. and Nathanson, Charles G., 2017. An extrapolative model of house price
dynamics. Journal of Financial Economics.
Guren, Adam M. 2016. “House Price Momentum and Strategic Complementarity”. Journal of
Political Economy, forthcoming.
Head, Allen, Huw Lloyd-Ellis, and Hongfei Sun. 2014. “Search, Liquidity, and the Dynamics of
House Prices and Construction.” American Economic Review, 104 (4): 1172-1210.
Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas. "Portfolio Choice in the Presence of Background Risk." The
Economic Journal 110, no. 460 (2000): 1-26.




                                                                                                24
Kuchler, Theresa and Basit Zafar. 2017. Personal experiences and expectations about aggregate
outcomes. Working paper.
Makridis, Christos (2017) Sentimental Business Cycles and the Protracted Great Recession.
Working Paper.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel, 2016, “Learning from Inflation Experiences,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 131, 53–87.
Manski, Charles F. 2004. Measuring expectations. Econometrica, 72(5):1329-1376.
Manski, Charles. 2017. Survey Measurement of Probabilistic Economic Expectations: Progress
and Promise. Chapter in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2017, 32nd Edition, edited by Martin
Eichenbaum and Jonathan Parker, Forthcoming.
Nagel, Stefan. 2012. Macroeconomic experiences and expectations: A perspective from the
Great Recession. Prepared for Academic Consultants meeting of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider. Momentum traders in the housing market: Survey
evidence and a search model. The American Economic Review, 99(2): 406-411, 2009.
Rampini, Adriano and S. Viswanathan, 2013. Collateral and capital structure, Journal of
Financial Economics 109 (2013) 466-492.
Shiller, Robert, 2013, “Speculative Asset Prices”, Nobel Prize Lecture, December 8, 2013.
Sinai, Todd and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2005. “Owner-Occupied Housing As A Hedge Against
Rent Risk.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, v120(2, May), 763-789.




                                                                                              25
Figure 1: Perception of risk and local house price risk measures
Note: Panel A shows the share of respondents by state who consider housing a safe asset (y-axis) by the state-level standard deviation of annual
house price changes (Panel A) and the population-weighted ZIP code-level beta of local house price growth on national house price growth
(Panel B). Elasticity data comes from Saiz (2010). Response data is from the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey.

Panel A: Standard deviation of annual house price changes




Panel B: ZIP code level beta




                                                                                                                                              26
Figure 2: Risk perception by age and income: Difference between Renters and Owners
Figure shows share of renters (Panel A) and owners (Panel B) that perceive housing to be a risky investment for respondents in each income and age category.
Panel C shows the difference between renters and owners (calculated as the share of renters minus share of owners) in risk perception. Sample means (weighted
by sample weights) of each variable are shows in the title of each panel. Respondents are split into (weighted) income terciles and age quartiles.



        Panel A: Renters                                                                                           Panel B: Owners


            0.6                                                                                                       0.6

            0.5                                                                                                       0.5

            0.4                                                                                                       0.4

            0.3                                                                                                       0.3

            0.2                                                                                                       0.2

            0.1                                                                                                       0.1

             0                                                                                                          0
                     Low Inc                Med Inc                High Inc                                                            Low Inc                Med Inc                High Inc

                               Youngest   Age 2   Age 3   Oldest                                                                                 Youngest   Age 2   Age 3   Oldest




                                                             Panel C: Difference (Renters-Owners)


                                                                    0.4

                                                                    0.3

                                                                    0.2

                                                                    0.1

                                                                     0
                                                                              Low Inc                Med Inc                High Inc
                                                                   -0.1

                                                                   -0.2
                                                                                        Youngest   Age 2   Age 3   Oldest




                                                                                                                                                                                                27
Figure 3: Perception of risk by asset class: Difference between Renters and Owners
Figure shows difference between renters and owners (always calculated as share of renters minus share of owners) in risk perception (Panel A), perception of the
potential of housing (Panel B) and whether they believe it is a good or a bad time to buy (Panel C) for respondents in each income and age category. Sample
means (weighted by sample weights) of each variable are shows in the title of each panel. Respondents are split into (weighted) income terciles and age quartiles.




Panel A: “Housing is risky” (𝑥𝑥̅ = 29%)                            Panel B: “Stocks are risky” (𝑥𝑥̅ = 82%)                         Panel C: “Bonds are risky” (𝑥𝑥̅ = 45%)


 0.4                                                               0.4                                                             0.4

 0.3                                                               0.3                                                             0.3

 0.2                                                               0.2                                                             0.2

 0.1                                                               0.1                                                             0.1

   0                                                                 0                                                               0
          Low Inc                Med Inc                High Inc          Low Inc                Med Inc                High Inc          Low Inc                Med Inc                High Inc
 -0.1                                                              -0.1                                                            -0.1

 -0.2                                                              -0.2                                                            -0.2
                    Youngest   Age 2   Age 3   Oldest                               Youngest   Age 2   Age 3   Oldest                               Youngest   Age 2   Age 3   Oldest




                                                                                                                                                                                                   28
Figure 4: House price expectations by income and age: Renters vs Owners
Figure shows difference between renters and owners in the share that expect prices will go up over the next 12 months (Panel A), and in the share that expect
prices will go down over the next 12 months (Panel B) for respondents in each income and age category (always calculated as share of renters minus share of
owners). Sample means (weighted by sample weights) of each variable are shows in the title of each panel. Respondents are split into (weighted) income terciles
and age quartiles.



Panel A: Diff. share expecting prices to go up (𝑥𝑥̅ = 39%)                        Panel B: Diff. share expecting prices to go down (𝑥𝑥̅ = 13%)


     0.4                                                                                  0.4

     0.3                                                                                  0.3

     0.2                                                                                  0.2

     0.1                                                                                  0.1

      0                                                                                     0
               Low Inc                Med Inc                High Inc                                Low Inc                Med Inc                High Inc
    -0.1                                                                                  -0.1

    -0.2                                                                                  -0.2
                         Youngest   Age 2   Age 3   Oldest                                                     Youngest   Age 2   Age 3   Oldest




                                                                                                                                                              29
Figure 5: Intention to buy by perception of risk
Figure shows share of respondents who would intend to buy if they were to move now (from question 31 listed in Appendix 1) by income and age category. We split
respondents depending on their risk perception and into owners (Panel A) and renters (Panel B). All shares are weighted by sample weights. Respondents are split into
(weighted) income terciles and age quartiles.



Panel A: Owners                                                                                                                    Panel B: Renters


   1                                                                                                                                 1

 0.8                                                                                                                                0.8

 0.6                                                                                                                                0.6

 0.4                                                                                                                                0.4

 0.2                                                                                                                                0.2

   0                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                       Oldest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oldest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Oldest
                                                                                                                                          Youngest




                                                                                                                                                                                       Youngest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Youngest
                                                                                                                                                     Age 2

                                                                                                                                                              Age 3




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Age 2

                                                                                                                                                                                                           Age 3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Age 2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Age 3
                                    Oldest




                                                                                  Oldest




                                                                                                                          Oldest
       Youngest




                                                    Youngest




                                                                                               Youngest
                  Age 2

                           Age 3




                                                               Age 2

                                                                        Age 3




                                                                                                          Age 2

                                                                                                                  Age 3




                          Low Inc                                      Med Inc                             High Inc                                          Low Inc                                      Med Inc                             High Inc

                                             Housing is safe                    Housing is risky                                                                                Housing is safe                    Housing is risky




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30
Figure 6: Expectations, risk and recent house price experience, Owners vs Renters
Note: Panel A shows changes in mean forward-looking house price expectations separately for owners and renters (relative to the 2010 mean
expectations) as well as lagged 12-month house price changes at the state level. Panel B shows changes in the share of respondents who consider
housing a safe asset, as well as lagged 12-month state house price changes. Data is from the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey.

Panel A: House price expectations
               0.08



               0.06



               0.04



               0.02



                 0
                           2010              2011               2012             2013                 2014           2015

              -0.02



              -0.04



              -0.06

                                                        Owner          Renter           L.State HPA




Panel B: Share responding housing is safe
               0.08



               0.06



               0.04



               0.02



               0.00
                           2010              2011               2012             2013                 2014           2015

              -0.02



              -0.04



              -0.06

                                                        Owner          Renter        L.State HPA




                                                                                                                                            31
Table 1: Summary statistics
Note: Table shows summary statistics for the variables used in the analysis. We show means weighted by the sample weights for each year in the
sample and for all years (“Total” column). Data is from the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey.

Panel A: Respondent characteristics
                                                   2010        2011       2012        2013        2014       2015        Total        N
                          Age         18-29         0.24        0.24       0.24        0.24        0.24       0.24        0.24      60,241
                                      30-44         0.29        0.30       0.30        0.30        0.30       0.29        0.29      60,241
                                      44-60         0.31        0.29       0.29        0.29        0.29       0.29        0.29      60,241
                                        60+         0.17        0.17       0.17        0.17        0.17       0.18        0.17      60,241
                     Income          < $35k         0.33        0.35       0.35        0.35        0.35       0.34        0.35      65,608
                            $35k < x < $75k         0.33        0.32       0.32        0.32        0.32       0.32        0.32      65,608
                                     > $75k         0.33        0.33       0.33        0.33        0.33       0.34        0.33      65,608
                      Renter                        0.31        0.32       0.33        0.33        0.34       0.36        0.33      65,610
               Recent owner      (<= 3 years)       0.19        0.18       0.17        0.19        0.19       0.20        0.19      36,123
                        Male                        0.50        0.50       0.50        0.50        0.50       0.50        0.50      65,608
                     College                        0.53        0.52       0.53        0.52        0.52       0.53        0.53      65,610
                         Race          White        0.66        0.65       0.63        0.63        0.63       0.63        0.64      65,610
                                     Minority       0.27        0.28       0.29        0.30        0.29       0.29        0.29      65,610
                                       Other        0.07        0.07       0.08        0.08        0.08       0.08        0.08      65,610
             HPA 2006-2010                         -0.16       -0.16      -0.16       -0.16       -0.15      -0.15       -0.16      65,584
             Sand State (AZ, CA, FL, NV)            0.22        0.24       0.21        0.20        0.19       0.19        0.21      65,584



Panel B: Attitudes and expectations
                                                  2010       2011        2012        2013        2014        2015       Total         N
Expected 1-yr HPA                      Δ Price    0.007      0.000       0.015       0.030       0.025       0.026      0.017       54,995
                                  Δ Price = 0      0.47       0.51        0.48        0.38        0.42        0.39       0.44       65,610
                                   Share down      0.20       0.21        0.13        0.08        0.07        0.08       0.13       65,610
                                      Share up     0.31       0.25        0.35        0.50        0.46        0.47       0.39       65,610
                                   Don't know      0.03       0.03        0.04        0.04        0.04        0.06       0.04       65,610
                              Δ Price | down      -0.11      -0.09       -0.09       -0.09       -0.09       -0.09      -0.09       5,979
                                 Δ Price | up      0.10       0.08        0.08        0.08        0.07        0.07       0.08       19,928
                        Abs(Expectation error)     0.06       0.07        0.08        0.06        0.05        0.06       0.06       54,972
    Attitude housing                       Safe    0.70       0.66        0.68        0.71        0.74        0.75       0.71       60,713
                                With potential     0.60       0.57        0.60        0.62        0.62        0.64       0.61       60,713
      Attitude stocks                      Safe    0.17       0.15        0.16        0.19        0.19        0.19       0.18       58,341
                                With potential     0.53       0.56        0.58        0.60        0.63        0.64       0.59       58,341
      Attitude bonds                       Safe    0.56       0.54        0.57        0.52        0.54        0.56       0.55       55,280
                                With potential     0.29       0.29        0.28        0.28        0.27        0.28       0.28       55,280
           Intentions                Move soon       .          .         0.39        0.39        0.39        0.43       0.40       40,724
                                    Buy if move    0.69       0.67        0.69        0.69        0.69        0.68       0.69       62,812
Personal Finance          Difficult obtain mtg.    0.57       0.56        0.54        0.53        0.49        0.47       0.52       63,954
                           Stressed to pay debt    0.34       0.32        0.28        0.28        0.26        0.26       0.29       61,921




                                                                                                                                          32
Table 2: Attitude towards housing – Cross-sectional patterns
Note: Panel A uses answers to the questions 75 and 76 listed in Appendix 1 and shows results from OLS regressions on respondent demographics.
Panel B shows regressions of “Housing is risky” on county-level house price appreciation and rental appreciation volatility (calculated over the
2011-2016 period). Data is from the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey. Standard errors are clustered at the state and year level, and all
regressions are weighted by the sample weights. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


Panel A: Individual demographics

                                                  Housing is           Housing has              Stocks          Stocks have
                                                     risky              potential              are risky         potential
             $35k < income < $75k                  -0.100***            0.029***                 0.004            0.034***
                                                     0.007                0.008                  0.006              0.007

             Income > $75k                          -0.143***                0.002               -0.001            0.090***
                                                      0.010                  0.013                0.003              0.005

             Age: 30-44                             -0.069***              -0.041***              0.004           -0.034***
                                                      0.015                  0.015                0.006             0.005

             Age: 44-60                             -0.105***               -0.020               -0.009           -0.078***
                                                      0.019                 0.012                 0.007             0.007

             Age: 60+                               -0.135***              -0.031***           -0.048***          -0.160***
                                                      0.016                  0.012               0.007              0.016

             Male                                      0.000               0.050***               0.000           -0.043***
                                                       0.003                 0.005                0.005             0.008

             College                                -0.050***               -0.013             0.009***            0.073***
                                                      0.006                 0.008                0.003               0.005

             Minority                                 0.016*               0.037***            -0.038***          -0.024***
                                                      0.010                  0.008               0.006              0.009

             Other_Ethnicity                           0.002                -0.019*               0.004              0.005
                                                       0.016                 0.010                0.006              0.009

             State & Year FE                            Y                     Y                    Y                  Y
             N                                        55,805                55,805               53,661             53,661
             r2                                        0.05                  0.01                 0.01               0.04




                                                                      33
Panel B: Local volatility measures


                                                         Housing is risky
                                                                        Renters                 Owners
 House price
 volatility           0.319***       0.236*                       0.322***        0.040    0.319***      0.342*
                        0.084        0.121                          0.116         0.225      0.122       0.207

 Rental price
 volatility                                   -0.064   0.105
                                              0.214    0.235

 Controls & Year FE      Y             Y        Y        Y             Y            Y        Y             Y
 State FE                N             Y        N        Y             N            Y        N             Y
 N                     47,199        47,199   45,648   45,648        13,096       13,096   34,103        34,103
 r2                     0.06          0.07     0.06     0.07          0.01         0.02     0.03          0.03




                                                                34
Table 3: Perception of risk and expected house price changes
Note: Table shows regressions of measures of 12-month expectations (Panel A), and 5-year expectations (Panel B) of house prices on households’
assessment of the riskiness of housing as an investment. “% Down”, “%Up” and “Share == 0” are all indicator variables for whether each respondent
thought house prices were going to go down, up, or stay the same over the subsequent 12 months. Data is from the Fannie Mae National Housing
Survey. Standard errors are clustered at the state and year level, and regressions in Panels A and B are weighted by the sample weights. *, **, ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




Panel A: 1-year ahead expectations


                        Expected Δ HP            Share == 0             % Down                  % Up           Δ Price | Down         Δ Price | Up
Housing is risky           -0.007***               -0.016               0.049***              -0.040***           -0.009***              0.004**
                            0.0008                 0.0190                0.0052                0.0148               0.0017               0.0013
Controls                       Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes                    Yes                  Yes
State & Year FE                Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes                    Yes                  Yes
N                             47,153                55,805                55,805               55,805                 5,260                16,797
r2                             0.04                  0.02                  0.04                 0.05                  0.06                  0.09




Panel B: 5-year ahead expectations


                                                      Share == 0                 % Down                     % Up
                       Housing is risky                  0.007                   0.021***                  -0.031*
                                                        0.0008                    0.0190                   0.0052
                       Controls                            Yes                      Yes                     Yes
                       State & Year FE                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
                       N                                  18,819                   18,819                  18,819
                       r2                                  0.01                     0.02                    0.02




                                                                       35
Table 4: Housing choice, risk perception and expectations
Note: Panel A shows OLS regressions of a respondent-level indicator variable for whether respondents are renters or owners on whether they
consider housing and stocks risky, all controls from Table 2, as well as a variety of financial and economic distress measures. These include q22
and q109-q112 listed in Appendix 1) and refer to the perceived ability to pay all types of debt, levels of income and savings, and job prospects. The
last column adds an interaction of fixed effects for the type of job (q133) with the share of employment in a county working in non-tradable
industries (NAICS codes 44-45 and 72). All regressions include the demographic controls shown in Tables 2 and 3. Data is from the Fannie Mae
National Housing Survey. Panel B includes data from the New York Fed Survey of Consumer Expectations, 2013‐2016. We construct mean,
standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis using midpoints of each of 10 bins used in the elicited house price distribution question. Controls include
age, education and household income fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state and year level, and all regressions are weighted by the
sample weights. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




Panel A: Perceived housing / stocks risk
                                                                              Renter vs Owner
Housing is risky                      0.114***                        0.112*** 0.109*** 0.104***                      0.098***        0.113***
                                        0.009                           0.009      0.008      0.015                     0.014           0.008
Stocks are risky                                        0.001           -0.011         -0.013*         -0.024**
                                                        0.007           0.008           0.008           0.010
Stressed to pay debts                                                                 0.037***          -0.007
                                                                                        0.011           0.015
Sufficient savings                                                                                    -0.053***
                                                                                                        0.002
Sufficient income                                                                                     -0.074***
                                                                                                        0.011
Concerned about job                                                                                     -0.004
                                                                                                        0.012
Exp. Price Change                                                                                                                        0.060
                                                                                                                                         0.042
Δ Price = 0                                                                                                                             -0.002
                                                                                                                                        0.017
Expect Down                                                                                                                              0.013
                                                                                                                                         0.025
Controls                                   Y               Y               Y               Y               Y              Y                Y
State & Year FE                            Y               Y               Y               Y               Y              Y                Y
Profession FE x NT share                                                                                                  Y
N                                      55,805          53,661          52,354          51,592           23,726          18,568          47,153
r2                                      0.28            0.27            0.28            0.28             0.29            0.29            0.28




                                                                        36
Panel B: Moments in elicited probability distribution
Note: This panel uses Federal Reserve Bank of New York SCE data.


                                                          Renter vs Owner
Expected HPA      -0.186    -0.019                                                                 -0.099    0.007
                  0.152     0.132                                                                  0.154     0.134

Std. Dev HPA                         1.947*** 0.825***                                            1.892*** 0.815***
                                       0.237    0.220                                               0.233    0.217

Skewness HPA                                             -0.019*** -0.009*                       -0.015*** -0.007
                                                           0.006    0.005                          0.006   0.005

Kurtosis HPA                                                                  -0.004*** -0.003*** -0.003*** -0.002**
                                                                                0.001     0.001     0.001    0.001

Controls             N        Y         N        Y              N       Y        N         Y         Y         Y
State FE             Y        Y         Y        Y              Y       Y        Y         Y         Y         Y
N                  8,586    8,472     8,586    8,472          8,586   8,472    8,586     8,472     8,586     8,472
r2                 0.02     0.20      0.04     0.20           0.02    0.20     0.02      0.20      0.05      0.20




                                                         37
Table 5: Risk attitudes and future intentions
Note: Data is from the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey. Panel A shows OLS regressions of a respondent-level indicator variable for
whether they would want to rent if they were to move now, on a dummy variable for whether they consider housing a risky investment, a risk
potential dummy and expectation about house prices, all controls from Table 2, as well as a variety of financial and economic distress measures.
Panel B splits the previous regression on individuals that are currently owners or currently renters. Standard errors are clustered at
the state and year level, and all regressions are weighted by the sample weights. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Buy vs Rent in the next move
                                                                             Intend to rent = 1
                Risk home                          0.142***                                            0.132***     0.127***
                                                     0.006                                               0.008        0.011
                Potential home                                 -0.070***                              -0.050*** -0.041***
                                                                 0.009                                  0.008     0.006
                Expected Δ HP                                                -0.114**                   -0.065       -0.045
                                                                              0.054                     0.065        0.124
                Down                                                                      0.022***
                                                                                            0.008
                Stressed to pay debt                                                                                0.057***
                                                                                                                      0.009
                Sufficient savings                                                                                  -0.045***
                                                                                                                      0.010
                Concerned about job                                                                                  0.010
                                                                                                                     0.007
                Controls                              Y            Y            Y            Y            Y            Y
                State & Year FE                       Y            Y            Y            Y            Y            Y
                N                                   53,704       53,704       48,729       57,729       45,652       26,958
                r2                                   0.23         0.22         0.21         0.21         0.23         0.24


Panel B: Differences between renters and owners


                                          Intend to rent | current owner                       Intend to rent | current renter
Risk home                            0.135***                        0.127***             0.144***                         0.131***
                                       0.005                           0.007                0.013                            0.015
Potential home                                   -0.061***                  -0.042***                   -0.083***                  -0.069***
                                                   0.008                      0.007                       0.013                      0.015
Expected Δ HP                                                  -0.154*** -0.096***                                     -0.063        -0.033
                                                                 0.019     0.026                                       0.126         0.127
Controls                               Y             Y            Y             Y             Y            Y             Y             Y
State & Year FE                        Y             Y            Y             Y             Y            Y             Y             Y
N                                    38,777        38,777       35,992        33,750        14,927       14,927        12,737        11,902
r2                                    0.10          0.08         0.08          0.10          0.09         0.08          0.07          0.09




                                                                      38
Table 6: Role of past and expected mobility
Note: Table shows OLS regressions of a respondent-level indicator variable for whether respondents are renters or owners, and whether they would
want to rent if they were to move now, on a dummy variable for whether they consider housing a risky investment, as well as measures of both
future expected mobility (whether they intend to move in the next 5 years, from q13bb) and past mobility (when owners purchased their home,
q26). All regressions include the demographic controls shown in Table 2. Data is from the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey. Standard errors
are clustered at the state and year level, and all regressions are weighted by the sample weights. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                         Renter = 1                                 Intend to rent if move = 1
 Housing is risky                                 0.109***       0.109***                     0.168***       0.162***       0.127***
                                                    0.010          0.019                        0.006          0.006          0.010

 Move soon (next 5 years)                         0.314***              0.314***              0.129***              0.125***
                                                    0.009                 0.016                 0.009                 0.009
 Housing is risky x Move soon                                             -0.001                                      0.013
                                                                          0.026                                       0.009
 Recent owner (≤ 3 years)                                                                                                                  -0.009
                                                                                                                                           0.011
 Housing is risky x Recent
 owner                                                                                                                                     -0.003
                                                                                                                                           0.003

 Controls                                             Y                    Y                     Y                     Y                     Y
 State & Year FE                                      Y                    Y                     Y                     Y                     Y
 N                                                  33,838               33,838                32,616                32,616                28,801
 r2                                                  0.36                 0.36                  0.18                  0.18                  0.08




                                                                         39
Table 7: Risk attitudes and effect of recent house price experience
Note: Panel A shows regressions of the share of respondents who consider housing risky and “with potential” on three lags of 12-month state-level
house price changes. Panels B use 12-month expectations as the independent variables. Data is from the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level, and all regressions are weighted by the sample weights. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




Panel A: Risk and potential


                                                                                                                 Housing is risky
                                                                           Housing has
                                             Housing is risky               potential                      Renter                    Owner
L.State HPA                                    -0.278***                      0.124                        -0.163                   -0.353***
                                                 0.066                        0.083                         0.144                     0.061
L2.State HPA                                         -0.041                      0.060                     -0.013                     -0.057
                                                      0.049                      0.038                      0.067                      0.045
L3.State HPA                                       -0.187***                   0.129***                  -0.213***                  -0.175***
                                                     0.046                       0.041                     0.074                      0.045
Controls & State FE                                    Y                          Y                          Y                          Y
N                                                    55,805                     55,805                     15,296                     40,509
r2                                                    0.06                       0.01                       0.02                       0.03




Panel B: House price expectations (12-month ahead)


                                                                                                                         Exp. Δ Price
                                               Exp. Δ Price           Δ Price = 0            % Down                 Renter     Owner
L.State HPA                                      0.179***              -0.614***             -0.781***             0.134***       0.203***
                                                   0.020                 0.117                 0.128                 0.020          0.018
L2.State HPA                                         0.008                0.013              -0.133***               0.008                0.007
                                                     0.010                0.100                0.029                 0.013                0.007
L3.State HPA                                         0.009              -0.247**               -0.048                0.013                0.008
                                                     0.011               0.120                 0.039                 0.016                0.009
Controls                                              Y                    Y                     Y                    Y                    Y
State FE                                              Y                    Y                     Y                    Y                    Y
N                                                   50,473               60,214                60,214               13,040               37,433
r2                                                   0.04                 0.02                  0.03                 0.02                 0.05




                                                                          40
       Appendix 1: Survey questions used in the analysis

        Question                                                                        Answer (options)
        In general, do you think this is a very good time to buy a house, a
                                                                                        1:Very good time; 2:Somewhat good time; 3:Somewhat
12      somewhat good time, a somewhat bad time, or a very bad time to buy a
                                                                                        bad time; 4:Very bad time
        house?
                                                                                        1:Never; 2:Less than 1year; 3:1-3 years; 4:3-5 years;
13bb    When do you expect to move next?
                                                                                        5:5+years
        During the next 12 months, do you think home prices in general will go          1:Prices will go up; 2:Prices will go down; 3:Prices will
15
        up, go down, or stay the same as where they are now?                            remain about the same
        (If 15=down) By about what percent do you think home prices in general
16                                                                                      [open ended question]
        will go down on the average over the next 12 months?
        (If 15=up) By about what percent do you think home prices in general
17                                                                                      [open ended question]
        will go up on the average over the next 12 months?
        Do you think it would be very difficult, somewhat difficult, somewhat           1:Very difficult; 2:Somewhat difficult; 3:Somewhat easy;
22
        easy, or very easy for you to get a home mortgage today?                        4:Very easy
26      How long have you owned your current home?                                      1:Less than a year; 2:1-3 years; 3:3-5 years; 4: >5 years
31      If you were going to move, would you be more likely to:                         1:Rent; 0:Buy
50      (If 31=Rent) In the future, are you more likely to:                             1:Always rent; 0:Buy at some point in the future
50b     (If 31=Buy) In the future, are you more likely to:                              1:Always own; 0:Rent at some point in the future
                                                                                        1:Safe investment with a lot of potential;
                                                                                        2:Safe investment with very little potential;
75      Buying a home: Do you think this investment is...
                                                                                        3:Risky investment with very little potential;
                                                                                        4:Risky investment with a lot of potential
                                                                                        1:Safe investment with a lot of potential;
                                                                                        2:Safe investment with very little potential;
76      Buying stocks: Do you think this investment is...
                                                                                        3:Risky investment with very little potential;
                                                                                        4:Risky investment with a lot of potential
        If a person’s home is now worth less than what they owe on it, do you
87                                                                                      1:Yes; 0:No
        think it is okay for them to stop paying their mortgage?
        If a person is facing financial distress, do you think it is okay for them to
88                                                                                      1:Yes; 0:No
        stop paying their mortgage?
        Now I’d like to ask about the next 5 years. In 5 years, do you think your
99                                                                                      1:Gone Up; 2:Gone Down; 3:Stayed exactly the same
        home’s value will have:
        Are you very stressed, somewhat stressed, not very stressed or not at all       1:Very stressed; 2:Somewhat stressed; 3:Not very
109
        stressed about your ability to make payments on your debts?                     stressed; 4:Not at all stressed
111     Do you feel you have sufficient savings?                                        1:Yes; 0:No
        Do you feel that your current household income is sufficient for the
112     amount of expenses you have, including any payments on debt and                 1:Yes; 0:No
        mortgages?
        How concerned are you that you will lose your job in the next twelve
        months? Are you very concerned, somewhat concerned, not very                    1:Very concerned; 2:Somewhat concerned; 3:Not very
112b
        concerned, or not at all concerned that you will lose your job in the next      concerned; 4:Not at all concerned
        twelve months?
                                                                                        1:18-20; 2:21-24; 3:25-29; 4:30-34; 5:35-39; 6:40-44;
122     Which of the following categories best describes your age?                      7:45-49; 8:50-54; 9:55-59; 10:60-64; 11:65-69; 12:70-74;
                                                                                        13:75+
                                                                                        1:White collar professional, like a doctor, lawyer,
                                                                                        marketing, 2:White collar office or support person
                                                                                        3:White collar government, law enforcement, or
133     How would you describe the work you do?
                                                                                        education; 4:Fine arts, 5:Blue collar/trade worker, like
                                                                                        carpenter, electrician, farming, manufacturing worker,
                                                                                        retail, security; 6:Military; 7:Other.
                                                                                        1:Less than $10,000; 2:$10,000-$14,999; 3:$15,000-
        For statistical purposes only, we need to know your total family income
                                                                                        $24,999; 4:$25,000-$34,999; 5:$35,000-$49,999;
142     for 2011. Will you please tell me which of the following categories best
                                                                                        6:$50,000-$74,999; 7:$75,000-$99,999; 8:$100,000-
        represents your total family income?
                                                                                        $149,999; 9:$150,000-$199,999; 10:$200,000+




                                                                         41
Perception of House Price Risk and Homeownership – ONLINE APPENDIX




                        September 14, 2018


                 Appendix Figures and Tables




                                                                     42
Figure A1: Perception of risk and housing supply elasticity
Note: Figure shows the share of respondents by state who consider housing a safe asset (y-axis) and the population-weighted housing supply
elasticity. Elasticity data comes from Saiz (2010). Response data is from the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey.




                                                                                                                                             43
Figure A2: Perception of risk and elicited distribution of 1-year expectations
Note: Panel A shows the average weight given by respondents to the Mechanical Turk survey to each of 10 bins of 1-year ahead house price
changes, see text for description of the data section. Respondents are split into those who consider housing a safe vs a risky asset.




                                                                                                                                           44
Table A1: Summary statistics (online survey respondents)
Note: data comes from the Mechanical Turk survey described in more detail in the data section. Panel A reports household demographics for
Mechanical Turk respondents. Panel B reports the average distribution and the moments constructed using midpoints of each of 10 bins used in the
elicited house price distribution question. Panel C shows the differences in the mean fractions assigned to each bin, and controls represent the
characteristics used in Panel A. Panel D regresses the constructed moments from the survey on the risk perception dummy, Standard errors are
heteroscedasticity robust,. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.



Panel A: Respondent characteristics
                                                                                     Share             N
                                             Age                   18-29              0.30           1,008
                                                                   30-44              0.47           1,008
                                                                   44-60              0.17           1,008
                                                                     60+              0.06           1,008
                                        Income                    < $35k              0.16           1,008
                                                         $35k < x < $75k              0.43           1,008
                                                                  > $75k              0.27           1,008
                                        Renter                                        0.51           1,005
                                        Gender                             Male       0.52           1,008




Panel B: Attitudes and expectations
                                                                                               Mean              N
                               Elicited distribution             Drop 4% or more               0.104           1,008
                                                                       Drop 0-4%               0.191           1,008
                                                                        Rise 0-4%              0.401           1,008
                                                              Increase 4% or more              0.302           1,008
                           Moments (constructed)                             Mean              0.024           1,008
                                                                Standard deviation             0.051           1,008
                                                                         Skewness              0.103           1,006
                                                                          Kurtosis             6.021           1,006




                                                                      45
Panel C: Elicited probability distribution


                      Drop < -4%          Drop 0-4%            Increase 0-4%       Increase > 4%
Housing is risky    1.893     1.290   4.038**    3.127*     -8.248*** -6.705***   2.316      2.288
                    1.222     1.231    1.750      1.797       2.010      2.226    2.174      2.154

Controls             N         Y         N         Y           N         Y         N          Y
State FE             N         Y         N         Y           N         Y         N          Y
N                   978       975       978       975         978       975       978        975
r2                  0.00      0.08      0.01      0.08        0.02      0.08      0.00       0.09




Panel D: Moments of elicited distribution


                     Expected HPA        Std. Dev HPA           Skewness HPA          Kurtosis HPA
 Housing is risky    0.001   0.001      0.003     0.001        -0.090    -0.039     -0.388     -0.370
                     0.004   0.003      0.002     0.002        0.096     0.105      0.423       0.488

 Controls             N         Y         N           Y          N         Y          N          Y
 State FE             N         Y         N           Y          N         Y          N          Y
 N                   980       975       980         975        978       975        978        975
 r2                  0.00      0.08      0.00        0.10       0.00      0.08       0.00       0.07




                                                46
Table A2: House price expectations and demographics (12-month ahead)
Note: Table shows OLS regressions of the continuous measure of house price expectations for the subsequent 12 months, the share of respondents
who believe house prices will stay the same, go down, go up, or who don’t know, on several respondent characteristics. Data is from the Fannie
Mae National Housing Survey. Standard errors are clustered at the state and year level, and all regressions are weighted by the sample weights. *,
**, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.



                                         Price
                                        Change             Δ Price = 0             Down                   Up             Don't know
 $35k < income < $75k                  -0.003***            0.032***               -0.002               -0.010            -0.020***
                                         0.001                0.009                 0.005                0.013              0.005

 Income > $75k                            -0.003               0.014                0.002                0.013             -0.029***
                                           0.003               0.018                0.008                0.023               0.003

 Age: 30-44                            -0.006***             0.034***               0.004             -0.040***               0.002
                                         0.002                 0.009                0.013               0.013                 0.005

 Age: 44-60                               -0.002               0.013                0.000               -0.019                0.006
                                           0.002               0.012                0.014                0.018                0.004

 Age: 60+                                 0.002               -0.028*            -0.026***               0.025              0.029***
                                          0.002                0.015               0.009                 0.018                0.004

 Male                                   0.003***             0.019***            -0.015***            -0.023***             0.019***
                                          0.001                0.003               0.004                0.007                 0.002
 College                                  -0.001               0.012             -0.014***               0.011             -0.009***
                                           0.001               0.008               0.003                 0.009               0.003
 Minority                               0.008***            -0.050***              -0.011              0.065***              -0.003
                                          0.001               0.012                 0.008                0.013                0.002

 Other_Ethnicity                        0.005***            -0.071***               0.002              0.056***             0.013***
                                          0.001               0.008                 0.009                0.010                0.004

 State & Year FE                           Y                    Y                    Y                    Y                    Y
 N                                       50,473               60,214               60,214               60,214               60,214
 r2                                       0.04                 0.02                 0.03                 0.05                 0.02




                                                                       47
Table A3: Rent vs Buy and House price expectations (12-month ahead)
Note: Table shows OLS regressions of a respondent-level indicator variable for whether respondents are renters or owners on measures of 12-
month ahead house price expectations, all controls from Table 2, as well as a variety of financial and economic distress measures. These include
q22 and q109-q112 listed in Appendix 1), and refer to the perceived ability to pay all types of debt, levels of income and savings, and job prospects.
The last column adds an interaction of fixed effects for the type of job (q133) with the share of employment in a county working in non-tradable
industries (NAICS codes 44-45 and 72). All regressions include the demographic controls shown in Tables 2 and 3. Data is from the Fannie Mae
National Housing Survey. Standard errors are clustered at the state and year level, and all regressions are weighted by the sample weights. *, **,
*** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                  Renter vs Owner
 Exp. Price Change                       -0.012            0.060              0.060         0.058                         -0.005               0.124
                                         0.027             0.047              0.042         0.047                          0.042               0.102

 Δ Price = 0                                               0.001              -0.002               -0.001                -0.020**              -0.004
                                                           0.016               0.017                0.017                  0.009               0.016

 Expect Down                                               0.027              0.013                 0.025                 -0.001
                                                           0.025              0.025                 0.025                  0.024

 Housing is risky                                                           0.113***
                                                                              0.008

 Stressed to pay debts                                                                            0.046***                -0.001
                                                                                                    0.012                  0.021

 Sufficient savings                                                                                                     -0.053***
                                                                                                                          0.005

 Sufficient income                                                                                                      -0.073***
                                                                                                                          0.012

 Concerned about job                                                                                                      -0.001
                                                                                                                           0.017

 Controls                                   Y                Y                   Y                     Y                      Y
 State & Year FE                            Y                Y                   Y                     Y                      Y
 Profession FE x NT
 share                                                                                                                                           Y
 N                                       50,473           50,473              47,153               47,745                 22,512               17,006
 r2                                       0.27             0.27                0.28                 0.27                   0.28                 0.28




                                                                         48
Table A4: Housing choice – cross-sectional patterns
Note: Panel A shows OLS regressions of the renter / owner status of a household and whether a household intends to buy or rent in their next move on several demographic characteristics. Data is from
the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey. Standard errors are clustered at the state and year level, and all regressions are weighted by the sample weights. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                                                Renter                                                      Buy vs Rent if move
                    $35k < income < $75k            -0.232***     -0.198***    -0.229***     -0.236***     -0.225***     0.204***     0.199*** 0.194*** 0.190***              0.196***
                                                      0.011         0.012        0.012         0.009         0.013         0.011        0.010      0.012      0.014             0.010
                    Income > $75k                   -0.390***     -0.347***    -0.382***     -0.373***     -0.389***     0.307***     0.289***     0.287***      0.285***     0.298***
                                                      0.011         0.010        0.012         0.013         0.011         0.010        0.013        0.011         0.013        0.010
                    Age: 30-44                      -0.224***     -0.139***    -0.224***     -0.226***     -0.223***     0.189***     0.170***     0.191***      0.184***     0.207***
                                                      0.011         0.015        0.012         0.012         0.014         0.016        0.017        0.016         0.014        0.014
                    Age: 44-60                      -0.318***     -0.208***    -0.316***     -0.313***     -0.323***     0.188***     0.151***     0.185***      0.178***     0.204***
                                                      0.011         0.013        0.010         0.005         0.013         0.019        0.027        0.018         0.016        0.020
                    Age: 60+                        -0.429***     -0.259***    -0.418***     -0.406***     -0.427***     0.064***      -0.010       0.040**      0.039**      0.061***
                                                      0.012         0.016        0.011         0.009         0.016         0.019       0.021         0.018        0.019         0.021
                    Male                              0.001         0.002        -0.001        0.003         -0.001       -0.008       -0.003        -0.004       -0.009       -0.007
                                                      0.004         0.003        0.005         0.003         0.005        0.007        0.006         0.007        0.008        0.007
                    College                          0.009*        -0.003         0.007        0.007*       0.013**      -0.011*       -0.007        -0.009      -0.013**      -0.011
                                                     0.005
                                                        0          0.005
                                                                      0           0.004
                                                                                    0          0.004
                                                                                                  0          0.005
                                                                                                               0          0.006        0.008         0.006        0.006        0.007
                    Minority                        0.082***      0.065***      0.083***     0.081***      0.078***       0.002         0.016        -0.001       0.008         0.008
                                                      0.017         0.011         0.016        0.017         0.016        0.014         0.015        0.014        0.016         0.014
                    Other_Ethnicity                   0.017        -0.007        0.017         0.023         0.007      -0.039***      -0.012       -0.037**    -0.051***      -0.028*
                                                      0.015        0.008         0.015         0.015         0.013        0.015        0.011         0.015        0.017         0.016
                    Move Soon                                     0.320***                                                            -0.134***
                                                                    0.009                                                               0.007
                    Stressed to pay debts                                       0.045***                                                           -0.097***
                                                                                  0.012                                                              0.007
                    Sufficient savings                                                       -0.073***                                                           0.095***
                                                                                               0.005                                                               0.010
                    Concerned about job                                                                    0.027***                                                           -0.055***
                                                                                                             0.008                                                              0.008
                    Controls                           Y             Y             Y             Y            Y             Y            Y            Y             Y            Y
                    State & Year FE                    Y             Y             Y             Y            Y             Y            Y            Y             Y            Y
                    N                                60,214        37,130        56,872        44,861       47,197        57,729       35,657       54,558        43,101       45,300
                    r2                                0.27          0.36          0.27          0.27         0.26          0.14         0.16         0.14          0.14         0.14



                                                                                                     49
Table A5: Expectations and attitudes after the crisis
Note: Panel A, shows OLS regressions of the continuous measure of house price expectations for the subsequent 12 months, the share of respondents
who believe house prices will stay the same, go down, go up, or who don’t know, dummies for house price appreciation tercile during the crisis.
Panel B repeated the previous analysis but using the perception of housing risk and potential and the perception of stock risk and potential as a
dependent variable. Data is from the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey. Standard errors are clustered at the state and year level, and all
regressions are weighted by the sample weights. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.



Panel A: Expected price changes
                                              Exp. Δ Price Δ Price = 0               Down               Up          Don't Know
              Crisis HP T2 (Middle)             -0.002*       0.010                  -0.002            -0.008          0.000
                                                 0.001        0.014                  0.008             0.013          0.004
              Crisis HP T3 (Worst)                0.005*           -0.031            -0.008            0.046*         -0.006*
                                                  0.003            0.019             0.011             0.024           0.003
              Controls                              Y                Y                 Y                 Y               Y
              State FE                              N                N                 N                 N               N
              N                                   50,473           60,214            60,214            60,214          60,214
              r2                                   0.03             0.02              0.03              0.04            0.01




Panel B: Risk and potential attitudes
                                                     Housing is        Housing has         Stocks are           Stocks have
                                                       risky            potential             risky              potential
                  Crisis HP T2 (Middle)               0.019**            -0.014**            -0.002                0.005
                                                       0.008               0.006              0.007                0.008
                  Crisis HP T3 (Worst)                 0.025***             -0.006            0.007               0.009**
                                                         0.009               0.008            0.008                0.003
                  Controls                                Y                   Y                 Y                   Y
                  State FE                                N                   N                 N                   N
                  N                                     55,805              55,805            53,661              53,661
                  r2                                     0.06                0.01              0.01                0.04




                                                                      50
Table A6: Expectation errors
Note: Panel A shows OLS regressions of the change in state house prices and zipcod level house prices on the expected change associated to the
same period. Panel B shows OLS regression of the difference between the realized and expected house price appreciation, on the perception of
housing risk, housing potential, and a series of demographics described in the data section. Data is from the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey.
Standard errors are clustered at the state and year level, and all regressions are weighted by the sample weights. *, **, *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Data is from the Fannie Mae National Housing Survey. Standard errors are clustered at the state and year level, and all regressions
are weighted by the sample weights. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.



Panel A: Pooled analysis


                                                 Actual State HP change                                Actual ZIP HP change
Expected HP change                   0.048***      0.020**     0.027    -0.003                 0.121***   0.042   0.097***  0.015
                                       0.005        0.008      0.024    0.006                    0.018    0.026     0.020   0.013

Year FE                                 N              Y              N             Y             N            Y            N            Y
State FE                                N              N              Y             Y             N            N            Y            Y
N                                     54,972         54,972         54,972        54,972        39,184       39,170       39,170       39,170
r2                                      0             0.41           0.27          0.68          0.01         0.31         0.12         0.43




Panel B: Expectation errors in the cross-section
                                                                   Abs(F.Actual HPA-Expected HPA)
              Risk home                            0.009***                                                             0.007***
                                                     0.001                                                                0.001
              Potential home                                      -0.001                                                  0.000
                                                                  0.001                                                   0.001
              Difficult to obtain mortgage                                     0.006***
                                                                                 0.001
              Recent Owner (<= 3 years)                                                        0.001
                                                                                               0.001
              Move soon (<= 5 years)                                                                        0.002**
                                                                                                             0.001
              Renter                                                                                                     0.002*
                                                                                                                         0.001
              $35k < income < $75k                                                                                     -0.002***

              Controls                                N             N             N              N            N            Y
              Year FE                                 Y             Y             Y              Y            Y            Y
              State FE                                Y             Y             Y              Y            Y            Y
              N                                     51,290        51,290        53,975         30,994       35,121       47,153
              r2                                     0.13          0.12          0.12           0.11         0.15         0.13




                                                                       51
Table A7: Mechanical Turk questionnaire
The questions below were used in the Mechanical Turk survey we ran in July of 2018. The questions include a
combination of questions from the Fannie Mae Housing Survey and from the Survey of Consumer Expectations by
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 3

Survey Text:
We want to learn about your current housing situation, and your outlook for the future of the
housing market. This survey takes about 10 minutes.
The questions in this survey have no right or wrong answers - we are interested in your views
and opinions. Your responses are confidential, and it helps us a great deal if you respond as
carefully as possible. If you should come to any question that you can't or don't want to answer,
just click on 'NEXT' and wait for the next question to appear.
Thank you for your participation!


Q1: During the next 12 months, do you think home prices in general will go up, go down, or stay
the same as where they are now?
1: Prices will go up; 2:Prices will go down; 3:Prices will remain about the same; 99:Don’t know.


Q2: ## IF DOWN (Q1=Down). By about what percent do you think home prices in general will
go down on the average over the next 12 months? ## IF UP (Q1=Up). By about what percent do
you think home prices in general will go up on the average over the next 12 months?


Q3: Buying a home: Do you think this investment is...
1: Safe investment with a lot of potential; 2:Safe investment with very little potential; 3:Risky
investment with very little potential; 4:Risky investment with a lot of potential; 99:Don’t know
VOL


Q4: And in your view, what would you say is the percent chance that, over the next 12 months,
the average home price nationwide will...


3
 Introduction and survey question number 4 were adapted from the Survey of Consumer Expectations, © 2013-
2017 Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY). The SCE questions are available without charge at
http://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/sce and may be used subject to license terms posted there. FRBNY
did not participate in or endorse our survey, and FRBNY disclaims any responsibility or legal liability for the
administration of the survey and the analysis and interpretation of data collected.

                                                       52
increase by 12% or more [] percent chance; increase by 8% to 12% [] percent chance percent
chance; increase by 4% to 8% [] percent chance increase by 2% to 4% [] percent chance;
increase by 0% to 2% []percent chance; decrease by 0% to 2% []percent chance; decrease by 2%
to 4% [] percent chance; decrease by 4% to 8% [] percent chance; decrease by 8% to 12%
[]percent chance decrease by 12% or more []percent chance. Total 100


Q5: Buying stocks: Do you think this investment is...
1:Safe investment with a lot of potential; 2:Safe investment with very little potential; 3:Risky
investment with very little potential; 4:Risky investment with a lot of potential; 99:Don’t know
VOL;


Q6: What is your current homeownership situation?
1:Own your home outright and do not have any debt on it; 2:Have a mortgage on your home,
such as a first mortgage, second mortgage or Home Equity Line of Credit or HELOC; 3:Rent;
4:Live with someone else and don’t pay for housing; 99:Don’t know VOL;
Q7: Which of the following categories best describes your age?
1:18-20; 2:21-24; 3:25-29; 4:30-34; 5:35-39; 6:40-44; 7:45-49; 8:50-54; 9:55-59; 10:60-64;
11:65-69; 12:70-74; 13:75+; 99:Don’t know VOL;
Q8: What is the ZIP code and State of your current primary residence?
Q9: Gender
1:Male; 0:Female;
Q10: For statistical purposes only, we need to know your total family income for this year.
Which of the following categories best represents your total family income?
1:Less than $10,000; 2:$10,000-$14,999; 3:$15,000-$24,999; 4:$25,000-$34,999; 5:$35,000-
$49,999; 6:$50,000-$74,999; 7:$75,000-$99,999; 8:$100,000-$149,999; 9:$150,000-$199,999;
10:$200,000+; 99:Don’t know VOL;




                                                53
