NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUBLISHING AND PROMOTION IN ECONOMICS:
THE TYRANNY OF THE TOP FIVE
James J. Heckman
Sidharth Moktan
Working Paper 25093
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25093

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018, Revised March 2019

This research was supported by a grant from the Institute for New Economic Thinking to the
Center for the Economics of Human Development. An early version of this analysis was
presented in a round table, “The Curse of the Top Five,” at the AEA meetings on January 7th,
2017. Participants included the authors, George Akerlof, Angus Deaton, Drew Fudenberg, and
Lars Peter Hansen. For a video of the session, see https://www.aeaweb.org/ webcasts/2017/curse.
James Heckman receives compensation for his role as Editor at the Journal of Political Economy,
which is one of the “Top Five” journals discussed in this paper. A conflict of interest
management plan is in place in accordance with University of Chicago conflict of interest
policies. We thank George Akerlof, Dan Black, Tom Ferguson, Jorge Luis García, Rob Johnson,
Ganesh Karapakula, Rasmus Landersø, Meera Mody, Magne Mogstad, Tanya Rajan, and Harald
Uhlig for comments. We thank Patrick Chen and Aakash Rao for outstanding research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by James J. Heckman and Sidharth Moktan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Publishing and Promotion in Economics: The Tyranny of the Top Five
James J. Heckman and Sidharth Moktan
NBER Working Paper No. 25093
September 2018, Revised March 2019
JEL No. A14,I23,J44,O31
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the relationship between placement of publications in Top Five (T5)
journals and receipt of tenure in academic economics departments. Analyzing the job histories of
tenure-track economists hired by the top 35 U.S. economics departments, we find that T5
publications have a powerful influence on tenure decisions and rates of transition to tenure. A
survey of the perceptions of young economists supports the formal statistical analysis. Pursuit of
T5 publications has become the obsession of the next generation of economists. However, the T5
screen is far from reliable. A substantial share of influential publications appear in non-T5
outlets. Reliance on the T5 to screen talent incentivizes careerism over creativity.

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu
Sidharth Moktan
Center for the Economics of Human Development
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
moktan@uchicago.edu

Online and text appendices are available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25093

Contents
1 Introduction

4

2 Empirical Evidence on the Potency of the Top Five
2.1 Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1.1 Categorizing the Journals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Probability of Receiving Tenure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.1 The Power of the T5 by Department Rank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.2 The Power of the T5 By Quality of T5 Publications . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Duration Analysis of Time-to-Tenure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3.1 Pooled Estimates of Hazard Rates and Time-to-Tenure . . . . . . . .
2.3.2 Estimates of Hazard Rates by Department Rank . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4 Heterogeneity in the Probability and Rate of Receiving Tenure By Gender .
2.4.1 Heterogeneity in Time-to-Tenure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4.2 Heterogeneity in the Probability of Receiving Tenure . . . . . . . . .
2.5 Sensitivity of Estimates to Inclusion and Exclusion of Finance and Econometrics Journals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9
10
12
14
15
17
19
21
23
24
25
28

3 Junior Faculty Perceptions of Current Tenure and Promotion Practices
3.1 Survey Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

31
32

4 The T5 as a Filter of Quality
4.1 Comparison of Citations Between T5 and Non-T5 Journals . . . . . . . . . .
4.1.1 Comparisons Against the Aggregate T5 Distribution . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Which Journals Publish Influential Research Papers? . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 The T5 are Not the Journals with the Top Five Impact Factors in Economics
4.4 Where Influential Economists Publish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.5 The Forgotten (by the Top 5) Classics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37
37
39
42
46
47
51

5 Openness and Incest
5.1 Corruption or Inside Information? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

54
57

6 Summary and Discussion

59

30

List of Figures
1
2
3
4

Length of First Tenure-Track Employment by Tenure Outcome . . . . . . . .
Evolution of Average Publication Portfolios by Tenure Outcome and by Departmental Ranks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Predicted Probabilities for Tenure Receipt in the First Spell of Tenure-Track
Employment (Logit) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Predicted Probabilities for Tenure Receipt in the First Spell of Tenure-Track
Employment, By Department Rank (Logit) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

Raw Probabilities for Receipt of Tenure in the First Spell of Tenure-Track Employment, by Quality of Overall Publications for Faculty Whose First Spell Ended by
2008 (Quality Proxied by Average Citations Received Through 2018 by First Spell
Publications); Sample Restricted to Faculty With 3 or More Journal Publications
by End of First Spell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

Relative Hazard Rates of Tenure Receipt Associated With Publications in
Different Outlets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Densities of time-to-tenure (Weibull Distribution) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Relative Hazards of Tenure Associated With Different Levels of T5 Publications (By Department Rank) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Densities of Time-to-Tenure (Weibull Distribution), by Gender (Publication
Rewards Held Constant across Genders) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Conditional Probabilities of Receiving Tenure During the First Spell of TenureTrack Employment Given T5 Publications and Gender . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ranking of Performance Areas Based On Their Perceived Influence On Tenure
and Promotion Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Minimum Number of T5 Publications Required for Tenure . . . . . . . . . .
Probability That Candidate with T5 Publications Receives Tenure or Promotion Instead of Candidate with non-T5 Publications, ceteris paribus . . . . .
Distribution of Residual Log Citations for Articles Published between 2000–
2010 (Measured Through July, 2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Proportion of RePEc’s Most Cited Articles Published in Different Journals in
the Last 10 and 20 Years (Adjusted for Publication Volume) . . . . . . . . .
Density Plot for the Number of Years Served by Editors between 1996-2016 .

7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

2

11
13
15
16

18
21
22
23
25
28
33
34
36
40
51
54

List of Tables
1
2
3
4

Potential States of Employment for Untenured Tenure-Track Faculty in Period
t + 1 Relative to State in t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Publication Volume-Unadjusted Proportion of Influential Articles Published
By Individual Journals Between 2000–2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Publication Volume-Adjusted Proportion of Influential Articles Published By
Individual Journals Between 2000–2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2, 5, 10, 15, and 20 Year Impact Factors For 25 Economics Journals Constructed Using Citations Data From 2017, Ordered by 5 Year Impact Factor

19
43
45
47

5

Journals that Account For Largest Share of Field-Specific Publications Between 19962017 By RePEc’s Top 50 Authors Within Different Fields (Adjusted For Publication Volume) 49

6

Journals That Received The Highest Number of Citations From Articles Published
Between 2010–2017 In the Top 2 Journals Within Different Fields of Specialization
(Rankings Uses Citations to Articles Published Between 1996-2017; Rankings are
Adjusted For Publication Volume of Cited Journal) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7
8

20 Most Cited Non-T5 Articles in RePEc’s Ranking of Most Cited Articles .
Incest Coefficients: Publications in Top 5 between 2000-2016 by Author Affiliation Listed During Publication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

50
53
56

1

Introduction

This paper examines how academic economics incentivizes young scholars and thereby shapes
the values and goals of the next generation of professional economists. Talking with young
economists entering academia and with their peers about their career prospects, one cannot
fail to note their obsession with publication in the Top Five journals, henceforth T5. Faculty
meetings about hiring, promotion, tenure, and prize committee discussions assess candidates
by the number of T5 articles they have published or have in the pipeline and the rapidity
with which they were generated. Research proposals are often appraised by their potential
to generate T5 publications.
The T5 journals are: The American Economic Review, Econometrica, the Journal
of Political Economy, the Quarterly Journal of Economics, and the Review of Economic
Studies. These “general interest” journals publish papers on a broad range of topics. They
are classified in the T5 based on aggregate proxies of journal influence. Assessing researchers
based on proxy measures is now common across fields. The use of Impact Factors1 is one such
example. Originally devised as an advisory system for library purchasing decisions, it has
now morphed into an assessment system widely used in many fields.2 Proxies of aggregate
journal performance such as the Impact Factor do not assess the creativity or value of any
individual paper, but only assess the scale of subscribership of the publication in which a
paper appears and the company it keeps.
Publication in the T5 journals has become a professional standard. Its pursuit shapes
research agendas. For many young economists, if a paper on any topic cannot be published
in a T5 outlet, the topic is not worth pursuing. Papers published in non-T5 journals are
commonly assumed to have descended into their “mediocre” resting places through a process
of trial and failure at the T5s and are discounted accordingly. This mentality is not confined
1
Impact Factors are assessed by Web of Knowledge, a scientific citation indexing service produced by
the Institute for Scientific Information that advises library acquisitions.
2
See Bertuzzi and Drubin (2013)

4

to the young. Habits formed early are hard to break. Pursuit of the T5 has become a way of
life for experienced economists as well. Falling out of the T5 is a sign of professional decline.
Decisions about promotions, recognitions, and even salaries3 are tied to publication counts
in the T5. Relying on the T5 to assess productivity rewards pursuit of publication counts in
the “proper” places and not the development of coherent bodies of research.
To a certain degree there is a strong case for relying on the T5 signal. The profession
has grown in size and has become more specialized. There is a demand for certification of
quality which publication in the T5 is used to meet. Publication in a highly-rated general
interest journal is now considered a proxy for the likelihood that a candidate publishes highly
cited general interest papers. In this paper, we demonstrate that readership and citation of
a paper and aggregate citations to a journal in which the paper appears are far from the
same thing.
The T5 standard has become increasingly difficult to attain. Card and DellaVigna
(2013) document that the amount of space available in T5s has remained roughly constant
during the period 1990–2012.4 At the same time, the number of submissions to the T5 and
the length of submitted papers have greatly increased5 with concomitant growth in rejection
rates and delays in the refereeing process.6 Editors now tend to use more referees than in
the past. The acceptance rates at T5 journals declined from 15% in 1980 to 6% in 2012.7
Economists with established reputations and in highly ranked departments are increasingly not publishing in T5 or field journals8 and are increasingly posting papers online
in influential working paper series, which are highly cited, but not counted as T5s. This
practice likely dilutes the quality of the T5 signal.
The declining acceptance rate and the reliance on the reports of multiple referees (and
3

See Table 7 of Gibson et al. (2014). Economics faculty in the University of California system face
salary penalties for not publishing in the T5.
4
See Online Appendix Figure O-A31 for a summary of Card and DellaVigna (2013)’s data.
5
Card and DellaVigna (2013)
6
Ellison (2002)
7
Card and DellaVigna (2013).
8
Ellison (2011)

5

concomitant scrutiny and delay) might suggest a rise in the quality of the T5 filter. But it
also raises some potentially worrisome issues, which we address in this paper.
We examine the influence of T5 publication on promotion and tenure decisions in
academic economics. We analyze data on tenure-track faculty hired by the top 35 economics
departments in the U.S. between the years 1996-2010. The top 35 is assessed based on an
average of the US News rankings assigned to economics departments during the years 2008,
2010, and 2015. The chosen period gives sufficient time to assess the early impacts of papers
and yet is recent enough to describe the current professional environment.
We assess the degree to which tenure decisions are influenced by publication in the
T5. We estimate the probability of receiving tenure in the first spell of employment and by
the seventh year of tenure-track employment. We supplement this analysis with estimates
from duration analyses that show that publishing three T5 articles is associated with a
310% increase in the rate of receiving tenure, compared to candidates with similar levels of
publications who do not place any in the T5. Candidates with one or two T5 articles are
estimated to experience increases in the rate of receiving tenure of 80% and 230% respectively,
compared to those with the same number of non-T5 publications. The estimated effects
of publication in non-T5 journals pale in comparison. For the same number of citation
counts measured ten or more years after tenure, publication in the Top 5 remains a strong
determinant of tenure probabilities and transition rates to tenure.
We explore heterogeneity in the tenure-generating power of the T5 with respect to
department quality. Requirements for T5 publication decline with department quality and
the impact on tenure of T5 publication increases with declines in department quality as measured by faculty publications. Publishing in the T5 is the most effective means of improving
one’s chances of obtaining tenure in all of the top 35 U.S. economics departments.
There are differences in rates of tenure by gender, although they are not precisely
determined due to our small sample size for women. For men, two T5s is more than enough
to get a 50% or higher probability of attaining tenure in the first spell. It takes three for a

6

woman, but this is only a point estimate and its standard error is big.
After documenting the potency of publishing in the T5, we examine the validity of
this filter using citation counts as a measure of validity. While T5 articles are highly cited,
so are articles published in non-T5 journals. Many non-T5 articles are better cited than
many articles in T5 journals.9 Numerous influential papers are published outside of the T5.
Indeed, many of the most important papers published in the past 50 years have been too
innovative to survive the T5 gauntlet.10 Many of the 20 most cited RePEc papers were not
published in the T5.11
In principle, insisting that scholars publish in general interest journals works against
the growing trend in academic economics toward specialization and Balkanization. However,
it flies in the face of current scholarly practice. Leading scholars in most fields largely publish
in non-T5 field journals. In addition, non-T5 journals generally dominate T5 journals in
terms of citations in the top journals within most subfields of economics. The T5 journals
typically rely on field specialists to review papers submitted in their fields. Scholars who
themselves primarily publish in, read, and cite papers from non-T5 field journals appraise
the quality of prospective candidates for promotion and hiring using their T5 publications.
The tenure of editors is long, especially at house journals whose editors are mostly, if
not exclusively, affiliated with a single department. Low turnover in editorial boards creates
the possibility of clientele effects surrounding both journals and editors, whereby authors,
in an effort to increase their chances of publication, choose to conduct research that caters
to the policy and/or methodology preferences of editors. Given the large rewards associated
with publishing in the T5, and the consequences of failing to do so, it is not implausible that
9

See, e.g., Hamermesh (2018), who makes this point. We build on and extend his analysis.
Akerlof (2018) suggests that the T5 journals often endorse “safe research” that extends the boundaries
of a field slightly, but does not advance it by much. This is likely a consequence of the peer review process,
which engenders an inherent conservatism. See also the discussion in the AEA symposium linked here:
https://www.aeaweb.org/webcasts/2017/curse.
11
RePEc (www.RePEc.org) stands for Research Papers in Economics and is a major source for rankings
of citations in the profession. According to the RePEc website: “...over 2,000 archives from 99 countries
have contributed about 2.6 million research pieces from 3,000 journals and 4,600 working paper series. Over
50,000 authors have registered and 75,000 email subscriptions are served every week.”
10

7

such clientele effects are both prevalent and large in magnitude.
It is well-documented that journals in economics tend to publish work by authors
who are connected with the journal’s editors (see Brogaard et al., 2014, Laband and Piette,
1994, and Colussi, 2018). We corroborate this literature by estimating incest coefficients
that quantify the degree of inbreeding in publications in the T5. Editors are likely to select
the papers of those they know. Network effects are empirically important.12
Whether this practice capitalizes on the benefits of using inside information that
improves journal quality as measured by citations or whether it is unproductive cronyism is
much-discussed.13 The evidence on this issue is not conclusive, but it appears to favor the
story of net benefits to insider knowledge. Although evidence on the source of the observed
network effects is inconclusive, the mere existence of such network effects gives cause for
concern. The T5’s tendency to publish work written by authors who are connected to the
editorial board has the possibly unintended but real effect of penalizing authors who lack
such connections. Unconnected authors are thus worse-off due to network effects that are
biased against them, regardless of whether such network effects stem from favoritism or
insider knowledge. However, this paper does not address in depth the larger question of the
value of using citation counts to judge productivity and the self-referential nature of groups
within economics who referee and cite each other’s papers and tend to exclude outsiders.14
Given the many adverse consequences associated with the current reliance on the T5,
we believe the discipline should reevaluate its current strong weighting of T5 publications
as a measure of research achievement and as a filter for tenure and promotion decisions.
The case for change is bolstered by the inadequacy of the T5 in predicting the quality of an
article.
12

Colussi (2018) is a recent study.
Laband and Piette (1994) find that articles with author-editor connections are indeed more likely to
be published, however, these articles also tend to attract higher citations on average. Brogaard et al. (2014)
estimate that authors publish 100% more papers in a journal when the journal is edited by a colleague,
compared to periods when such department-editor networks do not exist. They also find that connected
articles generate 5% – 25% more citations than unconnected articles on average.
14
See Kapeller et al. (2017)
13

8

The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 documents the power of the T5
in determining tenure and the time-to-tenure. Section 3 reports responses to a survey of
junior faculty about their perceptions of current tenure and promotion practices. They are
consistent with the evidence from our empirical analysis. Section 4 examines the quality of
the T5 filter as measured by citations to papers published there. Section 5 presents evidence
on editorial tenure length in house journals and on incest.
The paper concludes with a summary. We discuss what – if anything – should be
done about the practice of relying on T5 publications. We use an online appendix15 to
present background information and to report sensitivity analyses. We attach a within-textAppendix to explain certain points of methodology.
We note at the outset what this paper does not do. It does not offer an empirical
assessment of whether current incentives in economics lead to meritocratic outcomes in
academic economics. To do so would require an accurate measure of academic productivity
and research quality that do not yet exist. We rely on citation counts as a crude proxy
for productivity and quality, noting that the measure is flawed but conventional. We also
do not prove that the incentives we measure lead young economists to focus on pursuing
those incentives. We document certain strong incentives built into the current tenure and
promotion system and presume that junior academics respond to them just as agents would
respond to incentives in the models we teach and in the data we study.

2

Empirical Evidence on the Potency of the Top Five

This section presents an extensive analysis of the basis for incentives facing young economists.
Publication in T5 journals is the path to success. We note at the outset that finance has
emerged as a major field that abuts economics and has many influential scholars. In our
main analyses we pool papers in finance along with those in other fields of economics. Online
Appendix Section 5 conducts a parallel analysis excluding papers in finance. Our point
15

See http://heckman.uchicago.edu/publishing-and-promotion/appendix.pdf

9

estimates are barely affected. Under either treatment of data, we document that publication
in the T5 is an important predictor of professional success.

2.1

Data

We investigate the relationship between tenure decisions and T5 publications using panel
data on the job and publication histories of tenure-track faculty hired by the top 35 U.S.
economics departments between the years 1996 and 2010. Panel data are constructed in four
steps.16 Online Appendix Section 1 describes details on how we construct our data.
Tenure rates by the end of the first spell vary between 26% and 31% across the
department groupings, and do not exhibit systematic differences with respect to department
ranking.17 Not surprisingly, a substantial percentage of junior faculty move downwards.18
The incidence of lateral movement is highest among the top five departments with a rate of
21%. It is lowest for departments ranked 26 to 35 with a rate of 6%. Conversely, upward
movement and exits to industry are more common among lower ranked departments, and
become less frequent for higher-ranked departments.19 Tenure rates are considerably higher
at the end of the second spell across all department rank groupings, with tenure rates ranging
from 34% to 54%.20,21
16

The four steps are: (i) construction of a roster of tenure-track faculty hired by the top 35 departments between 1996 and 2010 using publicly available historical snapshots of departmental websites archived
by WayBackMachine; (ii) construction of work histories for tenure-track faculty using CVs and other public
sources of work-history data; (iii) construction of tenure decisions based on multiple sources of publicly available information including official announcements of tenure conferral; and (iv) construction of publication
and citation profiles using data from Scopus.com.
17
See Online Appendix Table O-A4
18
The top 5 departments exhibit the largest difference between the percentage of downward movers and
the percentage of tenure recipients. This discrepancy in relative differences arises partly because faculty at the
top 5 departments are unable to move upwards by definition, thereby restricting their outcome destinations
to 4 options instead of 5.
19
Rates of upward and lateral movement combined are similar across all rank groups.
20
See Online Appendix Table O-A6 for tenure rates during the second spell.
21
Online Appendix Table O-A7 gives estimates for rates of tenure conferral for the top 35 departments.

10

Figure 1: Length of First Tenure-Track Employment by Tenure Outcome

Figure 1 plots department rank-specific distributions for the length of first tenuretrack employment for individuals who received tenure or moved to other opportunities following the first spell of tenure-track employment. The distributions for tenure recipients have
means between 5.4 and 7.0 years and standard deviations between 2.0 and 3.0 years.22,23 The
distributions for upward and lateral departmental movements are left-shifted relative to the
tenured distributions. In comparison, the distributions for downward movement and exits
to industry are more similar to the tenured distributions. These differences suggest that
downward movements and movements to industry are more likely to result from denial of
tenure, compared to upward and lateral movements which tend to occur considerably earlier
than receipt of tenure. We discuss differences by gender in Section 2.4.
22

See Online Appendix Table O-A5 for means and standard deviations corresponding to each group
The right tails for the tenured distributions extend beyond 10 years. The presence of such outliers
is consistent with what one would expect given the adoption of tenure clock extension policies that allow
faculty to extend the length of tenure clocks in the event of pregnancies, adoptions, and other permissible
circumstances.
23

11

2.1.1

Categorizing the Journals

To compare the relationships between tenure decisions and publications in T5 and non-T5
journals, we categorize non-T5 journals into “quality” categories. Such categorization allows
us to estimate the influence on tenure of publishing in non-T5 journals of similar standing.
We use the field-specific rankings of Combes and Linnemer (2010) to categorize journals
into the following groups: Tier A Field, Tier B Field, and non-T5 general interest.24 Online
Appendix Table O-A9 presents the journals in these categories.
A summary of the publications data follows. Figure 2 differentiates faculty in the top
15 departments by tenure decision, and plots mean publication counts in the four journal
categories over the first eight years of academic experience.25 The plots reveal a striking
pattern. In terms of research productivity in peer-reviewed journals, tenured faculty at
the top 5 departments differentiate themselves from their tenure-denied colleagues primarily
based on T5 publications. The evolution of T5 publications exhibits considerable separation
between tenured and tenure-denied faculty, with the average publication count reaching
a difference of almost 3 publications by the 8th year of academic experience. The stark
difference in separation between the T5 and non-T5 journals strongly suggests that top
departments place a disproportionately large emphasis on T5 publications.
The degree of T5 differentiation falls among departments ranked 6 to 15. This decrease in T5 separation is accompanied by an increase in separation for Tier A Field journals,
with differences in average publication counts in Tier A journals as of the 8th year increasing from 0.4 for the top 5 departments to 0.6 for departments ranked 6 to 15. Despite
these changes, the T5 continues to serve as the main differentiator between tenured and
tenure-denied faculty among departments ranked 6 to 15. The relative importance of Tier A
journals continues to increase as we consider lower ranked departments, with the separation
24

Tier A Field consists of the two highest-ranked journals in the fields of development, econometrics,
finance, microeconomics/game theory, health economics, industrial organization, labor economics, macroeconomics and public economics. Tier B Field is composed of journals ranked three to five in the same fields.
The non-T5 general interest category includes the five highest ranked non-T5 general interest journals.
25
See Online Appendix Figure O-A1 for plots corresponding to departments ranked 16–35.

12

Figure 2: Evolution of Average Publication Portfolios by Tenure Outcome and by Departmental Ranks
Depts. Ranked 1−5
TierA

∆8=0.4

Non−T5 General

∆8=0.2

∆8=0.5

2

4

6

∆8=2.7

TierB

0

Avg. Cum. Pubs

T5

0

2

4

6

8

0

Academic Exp. (Yrs.)

2

4

6

8

0

Academic Exp. (Yrs.)

2

4

6

8

0

Academic Exp. (Yrs.)

2

4

6

8

Academic Exp. (Yrs.)

Depts. Ranked 6−15
TierA

∆8=0.6

Non−T5 General

∆8=0.1

∆8=0.4

2

4

6

∆8=1.4

TierB

0

Avg. Cum. Pubs

T5

0

2

4

6

8

Academic Exp. (Yrs.)

0

2

4

6

8

0

Academic Exp. (Yrs.)

2

4

6

8

Academic Exp. (Yrs.)

Tenured

0

2

4

6

8

Academic Exp. (Yrs.)

Untenured

Note: This figure plots the evolution of average publications in four different journal categories by tenure outcome. The
plotted means are calculated over tenure-track faculty hired by departments belonging to the referenced department
rank-group. ∆8 denotes differences in average cumulative publications as of year 8 between the tenured and untenured groups.

for Tier A journals surpassing the separation for T5 journals among departments ranked 16
to 25.
The observed pattern of publication behavior suggests that the number of T5 publications required for tenure decreases with department ranking. Non-T5 publications are
valued more at lower ranked schools. Faculty at lower ranked departments can publish more
non-T5 articles to compensate for their lower T5 publications. This evidence of heterogeneity suggests that it might be informative to conduct a deeper examination of department
rank-based heterogeneity in the relationship between tenure decisions and publications. In
our formal analysis, we use econometric models that allow for such heterogeneity.

13

2.2

Probability of Receiving Tenure

We discuss the relationship between tenure and publication in journals of different quality tiers. Figure 3 plots average predicted probabilities of tenure associated with different
numbers of publications in the four journal categories estimated using a logit model.26,27
Controlling for the total number of publications in all specifications, we isolate a composition effect from a scale effect. We control for gender, number of co-authors, and the quality
of the graduate school attended. Lastly, we control for the quality of authors’ publication
portfolios by including a vector of statistics that summarize the distribution of field-adjusted
citations received by each author’s portfolio of publications.28,29
Figure 3 shows that publishing in T5 journals is associated with the largest increases
in probabilities of receiving tenure. An individual with a single T5 publication is predicted to
have a 0.3 probability of receiving tenure. The predicted probability increases to 0.43 and 0.62
for individuals with two and three T5 publications respectively. Although publishing in nonT5 outlets is associated with non-zero probabilities of receiving tenure that are statistically
significant at the 5% level, the predicted probabilities associated with these publications are
considerably lower than those associated with T5 publications. Among the non-T5 estimates,
the largest probability of receiving tenure is 0.25 and it is associated with publishing two
articles in Tier A journals. This probability is lower than the probability of 0.3 associated
with publishing a single T5 article. The probability of 0.62 associated with three or more
26

See Text-Appendix Section 1.1 for the exact specification used in our Logit estimations.
The corresponding marginal effects are presented under the “Pooled” columns of the Online Appendix
Table O-A13. Online Appendix Table O-A10 presents comparable estimates of partial effects obtained from
our Linear Probability Model (LPM) estimation. Results are qualitatively the same. The T5 remains the
most influential category by far.
28
Relevance of an article varies by analysis. The current estimates of tenure by the first spell utilize
citations for all articles published during the first spell. Estimates for tenure by the 7th year utilize citations
to articles published by the 7th year of tenure-track experience.
29
The vector of citation controls includes the following statistics that summarize the distribution of
field-adjusted citations received by each author’s portfolio of publications: 25th percentile, median, 75th
percentile, minimum, maximum, and mean field-adjusted citations. Our adjustment follows a citationrescaling procedure similar to the one introduced by Radicchi et al. (2008) and discussed by Perry and Reny
(2016). Specifically, it rescales citations received by each article i with the mean number of citations received
by all articles in i’s field published during i’s year of publication. See Online Appendix Section 2 for detailed
documentation of the procedure undertaken to adjust citations by field and year.
27

14

Figure 3: Predicted Probabilities for Tenure Receipt in the First Spell of Tenure-Track
Employment (Logit)

Note: This figure plots the predicted probabilities associated with different levels of publications in different journal
categories. The predicted probability is defined in Equation TA-2 (Equation TA-2 uses parameter estimates from Equation
TA-1). White diamonds on the bars indicate that the prediction is significantly different than zero at the 5% level.

T5 publications is approximately 150% greater than this largest non-T5 estimate. The
pattern of large differences between the probability-of-tenure associated with T5 and nonT5 publications persists when we investigate the relationship between publications and the
probability of receiving tenure by the 7th year of tenure-track employment.30
2.2.1

The Power of the T5 by Department Rank

Figure 4 plots department rank-specific predicted probabilities for receipt of tenure during
the first spell of tenure-track experience associated with different levels of T5 publications.31
30

See Online Appendix Section 3.3 for results and details on specification used.
The corresponding marginal effects are presented under the department rank-specific columns of Online
Appendix Table O-A13.
31

15

The length of the first spell varies by individual.32 Predictions for each rank group is obtained
by estimating logit models for subsamples of faculty who had their first spell of tenure-track
experience at a department within the rank group in question. For all empirical models
estimated in this paper we include departmental fixed effects and adjust standard errors for
clustering at the department level.
Figure 4: Predicted Probabilities for Tenure Receipt in the First Spell of Tenure-Track
Employment, By Department Rank (Logit)

Note: This figure plots the predicted probabilities associated with different levels of publications in different journal
categories. The predicted probability is defined in Equation TA-2 (Equation TA-2 uses parameter estimates from Equation
TA-1). Department rank-specific estimates are obtained by restrictively estimating Equation TA-1 over subsamples of faculty
belonging to the department rank group in question. White diamonds on the bars indicate that the prediction is significantly
different than zero at the 5% level.

The figure reveals heterogeneity in the associated impact of each T5 publication in the
probability of receiving tenure. Faculty at lower ranked departments face higher probabilities
of tenure receipt with the same number of T5 publications. An individual with one T5
publication is predicted to face a probability of tenure of 0.2 in a top 10 department, but
the same individual experiences probabilities of 0.29 and 0.39 at departments ranked 11–20
and 21–35 respectively. Faculty with two and three T5 publications at departments ranked
32

We also estimate models that fix duration to 7 years of tenure-track experience. Pooled estimates are
presented in Online Appendix Figure O-A7. The results of that analysis are qualitatively similar to the
analysis in the main text. Department rank-specific estimates for tenure by the 7th year are presented in
Online Appendix Figures O-A8–O-A10.

16

11–20 are similarly predicted to experience higher probabilities of tenure than individuals in
top 10 departments who have published the same number of T5 articles.33
2.2.2

The Power of the T5 By Quality of T5 Publications

34

This section investigates the staying power of the T5. Results from the previous sections
show that T5 publications have a powerful impact on tenure decisions, after controlling
for differences in the quality of publication portfolios as proxied by citation performance of
published articles. These findings suggest that the T5 influence operates through channels
that are independent of publication quality. Figure 5 presents evidence in support of this
hypothesis. The figure bins faculty into four quartiles based on average citations accrued
through 2018 by all journal articles published by authors during the first spell of tenure-track
employment. Bins are designated in the natural order of citation quality from lowest (bin 1)
to highest (bin 4). Probabilities of tenure associated with different levels of T5 publications
are presented within each quartile.35 To investigate the staying power of T5 publications
conditional on article quality, we require all publications to accrue citations over a minimum
of ten years.36 The analysis in this section does not adjust for departmental fixed effects and
differences in the tenure process by department rank due to sample size issues. We lose a
large number of observations due to restriction of the sample to individuals who completed
their first spells by 2008.
Tenure probabilities generally increase with number of T5 publications across all quar33

While differences are evident, one cannot reject the null of equalities of the probabilities across department rank groups. See Online Appendix Table O-A14.
34
The analysis of this section was motivated by the comments of Dan Black and Harold Uhlig.
35
The probabilities are constructed in three steps: (i) the sample is restricted to only include faculty
with 3 or more journal publications by the end of the first spell (3 is the mean number of journal publications
during the first spell); (ii) each individual is binned into one of four performance quartiles based on average
citations accrued through 2018 by all journal articles published by the individual during the first spell; and
(iii) conditional probabilities of tenure receipt (given T5 publications) are estimated within each performance
quartile by taking the proportion of individuals who received tenure given publication of zero to three T5
articles during the first spell
36
This requirement is satisfied by restricting the estimation sample to only include individuals who
completed their first spells of tenure track employment by 2008. Thus, all pre-tenure decision publications
in the estimation sample must have been published in or before 2008.

17

Figure 5: Raw Probabilities for Receipt of Tenure in the First Spell of Tenure-Track Employment,
by Quality of Overall Publications for Faculty Whose First Spell Ended by 2008 (Quality Proxied
by Average Citations Received Through 2018 by First Spell Publications); Sample Restricted to
Faculty With 3 or More Journal Publications by End of First Spell

Note: This figure plots estimates of tenure probabilities (by the first spell) for individuals with different numbers of T5
publications by the quality of authors’ publications as proxied by citations measures through 2018. Faculty are grouped into
four quartiles based on average citations accrued through 2018 by all publications during the first spell. The figure plots
quartile-specific probabilities of tenure associated with each level of T5 publication. For each quartile, probabilities are
estimated as the proportion of individuals with a given level of T5 publication who received tenure during the first spell. The
estimation sample is restricted to only include individuals who published three or more journal articles during the first spell.
Confidence intervals are not plotted for probability estimates that equal one since tenure was received by every individual
within the group in question.

tiles of author publication quality. Inter-quartile comparison of tenure probabilities reveals
the extent of the T5 influence. It is more valuable to have a mediocre publication portfolio with T5 publications than an outstanding portfolio without any T5s. Individuals with
top quartile T5-less publication portfolios composed of three or more non-T5 publications
are estimated to face similar or lower probabilities of tenure receipt than individuals with
bottom quartile publication portfolios consisting of one T5 article and two or more non-T5
articles. Faculty with bottom quartile portfolios composed of two or three T5 publications
have vastly greater tenure probabilities than faculty with top quartile portfolios that lack T5

18

publications. This quality-invariant influence of T5 publications persists when we restrict
the sample to include faculty who published at least 4 or 5 journal articles during their first
job spell (see Online Appendix Figures O-A16–O-A17).
The results presented in this section support the hypothesis that the T5 influence
operates through channels that are independent of article quality. This finding is corroborated by responses to our survey of current tenure-track faculty at the top 50 U.S. economics
departments. Junior faculty believe that there is at least a 0.89 probability that tenure
committees will choose to tenure a candidate who possesses T5 publications over an identical candidate who possesses an identical number of non-T5 publications of the same quality.
The existence of such a strong quality-independent influence of T5 publications suggests that
tenure and promotion committees rely overwhelmingly on journal-level indicators of quality
(T5 vs. non-T5) to predict the quality of individual articles. Such reliance on the T5 label is
particularly problematic given the large intra-journal heterogeneity and inter-journal overlap
in quality documented in Section 4 for articles published in T5 and non-T5 journals. The
discussion in this section highlights the folly in relying on journal-level indicators of quality to predict individual article quality–it simultaneously generates errors in actual decision
making and leads junior faculty to (correctly) believe that the T5 has a quality-independent
effect on tenure decisions. The formation of such beliefs is likely to influence the direction
of research for faculty who seek tenure and career advancement.

2.3

Duration Analysis of Time-to-Tenure
Table 1: Potential States of Employment for Untenured
Tenure-Track Faculty in Period t + 1 Relative to State in t
state = s
0
1
2
3

Description
Untenured tenure-track in the same T35 department as period t
Tenured in the same T35 department as period t
Untenured tenure-track in a different T35 department than period t
Not employed as a tenure-track faculty in a T35 department

19

This section expands on our analysis of the tenure–publication relationship by investigating the association between time-to-tenure and time-varying measures of publications
in the four journal categories. We use a standard competing risks duration framework for
the states given in Table 1. This section presents the multi-spell hazard specification used in
this paper to estimate the duration relationships between tenure and T5 publications. The
reader is referred to Text-Appendix Section 2 for a more detailed discussion of the model.
Consider a multi-spell model where each individual enters the post-PhD academic job
market as an untenured assistant professor at one of the top 35 departments. The probability
that an individual is employed in an untenured tenure-track position during the first period
of any lth spell of untenured tenure-track employment is 1. In subsequent periods, individuals
can either remain untenured in the lth spell of tenure-track employment (s = 0), begin a
new spell l + 1 of untenured tenure-track employment in another T35 department (s = 2),
or exit the sample by either receiving tenure within the department (s = 1) or by ceasing to
be employed as a tenure-track faculty in a top 35 department (s = 3).37
Assuming that Weibull hazards generate survival times,38 the hazard rate that an
untenured tenure-track faculty in the lth spell of employment transitions from state s = 0 to
a new state k ∈ {1, 2, 3} in time period t is parametrized by:
(
hl0,k (t) = exp

3
X X
j∈J

)

!

j,n
l
tγ1,0,k (1)
α0,k
· 1(j(t) ≥ n) +Xβ0,k + Cη0,k + δ0,k (l − 1) + V0,k

n=1

where hl0,k (t) is the hazard rate of transitioning from state 0 to k in period-t of spell-l;

1(j(t) ≥ n) is an indicator for having n or more publications in journals of type j ∈ J as
of time period t; J = {T 5, General, T ierA, T ierB}; X is a vector that includes fixed effects
for authors’ academic department as well as measures of observable characteristics including
co-author characteristics, gender, quality of authors’ PhD granting institution, years since
37
Individuals cease to be employed as tenure-track faculty if they exit to a department below the top 35,
move to an industry position, or transition to a non-tenure-track position in a top 35 department.
38
see Text-Appendix Section 2 for a more detailed discussion of our duration model. The Text-Appendix
presents the Weibull model as a special case of a duration model that employs a Box-Cox transformation.

20

graduation, and a control for total volume of publications ln(#Total Publications+1); C is
a vector of statistics that summarizes the distribution of field-adjusted citations received by
each author39 ; γ1,0,k is the Weibull duration parameter; δ0,k captures potential dependence
between survival times and the number of spells that an individual has experienced prior to
l
the current spell; and V0,k
= C0,k V is a one-factor spell-specific specification for individual-

level unobserved heterogeneity.
The model imposes restrictions on the parameters associated with observed author
characteristics and department fixed effects, forcing the parameters β to be equal across
j,n
spells. We further restrict the parameters on the publication variables α0,k
to be constant

across spells. This restriction is equivalent to assuming that tenure committees maintain the
same publication standards for all untenured faculty regardless of the spell of employment.
2.3.1

Pooled Estimates of Hazard Rates and Time-to-Tenure

Figure 6: Relative Hazard Rates of Tenure Receipt Associated With Publications in Different
Outlets

Note: This figure plots hazard ratios associated with different levels of publications in different outlets. Hazard ratios are
obtained by estimating Text-Appendix Equation TA-13. White diamonds on the bars indicate that the prediction is
statistically significantly different than 1 at the 5% level.
39

see Footnote 29 for details

21

Figure 6 presents the increase in tenure hazards (rates of transition to tenure) associated
with publishing different numbers of articles in the four journal categories. Estimates for
individual parameters are presented in Online Appendix Table O-A17. The estimates show
that the transition rates to tenure associated with individuals who publish two and three
T5 publications are 3.3 and 4.1 times the transition rates associated with those who have
never published in the T5. In comparison, the transition rates associated with those who
have published three Tier A or Tier B publications is no higher than 1.1 times the hazards
associated with individuals who have never published in these outlets. None of the estimates
for the non-T5 hazard ratios are statistically significant at the 5% level.
Figure 7: Densities of time-to-tenure (Weibull Distribution)

Note: This figure plots distributions of time-to-tenure associated with different levels of publications in four different types of
journals. Densities of time-to-tenure are derived from estimation of Equation TA-13. The blue shaded region in each plot
represents the distribution of time-to-tenure associated with not having any publications in any journal.40

The differences in hazard rates translate into differences in the time required to attain
tenure. Figure 7 plots predicted densities of time-to-tenure associated with publishing different numbers of articles in the four journal categories.41 Publishing in the T5 is associated
41

Each panel plots a baseline density associated with having no publications in any of the four journal

22

with large decreases in the expected time-to-tenure as indicated by the large leftward shift in
the T5-specific density of predicted time-to-tenure. In comparison, publications in non-T5
journals are associated with negligible deviations from the baseline distribution.
2.3.2

Estimates of Hazard Rates by Department Rank

Figure 8: Relative Hazards of Tenure Associated With Different Levels of T5 Publications
(By Department Rank)

Note: This figure plots department quality-specific hazard rates of tenure associated with different levels of publications in the T5. The department quality-specific hazard rates are estimated
by interacting the publication parameters in Equation TA-13 with time-specific indicators for
whether an author is hired by a department that belongs to each of the three department-quality
groupings.

This section presents hazard estimates corresponding to three rank-based groupings
of deparments: Top 10, Top 11–20, Top 21–35. To estimate rank-specific hazard ratios,
we interact the publication variables in Equation 1 with indicators for being employed by
a department in one of the three rank-based groups during period t.42 The estimates are
categories. Journal category-specific densities are overlaid on this baseline density to highlight the deviation
in time-to-tenure associated with publishing in the different categories. The first subfigure plots the densities
associated with publishing one article in the journal category of interest, and none in the other three. The
remaining two subfigures analogously plot densities associated with publishing two and three articles in the
journal category of interest while holding the number of publications in the other three categories at zero.
42
See Text-Appendix Section 2.3 for details.

23

heterogenous across the different department rank groupings. The first T5 publication is
estimated to have a significant impact on the hazard of tenure for only those individuals employed by departments ranked 21–35. Further, the magnitude of impact associated with the
first T5 publication is higher for these departments compared to higher ranked departments.
Conversely, the estimates associated with two or three T5 publications is only significant for
the top 20 departments, and the magnitude of impact associated with these publications is
higher for individuals hired by the top 10 departments compared to individuals in departments ranked 11–20. Online Appendix Section 4.2 presents analogous rank-specific estimates
for the non-T5 journal categories. T5 publications are estimated to have a larger impact on
the hazard of tenure relative to non-T5 publications, across all department rank groupings.

2.4

Heterogeneity in the Probability and Rate of Receiving Tenure
By Gender

We next investigate gender differences in time-to-tenure and in the probability of receiving
tenure. Duration analyses in Section 2.4.1 reveal that male faculty enjoy shorter timesto-tenure than their female colleagues. We investigate the source of this discrepancy by
checking whether differences in time-to-tenure stem from differential returns to publication
by gender. Our analysis shows that T5 publications are indeed associated with greater
reductions in time-to-tenure for male faculty. We are careful not to interpret these estimates
as evidence of discrimination since we lack the data required to control for the confounding
effect of fertility on female time-to-tenure. While gender differences exist for time-to-tenure,
differences by gender are not present in our analyses of the probability of receiving tenure
(both during the first spell and by the 7th year of tenure-track employment) in Section 2.4.2.
Our results thus suggest that female faculty take longer to receive tenure but are not less
likely to eventually receive tenure.

24

2.4.1

Heterogeneity in Time-to-Tenure

Figure 9: Densities of Time-to-Tenure (Weibull Distribution), by Gender (Publication Rewards Held Constant across Genders)

Note: This figure plots conditional densities of time-to-tenure given different levels of publications in the
T5 journals and gender. Densities of time-to-tenure are predicted using parameter estimates obtained by
estimating Text-Appendix Equation TA-13 without interacting the publication parameters with gender.
Conditional densities of time-to-tenure given gender g, x number of T5s, and 0 non-T5s is given by:
f (t | #T5 = x, #nonT5 = 0, Gender = g, X) = h(t | #T5 = x, #nonT5 = 0, Gender = g, X) × S(t | #T5 =
x, #nonT5 = 0, Gender = g, X) where h(t | ·) and S(t | ·) give the conditional hazard and survivor rates at
t respectively. The titles for the 3 subplots in Figure 9 lists the conditioning used for the publication
variables. “2 Pubs in T5; 0 in Others” gives the condition: #T5 = 2, #nonT5 = 0. The conditioning on
gender is given by the legend which denotes whether the plot is associated with males or females. The
conditioning on X is left implicit. Taken together, the black density for the plot labelled “2 Pubs in T5; 0
in Others” plots the following density function: f (t | #T5 = 2, #nonT5 = 0, Gender = M ale, X). Plots for
females and other quantity of T5s are analogously defined. The blue shaded region in each plot represents
the conditional density of time-to-tenure for females given zero publications in all outlets journal. Each plot
also presents p-values obtained from Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests between the Male and Female distributions.

This section investigates heterogeneity in time-to-tenure and tenure rates by gender.
Estimation of the baseline hazard yields an estimated hazard ratio for the gender indicator (denoting that the subject is male) that ranges between 1.43 and 1.44 depending on
the assumption made about unobserved heterogeneity (see Online Appendix Table O-A17).
25

The ratio of 1.44 for men indicates that male faculty have a rate of time-to-tenure that is
44% greater than those faced by their female colleagues, once differences in the number of
publications and the vector of time-variant and -invariant controls X and C are accounted
for. Analyzing data for an older sample of individuals who were employed as economists in
1989, Kahn (1993) finds that men enjoy hazards of tenure that are 56% higher than that
for women.43 The difference in hazard rates translates into differences in time-to-tenure.
Figure 9 plots gender-specific densities of time-to-tenure associated with publishing one to
three T5 publications (see Online Appendix Figure O-A24 for non-parametric Kaplan Meier
plots of survival probabilities by gender and number of T5 publications). The densities for
females exhibit a rightward shift relative to their male counterparts. Kolmogorov-Smirnov
tests reported in the figure reject the null hypothesis of distributional equality across genders
at the 5% level for each level of T5 publication.
Given the statistical significance of the gender indicator, we next investigate differences in rewards associated with T5 publications by gender. We explore heterogeneity in
rewards to publication by interacting the publication variables in Equation 1 with an indicator for gender. Online Appendix Figures O-A21–O-A23 present gender-specific tenure
hazards associated with different levels of publishing in different journal categories. Figure
O-A21 plots hazards associated with the first three T5 publications, by gender. Females
are estimated to have higher hazard rates to tenure for the first T5 publication. However,
the estimate associated with the first T5 is only statistically significant for male faculty at
the 5% level. Males are estimated to have markedly higher hazard rates than females for
the second and third T5 publication. The hazard rate associated with two T5 publications
is 56% higher for males than for females. The hazard rate associated with three T5 publications is 86% higher for males. The hazard rate estimates for the second and third T5
publications are only statistically significant for male faculty. These gender differences in
hazard rates suggest that male faculty reap greater rewards for T5 publication–the same
43

Our estimate is not directly comparable with that of Kahn (1993) because we adopt different model
specifications and use a richer control set (our data collection procedure yields richer bibliographic data).

26

quantity of T5 publications is associated with greater reductions in time-to-tenure for male
faculty compared to their female counterparts. Gender differences in T5 rewards are not
attributable to gender differences in the quality of T5 articles. An inter-gender comparison
of citation distributions for solo-authored T5 articles reveals that citations to T5 articles are
not statistically significantly different across genders (see Online Appendix Section 7.6 for
details). However, point estimates for female faculty are more imprecisely determined than
those for males due to the relatively small sample of female faculty.44
The difference in tenure hazards and time-to-tenure across genders suggests that female faculty receive lower and possibly more uncertain rewards than their male counterparts
for the same level of publications. It is unclear how much of the slower female rate to tenure
is accounted for by fertility and differences in the take-up rate of parental leave (pregnancyrelated leave) between male and female faculty. Antecol et al. (2018) present evidence that
gender neutral tenure clock-stopping policies have differential impacts on rates of tenure
receipt by gender. The adoption of gender-neutral tenure clock-stopping policies is found
to be associated with significant reductions in the rate of tenure receipt for female faculty
in economics but not for their male counterparts. Ginther and Kahn (2004) find that 10
years post-PhD, female faculty in economics with children are statistically significantly less
likely to receive tenure than female faculty without children. Such differences do not exist
between male faculty with and without children. The existence of such discrepancies across
male and female faculty suggest that childbearing and rearing have important differential impacts on time-to-tenure by gender, and that such differences would be exacerbated by tenure
clock-stopping policies. Unfortunately, we lack the requisite data to make the appropriate
adjustment to female exposure sets.
44

The sample size is small for two reasons: (i) there are fewer females than males in academic economics
(Scott and Siegfried (2018) report that women accounted for 21.7%–26.6% of assistant and associate professor
positions in the 2017-2018 academic year across 103 PhD-granting institutions in the U.S); and (ii) women
who publish 3 or more T5 articles are much fewer in number.

27

2.4.2

Heterogeneity in the Probability of Receiving Tenure

Figure 10: Conditional Probabilities of Receiving Tenure During the First Spell of TenureTrack Employment Given T5 Publications and Gender

Note: This figure plots conditional probabilities of receiving tenure during the first spell of tenure-track employment, given
the quantity of T5 publications and gender. The probabilities are estimated as proportions of individuals within each
gender-T5 quantity cell who received tenure during the first spell of tenure-track employment.

Figure 10 plots raw probabilities of tenure given gender and number of T5 publications.45
The probabilities are lower for females at all levels of T5 publication. This result suggests
that females might reap lower rewards (in terms of the probability of receiving tenure)
than males for the same number of T5 publications. Although Figure 10 indicates that
tenure probabilities vary by gender given the same number of T5 publications, these gender
differences disappear when we estimate logit models that include an indicator for gender
and control for publication in non-T5 journals and a vector of characteristics X and C.46
The marginal effect for gender (indicator for male) is 0.019 (SE 0.038; p=0.607) for tenure
by the seventh year of tenure-track experience, and -0.045(SE=0.033; p=0.175) for tenure
during first spell of tenure-track employment. Both estimates are statistically insignificant
45

These probabilities are computed as proportions of individuals of a certain gender with a certain
number of T5 publications who receive tenure
46
See Equation TA-1 for exact specification

28

at the 5% level. Probabilities predicted from this model are comparable between genders
(see Online Appendix Figures O-A12–O-A15), with the first spell estimates showing greater
gender similarity than the estimates at the 7th year.47
We note that the parameters associated with publication in non-T5 journals and the X
that are used in constructing these predictions are not allowed to vary by gender. Therefore,
any differences in predicted probabilities stem from gender differences in tenure rates that are
unrelated to differences in rewards associated with publication. Unlike the gender-specific
publication rewards estimated in the duration analysis of Section 2.4, these logit estimates do
not show any differences in rewards to publication by gender. It is not possible to estimate
more sophisticated gender-specific publication specifications due to limited sample sizes for
women.48
A recent study by Sarsons (2017) suggests the possible existence of bias in favor
of male faculty in the tenure evaluation process. Specifically, her study finds that female
faculty reap lower rewards (i.e., increases in the probability of receiving tenure) for papers
co-authored with male co-authors compared to papers co-authored with female co-authors
or solo-authored papers. The author observes that such patterns could arise if tenure committees are biased in favor of males in their attribution of credit for co-authored work. A
competing hypothesis is that the nature of co-author pairings between males and females
could differ from other types of pairings in a way that generates the pattern observed in
the data. Ductor et al. (2018) document differences in co-author characteristics by authors’
gender. The authors find that that co-author networks exhibit gender homophily. Further,
they find that female authors tend to collaborate with smaller groups of co-authors who
are more likely to be inter-linked with one another. Lastly, they find that females tend to
collaborate with more senior faculty.
47

These probabilities are obtained by adding a gender indicator variable to prediction Equation TA-2 to
b , #Je = 0, Gender = g, X). The parameters used in these predictions are
obtain P r(T enure = 1 | #Jb = N
obtained by estimating Equation TA-1
48
Many of the publication parameters are non-estimable for females due to sample size issues. Females
account for only approximately 20% of the sample.

29

Our paper does not address the larger question of female representation in academic
economics. A growing body of literature discusses female representation within the discipline
and across academia in general (especially in the sciences). Analyzing data from the Survey
of Earned Doctorates for the period 1974–2000, Ginther and Kahn (2004) find that women
account for a substantially smaller share of doctorate degrees in economics and the physical
sciences compared to the life sciences, political science and statistics. Using more recent
data from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), Bayer and Rouse
(2016) find that the share of doctorate degrees in economics awarded to women has stagnated
since 1995, with women accounting for approximately 30% of doctorate degrees awarded in
2014. Female representation continues to fall as one progresses up the academic career ladder
(Ginther and Kahn, 2004).

2.5

Sensitivity of Estimates to Inclusion and Exclusion of Finance
and Econometrics Journals

Finance has emerged as a separate field that coexists with, and sometimes overlaps, with
mainstream economics. Given the distinct nature of the field and the existence of separate
finance departments in business schools, it is possible that top finance journals are valued
differently than other field journals in making tenure decisions. We recognize this reality by
conducting separate analyses in Online Appendix Section 5 that test the robustness of our
estimates to: (a) pooling economics and finance journals together into combined field journal
categories and (b) separating them out. Our results are robust to inclusion or exclusion of
finance journals. We similarly test for the sensitivity of estimates to alternative treatments of
Econometrics journals in Online Appendix Section 6. Our results are robust to the inclusion
and exclusion of Econometrics journals.

30

3

Junior Faculty Perceptions of Current Tenure and
Promotion Practices

We supplement our empirical analysis of job-history and publication data with findings
from a survey of individuals currently employed as assistant and associate professors by
the top 50 economics departments in the U.S.49 Respondents were surveyed about their
perceptions of how tenure and promotion decisions are determined within their departments,
with an emphasis on the role played by T5 publications in these decisions.50 The survey
responses corroborate and contextualize the evidence in Section 2. Junior faculty have
rational expectations about the power of the T5. Appendix Section 8.3 presents our survey
instrument.
The survey has an overall response rate of 40% (N=308) across all 50 departments,
with response rates of 44% (N=210) for assistant professors and 34% (N=97) for associate
professors. The overall response rate was highest for departments ranked 41–50 (43%), and
lowest for the top 10 departments (37%). Assistant professors had higher response rates
than associate professors across all department rank groups except the top 10 departments,
for which the response rate was 37% in both groups. Position- and department rank-specific
response rates are reported in Online Appendix Figure O-A29.
The response rate gives rise to concerns about non-response bias. Of particular concern is the potential bias that could stem from respondents selecting into the survey based on
their ability to publish in the T5. Comparisons of distributions of T5 publications between
the respondents and the overall population of assistant and associate professors hired by
the top 50 departments provides evidence against this form of selection. Department rank
49

See Liner and Sewell (2009) for a survey of department chairs on research requirements for promotion
and tenure.
50
The survey was designed with three goals in mind: (i) to confirm our empirical findings about the
influence of T5 publications on tenure decisions; (ii) to collect new data on the perceived importance of
factors such as teaching performance or external letters that are unobserved in the work-history data; and
(iii) to provide junior faculty the opportunity to express their opinions about the consequences (either positive
or negative) of current tenure and promotion practices for themselves and for the discipline as a whole.

31

group-specific Mann-Whitney tests comparing T5 distributions between survey respondents
and the overall population fail to reject the null of equality for all rank groups. See Online Appendix Table O-A53 for these comparisons. Online Appendix Section 8.2 presents
additional data description for the survey sample.51

3.1

Survey Results

One survey question asks respondents to rank eight different areas of research and teaching
performance based on their perceptions of the degree to which tenure and/or promotion decisions are influenced by performance in these areas. Figure 11 summarizes responses to this
question by presenting the mean ranking assigned by respondents to each performance area.
The figure presents three sets of summaries, corresponding to rankings of performance areas
for three different types of career advancement: receipt of tenure, promotion to assistant
professor, and promotion to associate professor.52 The quantity of T5 publications receives
the highest mean rank across all forms of career advancement. Wilcoxon signed-rank tests
performed between pairs of ranking distributions for the eight performance areas indicates
that the distribution of rankings of the importance of the quantity of T5 publications is significantly different than the ranking distributions for all of the remaining seven performance
areas at the 10% level.53 In addition to confirming our previous findings of the substantial
influence of T5 publications relative to publications in non-T5 journals, these survey results
51

We note that the survey was terminated prematurely because of a complaint to our IRB board by
some individuals we attempted to sample. The complainants were concerned that their identity might be
determined by our survey protocol despite our efforts to assure anonymity. This source of non-response
mechanically leads to a low response rate that does not necessarily produce a bias unless early responders
are biased in the same general direction and have axes to grind.
52
The tenure-specific ranking has a sample size of 306 respondents. The promotion-specific rankings
have lower sample sizes because these rankings were presented to different subsets of respondents: rankings
for promotion to associate professor was only requested from current assistant professors, and rankings for
promotion to full professor was only requested from current associate professors. The reason for employing
this form of sample restriction is twofold. First, it ensures that responses are current and well-informed
since faculty are only surveyed about promotions to positions that they are currently working towards
obtaining. Second, it improves the probability of survey completion by reducing the burden of response for
each respondent from 3 to 2 rankings.
53
See Online Appendix Tables O-A56–O-A58 for pair-wise tests on rankings for each type of career
advancement.

32

reveal that the T5 is also more influential than measures of performance such as external
letters of recommendation and teaching performance which are not available to us. These
findings support the conclusion that junior faculty at the top departments perceive the quantity of T5 publications to be the most important source of influence on tenure and promotion
decisions.
Figure 11: Ranking of Performance Areas Based On Their Perceived Influence On Tenure
and Promotion Decisions

Note: This figure summarizes respondents’ rankings of 8 performance areas. Responses are summarized by type of career
advancement: tenure receipt, promotion to assistant professor, and promotion to associate professor. The bars present mean
responses for each performance area. Respondents were given the option to not rank any or all of the eight performance areas.
As a result, the number of respondents vary across the performance areas.

The quality of external letters of recommendation receives the second-highest mean
ranking across all types of career advancement. External letters are meant to provide tenure
and promotion committees an outside view of the quality and impact of candidates’ research,
especially in comparison to similarly-experienced researchers working in comparable fields.
The data do not allow us to test whether one’s quantity of T5 publications influences the
quality of external letters. However, given that external and internal reviews are both focused
33

on judging candidates’ research output, and given that external reviewers likely work in
departments that are in the same class as the candidate’s department (with similar levels
of T5 emphasis in research evaluation), it is possible that external reviewers put as large an
emphasis on a candidate’s quantity of T5 publications as reviewers who are internal to the
candidate’s department. Indeed, it is not unusual for letter writers to focus on the number
of T5 articles published or in the pipeline for a prospective candidate. Such dependence of
external letters on the quantity of T5 publications would compound the pressure faced by
junior faculty to publish in the T5.
Figure 12: Minimum Number of T5 Publications Required for Tenure

Note: This figure summarizes respondents’ perceptions about the number of T5 publications that are required to obtain
tenure in their department. The bars present mean responses for each performance area. White diamonds indicate that the
responses were significantly different than zero at the 10% level.

Non-T5 publications receive the third-highest mean rank across all levels of career advancement. However, the rankings for both external letters and non-T5 publications are only
significantly different than the rankings for citations when we consider tenure and promotion
to associate professor. The Wilcoxon tests presented in Online Appendix Table O-A58 fail
to reject the null that the ranking distributions for external letters and non-T5 publications
34

are equal to the distribution for citations for promotions to full professor. The remaining
performance areas receive the four lowest mean ranks across all career advancement types.
Teaching performance and success in securing grants receive rankings that are not significantly different from each other for any type of career advancement. Books and chapters in
books are ranked last for all levels of career advancement. Long-term integrated bodies of
research are valued much less than focused T5 articles.
These survey results offer important evidence on the large influence of T5 publications
on tenure and promotion practices. However, they do not shed light on whether the difference
in influence between T5 and non-T5 publications is merely a reflection of differences in article
impact and quality between these outlets, or whether the T5’s influence also operates through
channels that are independent of article impact and quality. Figure 13 presents some evidence
that answers this question. The figure summarizes responses to a survey question that asks
respondents to compare the probabilities of receiving tenure and promotion associated with
publishing in T5 and non-T5 journals, fixing the quality of the publications in question to
be equal. Specifically, the question presents respondents with a thought experiment wherein
respondents are asked to imagine a scenario where their departments must decide to tenure
and/or promote one out of two candidates. The respondents are asked to assume that the
two candidates are identical in every respect, with the exception that one candidate has
published all of their articles in T5 journals whereas the other candidate has published the
same number of articles of equal quality in non-T5 journals. The respondents are then asked
to report the probability that the candidate with T5 publications receives tenure and/or
promotion instead of the candidate with non-T5 publications. In a scenario where the T5
influence operates solely through differences in article impact and quality, both the T5 and
non-T5 candidate would be expected to receive tenure and/or promotion with a probability
of 0.5. Any deviation from 0.5 in favor of the T5 candidate indicates that the T5 influences
tenure and/or promotion decisions through channels that are independent of article quality.
The results plotted in Figure 13 reveal large and statistically significant deviations

35

Figure 13: Probability That Candidate with T5 Publications Receives Tenure or Promotion
Instead of Candidate with non-T5 Publications, ceteris paribus

Note: This figure summarizes respondents’ perceptions about the probability that a candidate with T5s is granted tenure or
promotion by the respondent’s department instead of a candidate with non-T5s, ceteris paribus. Responses are summarized
by type of career advancement: tenure receipt, promotion to assistant professor, and promotion to associate professor. The
bars present mean responses for each performance area. White diamonds indicate that the mean response is significantly
different than 50% at the 10% level.

from 0.5 in favor of the candidate with more T5s. The deviations exist across department
rank groupings, and for all three levels of career advancement: tenure receipt, promotion
to assistant professor, and promotion to associate professor. The figure plots the mean
response by department rank group and level of career advancement. For tenure decisions,
the mean response is 0.89 or higher across all department rank groups. Thus, on average,
junior faculty at the top 50 departments believe that their department would award tenure
to the T5 candidate instead of the non-T5 candidate at least 89 times out of 100. The
mean reported probability rises as one considers lower ranked departments, with its value
peaking at 0.93 for departments ranked 31–40. The reported probabilities are similarly high
for promotions to associate professor. Mean reported probabilities are lower for promotions
to full professor, and exhibit higher variation. However, the means continue to remain

36

significantly different than 0.5 at the 10% level.
These results reveal that there exists a widely-held belief among junior faculty at the
Top 50 departments that the same quantity and quality of articles will yield rewards at vastly
different rates based on whether their articles are published in T5 or non-T5 journals. Junior
faculty form expectations based on past decisions, and past decisions are clearly biased in
favor of T5 publishing (see Figure 5). For rational career-oriented economists who prioritize
tenure and career advancement, given the current incentives academic careers should be little
more than quests for publication in the T5.

4

The T5 as a Filter of Quality

The analysis of Section 2 establishes the strong relationship between tenure decisions in
the top 35 departments and T5 publications. The analysis of Section 3 shows that junior
faculty are acutely aware of the power of the T5. The analysis in this section evaluates
quality of the T5 as a filter of research influence and quality. Using citations as a proxy
for influence, Section 4.1 compares citation distributions of individual journals against the
citation distribution of T5 journals as a group. Section 4.2 compares journals with respect to
the share of the most influential papers that have been published by T5 and non-T5 journals.
Section 4.3 compares T5 and non-T5 journals based on Impact Factors. Section 4.4 examines
the publishing behavior of influential economists from 14 major fields of economics.

4.1

Comparison of Citations Between T5 and Non-T5 Journals

This section compares cumulative citation counts (measured as of 2018) of articles published
in the T5 and those published in 25 non-T5 journals over the ten year period 2000–2010. We
reluctantly follow the literature in using citation counts as a valid measure of productivity.
However, it is obvious that citation counts are flawed measures of productivity. It is very
likely that, following convention, authors are more likely to cite T5 papers even when com-

37

parable or superior non-T5 papers are available. Given current practices, the appeal to a
T5-certified paper strengthens a reference in the eyes of many readers. Academic productivity is an elusive concept. In the absence of a better measure, we reply on a flawed measurer.
Our analysis shows large intra-journal heterogeneity and inter-journal overlap in the quality
of published articles across T5 and non-T5 journals. Combined with our analysis in Section
4.2 which identifies non-T5 journals that produce as many, if not more, influential articles
than the T5, the findings of this section show that whether an article is published in the T5
is a poor predictor of the article’s actual quality.
The comparisons in this section build on the analysis of Hamermesh (2018), who compares citations in the T5 journals, with citations in the Review of Economics and Statistics
and the Economic Journal. We extend his analysis by expanding the set of non-T5 journals
considered to 25, and by analyzing articles published in a wider and more recent time frame
(2000–2010 in our analysis vs. 1974-75 and 2007-08 in Hamermesh (2018)).54 Our results
confirm his findings. There are large intra-T5 variation in citations and large overlaps in
citations between papers published in the T5, and those published in ReStat and EJ. Our
use of the expanded journal comparison set helps identify six additional non-T5 economics
journals that share at least as large a citation overlap with the T5 as EJ. We conclude the
analysis by comparing the overlap between non-T5 journals and different subsets of T5 journals. We find that the comparability between T5 and non-T5 publications greatly increases
when one focuses on the lesser-cited T5 journals. As a case in point, the median-cited ReStat
article ranks in the 38th percentile of year-adjusted citations among all T5 publications, but
attains a rank of the 58th percentile when compared to ReStud alone. These comparisons
illustrate the large heterogeneity in influence among the journals that comprise the T5.
We note at the outset that for want of a better measure, our comparisons of journal
and article quality rely on citations. One concern with using citations is that it could
54

Our chosen time frame necessarily excludes any analysis of the impact of the new AEA applied journals,
which started publication in 2009.

38

undervalue the quality of non-T5 articles relative to those published in the T5.55 If such
undervaluation exists, our analysis will understate the degree of comparability between T5
and non-T5 journals. Further, independent of quality, the T5 could attract more citations
than field journals simply due to the fact that general interest journals are designed to target
a wider audience than field journals. The reader should consider such potential biases when
interpreting the results reported in this section.
4.1.1

Comparisons Against the Aggregate T5 Distribution

Figure 14 plots distributions of residual ln(Citations + 1) for articles published between
2000–2010 in each of the thirty journals considered in our analyses.56 The journal-specific
distributions are overlaid on a shaded distribution that represents the distribution of residual
citations for all articles published between 2000–2010 in the T5. The residualization adjusts
log citations for exposure effects, and yields an exposure-adjusted measure that can be used to
compare the performance of articles across publication cohorts.57 The residuals are obtained
by estimating an OLS regression of ln(Citations + 1) on a third-degree polynomial for the
number of years elapsed between the year of publication and 2018 (the year when citations
55
Longstanding and deeply entrenched perceptions about the superiority of T5 publications serve to
increase the visibility of T5 articles. In the presence of such differences, it is possible that T5 articles will
attract more citations than non-T5 articles, conditional on article quality. The T5 journals are among
the most popular and well-perceived journals in the profession. Analyzing the results of a survey of 92
Economists, Hawkins et al. (1973) show that the AER, ECMA, JPE, and QJE were the four most highly
regarded journals in the late 1960’s and early 1970’s (ReStat was ranked 5th, and ReStud was ranked 6th).
The perceived superiority of these four journals have persisted over time. Analyzing the results of 2,103
responses to an online survey sent to AEA members in 2002, Axarloglou and Theoharakis (2003) replicate
the findings of Hawkins et al. (1973) and show that the AER, ECMA, JPE, and QJE have continued to
be perceived as most influential in the early 2000s. To the extent that scholars prefer citing articles from
journals that they perceive to be of the highest quality and influence, we should expect a negative bias
against non-T5 citations. In other words, it is possible that holding constant both an article’s quality and
its relevance to the citing author’s work, T5 articles receive more citations than non-T5 articles due to
longstanding and deeply entrenched perceptions of the superiority of articles published in the T5.
56
Similar to Hamermesh (2018), we exclude notes, comments, reports of editors, and papers published
in the AER’s annual issue of Papers & Proceedings. We also exclude papers that are less than 10 pages in
length.
57
The present analysis focuses on comparisons of this year-adjusted measure. The interested reader is
referred to Online Appendix Figures O-A25–O-A27 for analogous plots that are specific to articles published
in 2000, 2005, and 2010 respectively.

39

were recorded).58
Figure 14: Distribution of Residual Log Citations for Articles Published between 2000–2010
(Measured Through July, 2018)

Source: Scopus.com; accessed 07/2018.
Definition of journal abbreviations: QJE–Quarterly Journal Of Economics, JPE–Journal Of Political Economy, ECMA–Econometrica,
AER–American Economic Review, ReStud–Review Of Economic Studies, JEL–Journal Of Economic Literature, JEP–Journal Of Economic
Perspectives, ReStat–Review Of Economics And Statistics, JEG–Journal Of Economic Growth, JOLE–Journal Of Labor Economics,
JHR–Journal Of Human Resources, EJ–Economic Journal, JHE–Journal Of Health Economics, ICC–Industrial And Corporate Change,
WBER–World Bank Economic Review, RAND–Rand Journal Of Economics, JDE–Journal Of Development Economics, JPub–Journal Of Public
Economics, JOE–Journal Of Econometrics, HE–Health Economics, ILR–Industrial And Labor Relations Review, JEEA–Journal Of The European
Economic Association, JME–Journal Of Monetary Economics, JRU–Journal Of Risk And Uncertainty, JInE–Journal Of Industrial Economics,
JOF–Journal Of Finance, JFE–Journal Of Financial Economics, ReFin–Review Of Financial Studies, JFQA–Journal Of Financial And
Quantitative Analysis, and MathFin–Mathematical Finance.

The subfigure labelled T5 reveals that the distribution of citations to QJE articles
has a considerable rightward shift relative to the other T5 journals. A comparison of the
median QJE residual against the distribution of residuals for all T5 publications reveals that
the median-cited QJE article ranks at the 71st percentile of all T5 publications in terms of
58
Online Appendix Table O-A32 presents comparison of median residualized citations (aggregate T5
vs. individual journals) using residuals obtained from four different specifications. The first three columns
present comparisons that use residuals obtained from an OLS of ln(Citations) + 1 on first-, second-, and
third-degree polynomials of years of exposure respectively. The last column uses residuals obtained from
estimating ln(Citations)+1 as a function of indicators for exposure. The results are robust to the alternative
specifications.

40

residualized citations.59 In terms of median citations, the QJE is followed by AER, JPE,
ECMA, and ReStud, with the median-cited ReStud article reaching the 31st percentile of T5
citations.
The subfigure labeled Journals 6–10 in Figure 14 plots distributions of residualized
citations for the five non-T5 economics journals with the highest median citations. Among
non-T5 economics journals, the greatest number of citations accrue to survey journals. Citations to JEL exhibit a considerable rightward shift relative to the T5 distribution. Online
Appendix Table O-A31 shows that the median-cited JEL article ranks at the 70th percentile
of all T5 publications in terms of residual citations, which is one percentile below the ranking for the median-cited QJE article. JEL is followed by the JEP, whose median-cited
article is ranked at the median of the T5 distribution. ReStat ranks first among the nonsurvey economics journals with its median citation reaching the 38th percentile of all T5
citations. It outranks ReStud by 7 percentile points and underperforms ECMA by only 3
points. The list of the five highest-cited non-T5 economics journals is rounded out by JEG
whose median-cited article is ranked at the 30th percentile of T5 citations, JOLE which has
an analagous ranking at the 25th percentile, and JHR, JHE, and ICC which are all tied at
the 24th percentile.60
As previously noted, finance has emerged as an important subfield in economics. Not
surprisingly, finance journals have lives of their own. They attract greater citations than
non-T5, non-survey economics journals. JOF is most highly cited, with its median-cited
article reaching the 61st percentile of all T5 publications. It is followed by JFE and ReFin,
both of which have median citations above that of ECMA and ReStud.
Finally, we note that the relative performance of non-T5 journals improves considerably when the comparison excludes the two highest-cited T5 journals (AER and QJE).
59
See Online Appendix Table O-A31 for comparisons of journal-specific median citations against the T5
distribution of citations.
60
The next three subfigures in Figure 14 present distributions for fifteen additional economics journals,
listed in decreasing order of median citations. The first six of these journals have median-cited articles that
are ranked at or above the 20th percentile of all T5 articles.

41

Thus, while the median-cited ReStat article ranks in the 38th percentile of the overall T5
distribution, its rank improves to the 48th percentile when the comparison set is restricted
to articles in JPE, ECMA, and ReStud. Similar improvements are recorded for other nonT5 journals. The reader is referred to Online Appendix Section 7.1 for further details on
comparisons of non-T5 journals against subsets of the T5.

4.2

Which Journals Publish Influential Research Papers?

This section compares T5 and non-T5 journals with respect to the volume of influential
articles published by each journal between the period 2000–2010. To proceed, we use the
residualized citations used in the previous sections to group articles from the 30 economics
journals into four performance-based bins: articles with the Top 25%, Top 10%, Top 5%,
and Top 1% of residual citations. We then calculate the proportion of articles in each quality
bin that was published by each of the 30 economics journals. Table 2 presents a ranking of
the 30 journals based on unadjusted proportions.
The AER features prominently in these rankings, contributing the largest proportion
of articles to each of the quality bins except the Top 1%. The QJE ranks second in the 25%,
10% and 5% bins, and ranks first in the Top 1% bin. With the exception of the Top 25%
bin, AER and QJE account for a combined 30% or more of the articles in each citation bin
(they account for 23.5% of the articles in the 25% bin). The other T5 journals contribute
fewer influential articles.61
The non-T5 non-survey journals publish many influential articles. JOE, ReStat and
JEG account for a combined 13.6% of all articles in the Top 1% of residual citations. The
contributions from these three journals are not only significant in absolute terms, but also in
relation to the T5. All three journals produce more Top 1% articles than ReStud, two of the
61

With the exception of the 1% bin, JPE and ECMA are ranked within one point of each other. ReStud,
on the other hand, ranks considerably lower than the other four T5 journals, and is outranked by many
non-T5 journals in all four categories. The appearance of ReStud as an outlier among the T5 is consistent
with the findings from the previous sections that show that the median ReStud article was ranked in the
31st percentile of all T5 publications in terms of residual citations.

42

Table 2: Publication Volume-Unadjusted Proportion of Influential Articles Published By
Individual Journals Between 2000–2010
Rank

Top 25%
Citations
N=3321

Top 10%
Citations
N=1329

Top 5%
Citations
N=665

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

AER
QJE
ECMA
JEP
JPE
EJ
JOE

(14.0%)
(9.5%)
(6.7%)
(6.6%)
(5.7%)
(5.2%)
(5.2%)

AER
QJE
JEP
ECMA
JPE
JEL
ReStat

(16.6%)
(14.0%)
(7.6%)
(7.4%)
(6.8%)
(5.5%)
(4.5%)

8.

ReStat

(4.8%)

EJ

(4.4%)

9.
10.

JPub
JME

(4.5%)
(3.8%)

JOE
ReStud

(4.2%)
(3.5%)

11.
12.

JDE
ReStud

(3.8%)
(3.7%)

JPub
ICC

(3.1%)
(3.0%)

13.

JHE

(3.3%)

JDE

(2.7%)

14.
15.

JEL
ICC

(3.3%)
(2.7%)

JME
JHE

(2.5%)
(2.2%)

16.

HE

(2.5%)

HE

(2.0%)

17.

JMCB

(2.4%)

JMCB

(1.5%)

18.

JHR

(2.1%)

JEG
JOLE

(1.4%)

( .%)

19.
20.

RAND
JOLE

(2.0%)
(1.9%)

( .%)
(1.3%)

( .%)
( .%)

JEEA

AER
QJE
JEP
JEL
ECMA
JPE
JOE
ReStat

EJ
JME
ReStud

ICC
JPub

(17.7%)
(15.6%)
(9.6%)
(8.0%)
(7.1%)
(5.1%)
(4.7%)

QJE
JEL
AER
JEP
ECMA
JOE
ReStat

(17.3%)
(13.5%)
(12.8%)
(9.8%)
(8.3%)
(5.3%)
(4.5%)

( .%)

JEG
JPE

(3.8%)

(4.5%)
(2.6%)

( .%)
(3.0%)

( .%)
( .%)
JBES
JEEA
JPub

(2.0%)
(1.4%)
( .%)

HE
JDE
JOLE
RAND

EJ
JHE
RAND

( .%)
(2.4%)
( .%)

JHE
JBES
JEG

Top 1%
Citations
N=133

(2.3%)

( .%)
( .%)
ICC
ReStud

(1.2%)

(1.5%)
( .%)

JME
JOLE
WBER

(0.8%)

( .%)
( .%)

Source: Scopus.com; accessed 07/2018
Note:This table presents publication volume-unadjusted proportions of highly cited articles published by different journals.
Definition of journal abbreviations: QJE–Quarterly Journal Of Economics, JPE–Journal Of Political Economy, ECMA–Econometrica,
AER–American Economic Review, ReStud–Review Of Economic Studies, JEL–Journal Of Economic Literature, JEP–Journal Of Economic
Perspectives, ReStat–Review Of Economics And Statistics, JEG–Journal Of Economic Growth, JOLE–Journal Of Labor Economics,
JHR–Journal Of Human Resources, EJ–Economic Journal, JHE–Journal Of Health Economics, ICC–Industrial And Corporate Change,
WBER–World Bank Economic Review, RAND–Rand Journal Of Economics, JDE–Journal Of Development Economics, JPub–Journal Of Public
Economics, JOE–Journal Of Econometrics, HE–Health Economics, ILR–Industrial And Labor Relations Review, JEEA–Journal Of The European
Economic Association, JME–Journal Of Monetary Economics, JRU–Journal Of Risk And Uncertainty, JInE–Journal Of Industrial Economics,
JOF–Journal Of Finance, JFE–Journal Of Financial Economics, ReFin–Review Of Financial Studies, JFQA–Journal Of Financial And
Quantitative Analysis, and MathFin–Mathematical Finance.

43

three journals produce more Top 1% articles than JPE, and the remaining one produces as
many Top 1% articles as the JPE. ReStud is outranked by six additional non-survey non-T5
journals. These journals contribute a further 16% to the Top 1% bin. The contributions
of non-T5 non-survey journals remains significant across the remaining three citation bins.
The five most influential non-survey journals in the Top 5% bin produce a combined 20%
of the articles in that bin. The Top 10% and Top 25% bins receive 19% and 24% of their
publications respectively from the five most influential non-T5 sources within their respective
bins.
The discussion thus far focuses on each journal’s absolute production of influential
articles. AER publishes at least twice as many papers as the next highest T5 journal. It is
informative to compare contributions in light of each journal’s total volume of publications.
Table 3 produces a publication volume-adjusted version of the rankings presented in Table
2.62 The adjustment discounts the contribution of high-volume journals such as AER in order
to account for the increased probability of contribution (to the citation bins) associated with
publishing a larger volume of articles.
The volume adjustment leads to a substantial reordering of journals within all of the
citation bins. The AER falls in the rankings from first or third place in the unadjusted
ranking (depending on the citation bin) to the third place or lower in the adjusted ranking.
The adjustment increases the relative contributions from the QJE and JPE, reflecting the
fact that these journals have a lower volume of publication than the AER. While the increase
in their proportions improves the overall standing of these two journals, it does not result in
62

The rankings are based on volume-adjusted proportions of contributions to each citation bin, where
the adjusted proportion for journal-j in citation bin b is computed as follows:
Pj,b =



2010
1 X
vj,y
Cj,y,b /
Nb y=2000
Vy

(2)

where Nb is the total number of articles in citation bin b, Cj,y,b is the count of all articles published by
journal-j during year y that received enough citations to be included in citation bin b, vj,y is the number
of articles published by journal j during year y, and Vy is the total number of articles published in year y
by all of the 30 economics journals included in this exercise. The term (vj,y /Vy ) is a year-specific volume
adjustment that weights the contribution of each journal by the inverse of its publication volume during a
given year.

44

Table 3: Publication Volume-Adjusted Proportion of Influential Articles Published By Individual Journals Between 2000–2010
Rank

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

Top 25%
Citations
N=3321
QJE
JEL
AER
JPE
JEP
ECMA
JEG
ReStud
ReStat
JOLE
ICC
WBER
EJ
JHR
JDE
JHE
RAND
JOE
JME
JPub

(12.0%)
(8.9%)
(7.8%)
(7.3%)
(6.9%)
(5.7%)
(4.6%)
(4.6%)
(3.9%)
(3.6%)
(3.4%)
(3.4%)
(3.4%)
(3.2%)
(2.8%)
(2.5%)
(2.5%)
(2.4%)
(2.4%)
(2.3%)

Top 10%
Citations
N=1329

Top 5%
Citations
N=665

Top 1%
Citations
N=133

QJE
(16.6%)
JEL
(14.2%)
AER
(8.6%)
JPE
(8.3%)
JEP
(7.5%)
ECMA (5.9%)
JEG
(5.3%)
ReStud (4.1%)
ICC
(3.8%)
ReStat
(3.4%)
EJ
(2.7%)
WBER
(2.5%)
JOLE
(2.3%)
JOE
(1.9%)
JDE
(1.9%)
JHE
(1.6%)
JME
(1.5%)
JPub
(1.5%)
JBES
(1.2%)
RAND
(1.2%)

JEL
(19.8%)
QJE
(17.8%)
JEP
(8.8%)
AER
(8.7%)
JPE
(6.0%)
ECMA (5.2%)
JEG
(5.0%)
ReStat
(3.5%)
ICC
(3.0%)
ReStud (3.0%)
EJ
(2.6%)
WBER
(2.3%)
JOE
(2.1%)
JOLE
(1.8%)
JME
(1.6%)
JHE
(1.4%)
JBES
(1.3%)
RAND
(1.3%)
JPub
(1.1%)
JHR
(1.0%)

JEL
(26.6%)
QJE
(18.0%)
JEG
(11.8%)
JEP
(7.8%)
ECMA (5.5%)
AER
(5.5%)
JPE
(3.5%)
ReStat
(2.8%)
RAND
(2.7%)
JBES
(2.6%)
JHE
(2.0%)
JOE
(2.0%)
ICC
(1.9%)
EJ
(1.7%)
WBER
(1.4%)
ReStud (1.3%)
JPub
(1.2%)
JOLE
(1.2%)
JME
(0.6%)
JEEA
(0.0%)

Source: Scopus.com; accessed 07/2018
Note: This table presents publication volume-adjusted proportions of highly cited articles published by different journals. Adjusted proportions
are calculated according to Equation 2.
Definition of journal abbreviations: QJE–Quarterly Journal Of Economics, JPE–Journal Of Political Economy, ECMA–Econometrica,
AER–American Economic Review, ReStud–Review Of Economic Studies, JEL–Journal Of Economic Literature, JEP–Journal Of Economic
Perspectives, ReStat–Review Of Economics And Statistics, JEG–Journal Of Economic Growth, JOLE–Journal Of Labor Economics,
JHR–Journal Of Human Resources, EJ–Economic Journal, JHE–Journal Of Health Economics, ICC–Industrial And Corporate Change,
WBER–World Bank Economic Review, RAND–Rand Journal Of Economics, JDE–Journal Of Development Economics, JPub–Journal Of Public
Economics, JOE–Journal Of Econometrics, HE–Health Economics, ILR–Industrial And Labor Relations Review, JEEA–Journal Of The European
Economic Association, JME–Journal Of Monetary Economics, JRU–Journal Of Risk And Uncertainty, JInE–Journal Of Industrial Economics,
JOF–Journal Of Finance, JFE–Journal Of Financial Economics, ReFin–Review Of Financial Studies, JFQA–Journal Of Financial And
Quantitative Analysis, and MathFin–Mathematical Finance.

improvements in rankings across all bins since other journals such as the JEL get even larger
increases in their proportion of contributions. ECMA experiences a negative adjustment
and falls to sixth place in the Top 25%, Top 10%, and Top 5% bins. ReStud shows ranking
improvements in the Top 25% and Top 10% bins. However, its rankings are not affected in
the Top 5% and Top 1% bins despite the volume adjustment.
Among non-T5 non-survey journals, JEG has the largest upward shift, consistently

45

ranking within the Top 7 across all citation bins. ReStat falls in rank. However, it continues
to remain influential across the various citation bins. EJ and JOE both move down the
scale.
The major takeaway from the rankings in Tables 1 and 2 is that non-T5 non-survey
journals publish a significant volume of influential research in economics, frequently outperforming some of the less-influential T5 journals. Their influence on the discipline is highly
visible regardless of whether one considers their absolute volume of contributions or contributions per unit of publication.

4.3

The T5 are Not the Journals with the Top Five Impact Factors
in Economics

Table 4 presents impact factors by lag (2 year; 5 year;· · · ; 20 year) with the longest lag
showing the lasting contributions (citations at 20 years). Among the T5, only the QJE is
in the T5 impact in any listed year, and is ranked first at all lags except the 10 year lag.
Finance journals have much higher impact factors, reflecting the scale of practitioners in
that field. Journals with high short-term (2 year) impacts often do not keep their rankings
over the long term. The very basis for the ranking of the T5– that it signals journals with
the most cited papers – is flawed. Only the QJE deserves that status.
The scale of the impact of economics journals pales into insignificance compared to
that of science journals (see Online Appendix Table O-A34). The two year impact factors
for any of the six leading journals listed in that table exceed those of any economics journal.
Science is ranked fourth with two and five-year impact factors around 41. Also notable is
the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences – an outlet in which many important
papers by economists have appeared, but which is off the table in T5 assessments. Its impact
factor rivals the highest ranked journal economics impact factor.

46

Table 4: 2, 5, 10, 15, and 20 Year Impact Factors For 25 Economics Journals Constructed
Using Citations Data From 2017, Ordered by 5 Year Impact Factor

2 Year IF

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

Quarterly Journal Of Economics
Journal Of Economic Perspectives
Journal Of Economic Literature
Journal Of Finance
Journal Of Financial Economics
American Economic Review
Review Of Financial Studies
Journal Of Economic Growth
Journal Of Political Economy
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
Review Of Economic Studies
Econometrica
Review Of Economics And Statistics
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
Journal Of Human Resources
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
Journal Of The European Economic Association
Journal Of Labor Economics
Economic Journal
Journal Of Health Economics
Journal Of Development Economics
Journal Of Monetary Economics
Journal Of Financial And Quantitative Analysis
Journal Of Applied Econometrics
Industrial And Corporate Change

5 Year IF

10 Year IF

15 Year IF

20 Year IF

Rank

IF

Rank

IF

Rank

IF

Rank

IF

Rank

IF

1
2
11
5
6
9
10
4
8
7
20
14
15
12
3
17
21
13
19
16
23
26
27
24
25

(8.57)
(7.21)
(4.29)
(5.54)
(5.53)
(4.63)
(4.45)
(6.17)
(5.08)
(5.42)
(3.12)
(3.87)
(3.64)
(3.99)
(6.86)
(3.45)
(3.04)
(3.88)
(3.27)
(3.49)
(2.48)
(2.24)
(2.22)
(2.46)
(2.35)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

(12.80)
(10.82)
(9.91)
(9.38)
(8.11)
(6.53)
(6.27)
(6.15)
(6.09)
(6.08)
(6.03)
(5.94)
(5.55)
(5.51)
(5.11)
(4.83)
(4.70)
(4.62)
(4.27)
(4.00)
(3.89)
(3.27)
(3.23)
(3.16)
(3.08)

2
4
1
3
5
9
6
12
7
.
11
8
10
.
13
.
17
14
15
18
16
25
19
23
22

(15.53)
(11.52)
(17.24)
(11.98)
(10.54)
(7.41)
(9.39)
(6.07)
(8.48)
(.)
(6.42)
(7.86)
(6.81)
(.)
(5.89)
(.)
(4.82)
(5.14)
(5.01)
(4.32)
(4.90)
(3.51)
(4.25)
(3.83)
(3.91)

1
4
2
3
5
10
7
9
6
.
12
8
11
.
15
.
.
14
13
19
16
25
18
23
20

(18.62)
(11.91)
(17.13)
(13.99)
(11.53)
(8.04)
(9.49)
(8.93)
(10.09)
(.)
(7.00)
(9.25)
(7.62)
(.)
(5.33)
(.)
(.)
(5.33)
(5.41)
(4.50)
(4.90)
(3.86)
(4.60)
(4.15)
(4.47)

1
5
2
3
4
9
8
10
6
.
12
7
11
.
15
.
.
13
14
22
20
26
16
17
19

(20.11)
(11.03)
(18.60)
(15.04)
(11.97)
(8.25)
(9.32)
(8.23)
(10.75)
(.)
(7.14)
(9.69)
(7.31)
(.)
(4.90)
(.)
(.)
(5.21)
(5.11)
(4.45)
(4.53)
(3.83)
(4.63)
(4.59)
(4.58)

Source: Scopus; Accessed 07/2018.
Note:This table presents 2, 5, 10, 15, and 20 Year Impact Factors for 51 different journals. Impact Factors are calculated using citations accrued
during the year 2017. The table also presents five different journal rankings corresponding to each of the five Impact Factors. Due to data
unavailability, we exclude the AEJ s from the 10, 15, and 20 year Impact Factor calculations and rankings. We also exclude JEEA from the 15
and 20 Year Impact Factor calculations and rankings.
Definition of Impact Factor: For any given journal, an x-year Impact Factor as of 2017 is defined as the sum of citations received in 2017 by
all articles published in the journal during the time period 2016-x to 2016 divided by the journal’s total volume of publications during the same
time period:
2016
X
citations2017
y,j
2017
IFx,j =
volumej
y=2016−x
where citations2017
represents the sum of citations received in 2017 by all articles published by journal-j during year y, and volumej represents
y,j
journal-j’s total volume of publication during the period 2016-x to 2016.

4.4

Where Influential Economists Publish

This section explores where influential economists publish classified by their field of specialization. We use RePEc’s field-specific author rankings to compile a list of the 50 most
influential authors63 within 14 fields of specialization64 . We analyze their publication his63

Online Appendix Tables O-A43–O-A46 present the list of top 50 authors within each field. The fields
of Finance and Industrial Organization include fewer than 50 authors because RePEc’s ranking for these
fields included fewer than 50 authors.
64
The fields include demographic economics, development economics, econometrics, environmental economics, experimental economics, finance, health economics, international finance, international trade, industrial organization, labor economics, macroeconomics, microeconomics, and public economics

47

tories to identify the journals that account for the largest share of publications by the T50
authors of each field.
We use EconLit to obtain lists of articles published by each author between 1996–
2017. We use the classification scheme of Card and DellaVigna (2013) to assign articles to
different fields based on JEL codes included in the EconLit data65 . The assignment yields
14 different publication lists corresponding to the 14 field-specific author groupings, where
each publication list is restricted to only include journal articles that were identified as being
related to the author’s field of specialization.
Online Appendix Table O-A40 presents publication-volume-unadjusted field-specific
journal rankings based on the share of field f -specific articles written by field f ’s T50 authors
that was published in each journal j. The table presents rankings for the ten journals that
accounted for the largest share of publications. The rankings show that the top authors in
each field publish the largest volume of their field-specific publications in either the AER or
in non-T5 specialist field journals. The remaining four T5 journals do not feature in the top
3 for any field, except ECMA which ranks 3rd in econometrics and microeconomics. These
patterns reveal that the foremost economists working in the major fields of specialization
within economics publish most of their articles in non-T5 field journals.

The importance of non-T5 field journals becomes even more pronounced when we
rank journals by publication shares that have been adjusted for inter-journal differences
in volume of publication.66 The publication volume-adjusted rankings in Table 5 show
65
We make the following changes to Card and DellaVigna (2013)’s classification scheme:(i) We break out
the labor economics category into labor (JEL Codes I2 and J except J1), and demographic economics (JEL
Codes J1); (ii) environmental economics is added as a field (JEL Code Q5); (iii) international economics
is broken out into international finance (JEL Codes F3, F4, and F65) and international trade (JEL Codes
F1 and F4); and (iv) urban economics is removed from the health and urban economics category to yield
a health-only category (JEL Code I0 and I1). The rest of the fields are classified identically to Card and
DellaVigna (2013).
66
Table 5 presents weighted rankings based on a field f -specific volume-adjusted proportion, S̃jf :

S̃jf

1
= f
N

2017
X

f
Cj,y

y=1996

48


/

vj,y
Vy


(3)

Table 5: Journals that Account For Largest Share of Field-Specific Publications Between 1996-2017
By RePEc’s Top 50 Authors Within Different Fields (Adjusted For Publication Volume)
Rank.

dem

dev

ecmt

env

exp

fin

health

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

AEJae
JOLE
JPop
JHR
CES
AER
JEG
JHumCap
LabEc
JDemEc

JEG
WBRschObs
WBER
EDCC
JDE
JAfrEc
QJE
FrntEcChn
AER
JEL

JOE
EctT
JBES
ECMA
EctJ
EctRev
JAE
JFinEcmt
OxES
ReStat

IntRevEnvResEc
REnvEcPol
EnvEcPol
JEnvEcMgmt
EnvDevEc
ResEnerEc
JEL
ClmChgEc
EnvResEc
OxRevEcPol

ExpEc
JEcMeth
JRU
AEJmi
JEBO
RevEcDsgn
AER
GAMES
SthEcJ
NZEcPap

Rank.

intFin

intTr

IO

labor

macro

micro

pubEcon

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

EcPol
JIntComEcPol
JIMF
IntJFinEc
JIE
BPEA
IntFin
OpEcRev
JJapIntEc
IMFEcRev

JIE
EcPol
WrldTrdRev
WrldEc
RevWrldEc
AER
IEJ
QJE
RevIntEc
Empirica

RAND
JInE
IJIO
InfEcPol
JEMS
RevIO
JEEA
EcPol
JIndCmpTr
AER

JOLE
BPEA
AER
ILR
LabEc
QJE
IndRel
EducEc
JEL
JHR

BPEA
JME
AER
JMCB
AEJma
FedSTLRev
IntJCentrBank
FrntEcChn
JPE
EcPol

ECMA
ReStud
RAND
JET
JPE
QJE
JEEA
AER
GAMES
RschInEc

NTJ
ITPF
FiscSt
JPub
EcPol
AEJep
FinanzArchiv
CES
AER
PubFinRev

JOF
JHE
JFE
AmJHealEc
ReFin
HE
WBRschObs
AER
JFinInterm
EcHumBio
JFinMkt
JHumCap
RevFin
JHR
WBER
FormHeaEcPol
JFinEcmt
WBRschObs
JPortMgmt
QJE

Note: Adjusted proportions are calculated according to Equation 3.
Label Legend: AEJae–American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, AEJep–American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, AEJma–American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, AEJmi–American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, AER–
American Economic Review, AmJHealEc–American Journal of Health Economics, BPEA–Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, CES–CESifo Economic Studies, ClmChgEc–Climate Change Economics, EcHumBio–Economics and Human Biology,
ECMA–Econometrica, ECMA–Econometrica, EcPol–Economic Policy, EctJ–Econometrics Journal, EctRev–Econometric Reviews, EctT–Econometric Theory, EDCC–Economic Development and Cultural Change, EducEc–Education Economics, EJ–
Economic Journal, Empirica–Empirica, EnvDevEc–Environment and Development Economics, EnvEcPol–Environmental Economics and Policy Studies, EnvResEc–Environmental and Resource Economics, ExpEc–Experimental Economics, FedSTLRev–
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, FinanzArchiv–FinanzArchiv, FiscSt–Fiscal Studies, FormHeaEcPol–Forum for
Health Economics and Policy, FrntEcChn–Frontiers of Economics in China, GAMES–Games and Economic Behavior, HE–
Health Economics, IEJ–International Economic Journal, IJIO–International Journal of Industrial Organization, ILR–Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, IMFEcRev–IMF Economic Review, IndRel–Industrial Relations, InfEcPol–Information Economics
and Policy, IntFin–International Finance, IntJCentrBank–International Journal of Central Banking, IntJFinEc–International
Journal of Finance and Economics, IntRevEnvResEc–International Review of Environmental and Resource Economics, ITPF–
International Tax and Public Finance, JAE–Journal of Applied Econometrics, JAfrEc–Journal of African Economies, JBES–
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, JDE–Journal of Development Economics, JDemEc–Journal of Demographic Economics, JEBO–Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, JEcMeth–Journal of Economic Methodology, JEEA–Journal of
the European Economic Association, JEG–Journal of Economic Growth, JEL–Journal of Economic Literature, JEMS–Journal
of Economics and Management Strategy, JEnvEcMgmt–Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, JET–Journal
of Economic Theory, JFinEcmt–Journal of Financial Econometrics, JFinServRes–Journal of Financial Services Research, JHE–
Journal of Health Economics, JHR–Journal of Human Resources, JHumCap–Journal of Human Capital, JIE–Journal of International Economics, JIMF–Journal of International Money and Finance, JIndCmpTr–Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade,
JInE–Journal of Industrial Economics, JIntComEcPol–Journal of International Commerce, Economics and Policy, JJapIntEc–
Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, JLawEcOrg–Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, JMCB–
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, JME–Journal of Monetary Economics, JOE–Journal of Econometrics, JOLE–Journal
of Labor Economics, JPE–Journal of Political Economy, JPop–Journal of Population Economics, JPub–Journal of Public Economics, JRU–Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, LabEc–Labour Economics, NTJ–National Tax Journal, NZEcPap–New Zealand
Economic Papers, OpEcRev–Open Economies Review, OxES–Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, OxRevEcPol–Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, PubFinRev–Public Finance Review, QJE–The Quarterly Journal of Economics, RAND–RAND
Journal of Economics, REnvEcPol–Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, ResEnerEc–Resource and Energy Economics, ReStat–The Review of Economics and Statistics, ReStud–Review of Economic Studies, RevEcDsgn–Review of Economic Design, RevIntEc–Review of International Economics, RevIO–Review of Industrial Organization, RevWrldEc–Review of
World Economics, RschInEc–Research in Economics, SthEcJ–Southern Economic Journal, WBER–World Bank Economic Review, WBRschObs–World Bank Research Observer, WrldEc–World Economy, WrldTrdRev–World Trade Review
49
Source: RePEc, EconLit.

Table 6: Journals That Received The Highest Number of Citations From Articles Published Between 2010–2017 In the Top 2 Journals Within Different Fields of Specialization (Rankings Uses
Citations to Articles Published Between 1996-2017; Rankings are Adjusted For Publication
Volume of Cited Journal)
ranking
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

ranking
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

T5

dev

ecmt

fin

health

QJE
ECMA
JPE
AER
ReStud
JEL
JEP
JET
ReStat
BPEA

QJE
JEG
JDE
JEL
WBER
JPE
ReStud
AER
ReStat
AEJae

ECMA
JOE
EctT
JBES
JAE
AnnStat
EctRev
EctJ
ReStud
JASA

JOF
JFE
ReFin
QJE
JPE
JFQA
JAccEc
JFinMkt
JFinInterm
FoundTrFin

JHE
HE
QJE
JHR
JEL
JPE
JEP
ReStat
AER
HtlhServRes

IO

labor

macro

micro

pubEcon

RAND
JInE
JPE
ReStud
JEMS
IJIO
QJE
ECMA
AER
JLawEcon

JOLE
QJE
JHR
JPE
JEL
AEJae
ReStat
ECMA
AER
ReStud

JME
JPE
JMCB
QJE
AER
RED
AEJma
BPEA
JOF
ReStud

ECMA
JET
GAMES
ReStud
IJGT
QJE
JPE
EcT
AER
SocChWelf

QJE
JPub
JPE
JEL
AER
ReStud
AEJep
ECMA
ExpEc
JEP

Source: Scopus; Accessed 08/2018.
Note: This table presents a publication volume-adjusted (volume of cited journal) ranking of journals that received the
highest citations from the top 2 field journals in nine different fields of specialization. The nine fields used in this table are
the same ones used in our analysis of work-history data and categorized in Table O-A9. Construction of the ranking proceeds
in three steps. First, the top 2 journals in a field is defined as being composed of the two journals that received the highest
rank within the field in Combes and Linnemer (2010)’s field-specific rankings (the column titled “Tier A Field” in Table O-A9
presents the top 2 journals by field). Second, publication volume-weighted proportions of outgoing citations from the top 2
field journals are calculated for each journal that received citations from articles published by the top 2 field journals in 2017,
where the volume adjustment is made with respect to the yearly publication volume of the journals that received citations from
the top 2 field journals. The proportions only use citations to articles published between 1996-2017 due to data unavailability
for the pre-1996 period. Third, journals are ranked within a field based on field-specific outgoing proportions constructed in
step 2. This table uses field-specific proportions constructed in Steps 1–3 to present the 10 journals that received the largest
proportion of citations from the top 2 journals of each field.
Label Legend: AEJae–American Economic Journal: Applied Economics; AEJep–American Economic Journal: Economic Policy; AEJma–American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics; AER–American Economic Review; AnnStat–Annals of Statistics;
BPEA–Brookings Papers on Economic Activity; ECMA–Econometrica; EcT–Economic Theory; EctJ–Econometrics Journal;
EctRev–Econometric Reviews; EctT–Econometric Theory; ExpEc–Experimental Economics; FoundTrFin–Foundations and
Trends in Finance; GAMES–Games and Economic Behavior; HE–Health Economics; HtlhServRes–Health Services Research;
IJGT–International Journal of Game Theory; IJIO–International Journal of Industrial Organization; JAE–Journal of Applied
Econometrics; JASA–Journal of the American Statistical Association; JAccEc–Journal of Accounting and Economics; JBES–
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics; JDE–Journal of Development Economics; JEG–Journal of Economic Growth;
JEL–Journal of Economic Literature; JEMS–Journal of Economics and Management Strategy; JEP–Journal of Economic
Perspectives; JET–Journal of Economic Theory; JFE–Journal of Financial Economics; JFQA–Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis; JFinInterm–Journal of Financial Intermediation; JFinMkt–Journal of Financial Markets; JHE–Journal of
Health Economics; JHR–Journal of Human Resources; JInE–Journal of Industrial Economics; JLawEcon–Journal of Law and
Economics; JMCB–Journal of Money, Credit and Banking; JME–Journal of Monetary Economics; JOE–Journal of Econometrics; JOF–Journal of Finance; JOLE–Journal of Labor Economics; JPE–Journal of Political Economy; JPub–Journal of Public
Economics; QJE–Quarterly Journal of Economics; RAND–RAND Journal of Economics; RED–Review of Economic Dynamics; ReFin–Review of Financial Studies; ReStat–Review of Economics and Statistics; ReStud–Review of Economic Studies;
SocChWelf–Social Choice and Welfare; WBER–World Bank Economic Review

50

that once one adjusts for differences in publication volumes, the T5 journals account for a
considerably smaller share of field-specific articles published by the T50 authors of each field.
The difference across ranking methods stems largely from differences in rankings assigned to
AER. The rank of the AER declines considerably. Rankings for the non-AER T5 journals
are fairly stable across the ranking methods. Table 6 repeats the format of Table 5 except
for a more recent time period of publication. The T5 fare a little better, but the non-T5 still
dominate.

4.5

The Forgotten (by the Top 5) Classics

Figure 15: Proportion of RePEc’s Most Cited Articles Published in Different Journals in the
Last 10 and 20 Years (Adjusted for Publication Volume)
(a) Articles Published in Last 10 Years

(b) Articles Published in Last 20 Years

Prop. Out Of 10 Most Published
Journals For Author Group
(Adj. For Volume)

Prop. Out Of 10 Most Published
Journals For Author Group
(Adj. For Volume)

.6
.4
.2
0
T1T5
T 0a
no 10b
nT
5

JE
Q L
J
J E
EC PE
M
JOA
A F
R ER
eS
t
JMat
E
JF
E
JO
E

Aggregate Proportion

Individual Proportion
.1
.2
.3

.8

Aggregate

0

.6
.4
.2
0
T1T5
T 0a
no 10b
nT
5

JE
Q L
EC JE
R MA
eS
ta
JA t
EEE
JE A
AE P
JOR
E
JF
E

0

Aggregate Proportion

Individual Proportion
.1
.2
.3

.8

Aggregate

Source: RePEc.
The plot uses RePEc rankings for the top 1% of all economics articles over time to present the proportion of top cited articles
that were published in different journals. Each subfigure is divided into an individual and aggregate journal section. The
aggregate section presents the volume-adjusted proportions accounted for by (i) the T5, (ii) the T10a – the T10 according to
Kalaitzidakis et al. (2003), (iii) the T10b – the T10 according to Kodrzycki and Yu (2006), and (iv) non-T5 journals. T10a
includes the T5 and the Journal of Economic Theory, Journal of Econometrics, Econometric Theory, Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, and the Journal of Monetary Economics. T10b includes the T5 and the Journal of Economic Theory,
Journal of Econometrics, Journal of Finance, Journal of Financial Economics, Review of Financial Studies. The labels in the
horizontal axis correspond to: JEL-Journal of Economic Literature, QJE-Quarterly Journal of Economics,
ECMA-Econometrica, ReStat-Review of Economics and Statistics, JAE-Journal of Applied Econometrics, EEA-Journal of the
European Economic Association, JEP-Journal of Economic Perspectives, AER-American Economic Review, JOE-Journal of
Econometrics, JFE-Journal of Financial Economics, JME-Journal of Monetary Economics.

where N f is the total number of field f -specific articles published by field f ’s T50 authors over the period
f
1996–2010, Cj,y
is the total number of field f -specific articles published by field f ’s T50 authors in journal
P
j during year y, vj,y is the total number of articles published by journal j during year y, and Vy =
vj,y
j∈J

is the total number of articles published during year y by all journals j that published articles by field f ’s
T50 authors over the period 1996–2017.

51

The T5 excludes many influential papers. Figures 15a and 15b show that papers published in
non-T5 journals account for more than 70% of RePecs most-cited articles in the past 10 and
20 years, respectively. Among the 20 most cited articles by RePEc, 35% were not published
in the T5 (see Table O-A49). The most cited non-T5 papers reads like an honor roll of
economic analysis (see Table 7, and Tables O-A47–O-A48). Many classics have appeared
outside the T5. The T5 ignores publication of books. Becker’s Human Capital (1964) has
more than 4 times the number of citations of any paper listed on RePEc.67 The exclusion
of books from citation warps incentives against broad and integrated research and towards
writing bite-sized fragments.
67

See Table O-A50 for a sample of these neglected classics.

52

Table 7: 20 Most Cited Non-T5 Articles in RePEc’s Ranking of Most Cited Articles

Author

Article Name
Journal

Pub
Year

RePEc
Rank

RePEc
Cites

1.

Lucas, R. J.

“On the Mechanics of Economic Development”
Journal of Monetary Economics

1988

5

4,249

2.

Blundell, R.,
Bond, S.

“Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic
panel data models”
Journal of Econometrics

1998

6

4,195

3.

Jensen, M.,
Meckling, W.

“Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs
and ownership structure”
Journal of Financial Economics

1976

7

4,145

4.

Johansen, S.

“Statistical Analysis of Cointegration Vectors”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control

1988

8

3,939

5.

Bollerslev, T

“Generalized autoregressive conditional
heteroskedasticity”
Journal of Econometrics

1986

9

3,876

6.

Arellano, M.
Bover, O.

“Another look at the instrumental variable estimation of
error-components models”
Journal of Econometrics

1995

15

3,087

7.

Fama, E.
French, K.

“Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds”
Journal of Financial Economics

1993

19

2,760

8.

Calvo, G.

“Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework”
Journal of Monetary Economics

1983

23

2,576

9.

Im, K. S
Pesaran, H.
Shin, Y.

“Testing for unit roots in heterogeneous panels”
Journal of Econometrics

2003

25

2,487

10.

Charnes, A
Cooper, W.
Rhodes, E.

“Measuring the efficiency of decision making units”
European Journal of Operations Research

1978

28

2,438

Note: Ranking and Citation Source: RePEc. Accessed on: 05/19/2017

In subfield after subfield this pattern is repeated. Truly innovative papers often do
not survive the gauntlet of mainstream refereeing and editing that feature “normal science”
and not “novel science.”

53

5

Openness and Incest

.6

Figure 16: Density Plot for the Number of Years Served by Editors between 1996-2016

Density

.4

ReStud

.2

ECMA
AER
JPE
0

QJE
0

5

10

15

20

No. of years served as editor between 1996−2016
AER

ECMA

JPE

QJE

ReStud

Source: Brogaard, Engelberg & Parsons (2014) for data until 2011. Data for subsequent years collected from journal front
pages.
Note: The plot presents the density for the number of years served by editors of each journal between the years 1996 and
2016.

Monopolies restrict welfare. Oligopolies do little better. Openness and entry promote productivity, innovation, and the introduction of new ideas. Card and DellaVigna (2013) document the decline in the number of T5 papers published because T5 journal space is fixed
in supply and papers have become longer. They show that demand for journal space has
increased greatly in the face of fixed supply.68 This has created a more competitive environment. Thus, it is likely that the cost and effort going into getting into the T5 has increased.
This might mean that the average quality of papers published has gone up. It might also
mean that more valuable resources of time and effort are being devoted to tailoring papers to
please a certain group of editors. Although we have no evidence to prove this, the incentives
to do so are clear.
One consequence of increased effort required to gain access to T5 is that scholars who
have good reputations would avoid the rat race because they can secure a large readership
68

See Online Appendix Figure O-A31

54

by posting papers in prominent working paper series. Indeed, citation to working papers
has become more prominent because of their greater availability and currency. Publication
lags documented by Card and DellaVigna (2013) diminish readership of published papers.
Ellison (2011) documents that highly-ranked scholars are placing fewer of their papers in the
T5 journals.
Compounding the privately rational incentive to curry favor with editors is the phenomenon of longevity of editorial terms, especially at house journals. Professional associations generally limit the terms of editors. House journals have much looser limits. They
retain editors with their special preferences for years. See Figure 16. Long tenure for editors
inevitably creates a culture around them, their interests, and their research styles. The basic
economics of incentives suggests that prospective authors cultivate these editors and cater
to their whims. Such clientele effects are an inevitable feature of any journal. Turnover
of editors limits the harm in non-house journals. House journals are much less likely to
foster turnover. Journals published by professional associations generally have more rapid
turnover, although some of the journals published by the American Economic Association
are exceptions to this rule.
Long term lengths inevitably incentivize incest and inbreeding. Table 8 estimates “incest coefficients” for the T5 journals69 . The table documents the percentage of publications
in the period 2000–2016 made by the Top 10 US departments as assessed by the US News
69
Colussi (2018) conducts a similar analysis for the “Top Four” journals (T5 excluding ReStud ) using
citations data for the period 2000–2006. His estimates of inbreeding are lower than ours: Colussi (2018)
finds that Harvard faculty account for 15% of QJE publications during the period 2000–2006, and Chicago
faculty account for 10% of JPE publications. The differences in the magnitude of the estimates are due to:
(i) differences in the publication periods considered ( 2000–2016 in our analysis vs. 2000–2006 in Colussi
(2018)); and (ii) differences in strategies for assigning author affiliation (we assign affiliation based on institutional affiliation reported by the authors in their publications, whereas Colussi (2018) assign affiliation
based on employment data reported in authors’ Curriculum Vitaes). The two assignment strategies can
yield differing outcomes because the institution that a researcher is affiliated with when they complete their
research (the affiliation picked up by our strategy) may be different than the institution where the researcher
was hired when the work was eventually published (the affiliation picked up by matching date of publication
with yearly employment data from CVs).
Despite differences in the magnitude of estimates, Colussi (2018)’s results lead to the same conclusion:“ECA and the AER seem to be more open than the QJE and JPE, which show a bias toward authors
appointed at their host institutions.” The two sets of results thus complement each other by using different
strategies, data sets, and time periods to arrive at the same mutually confirmed conclusion.

55

Table 8: Incest Coefficients: Publications in Top 5 between 2000-2016 by Author Affiliation
Listed During Publication
AER

ECMA

JPE

QJE

ReStud

Count

%

% All

Count

%

% All

Count

%

% All

Count

%

% All

Count

%

% All

Chicago

266

14.7%

7.7%

70

12.8%

6.8%

90

23.8%

14.3%

103

20.8%

15.4%

25

7.4%

3.5%

Columbia

169

9.4%

4.9%

28

5.1%

2.7%

27

7.1%

4.3%

43

8.7%

6.4%

33

9.8%

4.6%

Harvard

412

22.8%

11.9%

58

10.6%

5.7%

55

14.6%

8.7%

165

33.3%

24.7%

26

7.7%

3.7%

MIT

255

14.1%

7.3%

75

13.7%

7.3%

47

12.4%

7.5%

93

18.8%

13.9%

33

9.8%

4.6%

Universities:

NYU

153

8.5%

4.4%

53

9.7%

5.2%

37

9.8%

5.9%

39

7.9%

5.8%

52

15.4%

7.3%

Northwestern

135

7.5%

3.9%

94

17.2%

9.2%

36

9.5%

5.7%

33

6.7%

4.9%

50

14.8%

7.0%

Princeton

166

9.2%

4.8%

54

9.9%

5.3%

24

6.3%

3.8%

39

7.9%

5.8%

34

10.1%

4.8%
4.6%

Stanford

245

13.6%

7.1%

75

13.7%

7.3%

42

11.1%

6.7%

62

12.5%

9.3%

33

9.8%

UCBerkeley

230

12.7%

6.6%

47

8.6%

4.6%

28

7.4%

4.4%

65

13.1%

9.7%

33

9.8%

4.6%

UPenn

162

9.0%

4.7%

48

8.8%

4.7%

38

10.1%

6.0%

26

5.3%

3.9%

46

13.6%

6.5%

Yale

134

7.4%

3.9%

88

16.1%

8.6%

23

6.1%

3.7%

33

6.7%

4.9%

22

6.5%

3.1%

UCL

53

2.9%

1.5%

39

7.1%

3.8%

15

4.0%

2.4%

11

2.2%

1.6%

32

9.5%

4.5%

33.0%

17.2%

122

22.3%

11.9%

94

24.9%

14.9%

225

45.5%

33.7%

53

15.7%

7.5%

University Combination:
Harvard/MIT

597

Total (Top Afil.)

1807 100.0% 52.0%

546 100.0% 53.4%

378 100.0% 60.0%

495 100.0% 74.2%

337 100.0% 47.5%

Total (Non-Top

1667

n/a

48.0%

476

n/a

46.6%

252

n/a

40.0%

172

n/a

25.8%

373

n/a

52.5%

3474

n/a

n/a

1022

n/a

n/a

630

n/a

n/a

667

n/a

n/a

710

n/a

n/a

Afil.)
Total (Top &
Non-Top)

Source: Elsevier, Scopus.com.
Note: The table reports three columns for each T5 journal. The left most columns report the number of articles that were
affiliated to each university. The middle columns present the percentage of articles published in the journal that were affiliated
to the university out of all articles affiliated to the list top universities. The right most columns present the percentage of
articles published in the journal that were affiliated to the university out of all articles published in the journal. An author is
defined as being affiliated with a university during a given year if he/she listed the university as an affiliation in any
publication that was made during that specific year. An article is defined as being affiliated with a university during a specific
year if at least one author was affiliated to the university during the year.

rankings of economics departments,70 plus New York University (ranked 13) and University
College London (not ranked by the US News). The percentages shown are those attributed
to scholars affiliated with a particular university for each T5 journal. The JPE has a high
incest coefficient – 14.3% for Chicago affiliates; the non-house-affiliated AER has a relatively
high incest coefficient for Harvard faculty who account for 11.9% of its publications71 . Most
conspicuous is the QJE with a 24.7% incest coefficient for Harvard affiliates and a 13.9%
70

The top 10 departments are determined based on an average of US News department rankings for the
years 2008, 2010, and 2015.
71
Chicago faculty account for only 7.7%

56

coefficient for MIT affiliates (the combined incest coefficient is over 33%).72,73
Tenure committees abdicate their responsibilities if they rely too strongly on T5 publications in making their decisions. They effectively delegate the task of candidate evaluation
to editors of the T5. This leads to a potentially dangerous concentration of power in the
hands of a few editors and leaves the discipline vulnerable to potential bias and corruption
within T5 editorial systems.

5.1

Corruption or Inside Information?

A number of studies have attempted to determine if there is corruption in the editorial process
of economics journals by examining the extent to which an article’s chances of publication
are affected by the presence of connections between the article’s authors and journal editors.
Analyzing data on 1,051 articles published in 1984 by 28 leading economics journals (T5
included), Laband and Piette (1994) find that articles with author-editor connections are
indeed more likely to be published. However, on average, these articles also tend to attract
higher citations. Brogaard et al. (2014) find qualitatively similar results from their analysis
of a more comprehensive sample of 50,000 articles published since 1955 by 30 top economics
and finance journals. They estimate that authors publish twice as many papers in a journal
when the journal is edited by a colleague, compared to periods when such departmenteditor networks do not exist. They also find that connected articles generate 5% – 25%
more citations than unconnected articles on average. The authors of both studies conclude
that their findings are suggestive of an underlying phenomenon whereby uncorrupt, articleimpact-maximizing editors exploit their author-connections to identify high-potential papers.
They conjecture that heterogeneous access to information for connected and unconnected
72

Some papers have multiple authors at MIT and Harvard. Thus, some percentages do not sum up.
Except for Harvard faculty at the AER, the percentages for the non-house journals show little evidence of
favoritism.
73
The relative high proportion of AER publications by Harvard faculty cannot be attributed to incest.
Harvard faculty did not serve in the AER editorial board during the period being analyzed (see Online
Appendix Table O-A59) Indeed the 11.9% figure might serve as a quality benchmark to down-weight the
QJE incest coefficient.

57

papers makes it less expensive for editors to identify high-potential papers written by authors
within their network, which in turn has the effect of simultaneously increasing both the
number and quality of published articles authored by individuals within their network.
While indicative of the overall fairness of the editorial process within the top journals
of economics, the aggregate nature of these analyses prevent the studies from shedding light
on the prevelance of editorial corruption within the T5 – a small subsample of the journals
analyzed by these studies. We are therefore none the wiser about corruption within the T5
and must continue to allow for its possible existence when evaluating the consequences of
relying on the T5 to judge quality.
Despite the ambiguity regarding the prevalence and importance of corruption in T5
publishing, these results have important implications. If the explanations in the literature
hold for the T5 journals, tenure-track faculty with connections to T5 editorial boards gain
an advantage over colleagues who lack such networks. While this may be a fair practice
from the perspective of an editor seeking to maximize article impact conditional on his/her
information set, it would be unfair from the perspective of an unconnected author whose
tenure outcome is closely tied to the T5 editor’s decision which, if correctly conjectured, is
biased against unconnected authors. Therefore, given the available evidence, one must allow
for the possibility of strong network bias against tenure-track faculty who lack connections
with T5 editors, regardless of whether such bias stems from blatant editorial corruption or
from the above conjectured impact-maximizing behavior of editors who seek quality papers.74
Biases stemming from informational efficiencies associated with author-editor networks are inevitable. Out of sight, out of mind. Also relevant are the effects that an editor’s
ideological and methodological biases might have on editorial decisions. Such biases could
operate both directly through the editor by affecting the manner in which the editor assesses
74

Bertsimas, Brynjolfsson, Reichman, and Silberholz (2015) study the power of (short term) network
connections in predicting future citations in Operations Research and Management Science. Their analysis
implicitly documents the power of membership in networks. Membership in a network fosters more citations,
but may also transmit knowledge. The evidence by Ellison (2011) that top scholars are relying more on
internet posts suggests the power of incumbency and points to the value of a PLOS system. See Eisen (2013)

58

and overrules referee reports, and indirectly by influencing the referees that editors select.
In the presence of strong policy and/or methodology preferences, a journal will tend to disproportionately publish papers that exhibit the editor’s preferred papers. Such biases could
have profound effects on the health and future of the discipline, given the large dependence
of tenure decisions on T5 publications.
First, any biases have a direct effect on the composition of tenured scholars by decreasing the chances of publishing in the T5 for tenure-track faculty who do not cater to
editorial preferences. This will cause access to the T5 to be more limited for scholars outside
the network, which mechanically decreases their tenure rates.
Second, strong editorial preferences might also have an additional indirect effect by
inducing future tenure-track faculty to only pursue those types of research that have been
known to be published by an editor’s journal. Pursuing this strategy is individual but socially
irrational. Reliance on the T5 influences the course of future research.

6

Summary and Discussion

Without doubt, publication in the Top Five is a powerful determinant of tenure in academic
economics that influences the choice of topics on which young economists work and squeezes
papers into bite-sized journal-friendly fragments. One of us (Heckman) has had numerous
conversations over the years with first-rate graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and
assistant professors about scientifically interesting research projects, only to be told
“that is a great idea, but it will not lead to a Top Five.”
An emphasis on publishing in the Top Five discourages large-scale, data-intensive
empirical projects that explore and report the sensitivity of estimates to alternative assumptions. The fruits of such projects are often too long and do not easily fit into the format of
the 40-page limit imposed by most of the Top Five journals.

59

Reliance on the T5 centralizes power to shape the profession into the hands of a
select group of editors. Relying on the Top Five to screen the next generation of economists
incentivizes professional incest and creates incentives for clientele effects whereby careeroriented authors appeal to the tastes of editors and the various biases of journals. It raises
entry costs for new ideas and persons outside the orbits of the journals and their editors.75
The current practice has weak empirical support if judged by its ability to produce
papers that last in terms of citation counts. Publication in the Top Five is claimed to
demonstrate the appeal of a paper to a broad base of professional economists assuming
(without evidence) that subscribers read issues of journals cover to cover. The argument
also ignores the fact that T5 referees are themselves field specialists, and field journals are
highly influential outlets. Moreover, the Top Five journals do not have the highest impact
factors even among economics journals, never mind general interest journals. Many non-T5
journals have citation counts that rival T5 journals, especially the lower-cited ones, such
as Review of Economic Studies or Econometrica. Academics who impose the T5 standard
impose a standard that they themselves do not follow. They primarily publish in, read and
cite non-T5 journals, as will the candidates who survive the T5 filter and become tenured
faculty.
Reliance on the T5 as a screening device raises serious concerns. First, an overemphasis on T5 publications perversely incentivizes scholars to pursue follow-up and replication work at the expense of creative pioneering research since follow up work is easy to
judge, is more likely to result in clean publishable results, and hence is more likely to be
published.76 This behavior is consistent with basic common sense: you get what you incentivize.
In light of the many adverse and potentially severe consequences associated with
75

Many readers of earlier drafts of this paper have remarked to us that the empirical results in this
paper do not strictly prove these factors are operative. We grant this point. At the same time, we ask
readers to apply the standard analysis of incentives to the “market” we have described. To deny the power
and direction of these incentives is to assume an unlikely level of saintliness among journal editors and the
scholars seeking to publish in their journals.
76
See the discussion at https://www.aeaweb.org/webcasts/2017/curse.

60

reliance on the T5, we believe it unwise for the discipline to continue using publication in
the T5 as a measure of research achievement and as a predictor of future scholarly potential.
The need for change is made ever more apparent by the T5’s inadequacy as a predictor of
individual article quality, much less the quality of a person. It also has an apparent gender
tilt.
Our findings should spark a serious conversation in the profession about how to develop implementable alternatives to judge quality research. Such solutions would necessarily
need to de-emphasize the role of the T5 in tenure and promotion decisions, and re-distribute
the signalling function among more high-quality journals.77 For example, there is limited
evidence that AEJ: Applied Economics competes favorably with Restat and EJ.
However, a proper solution to the tyranny of the T5 will likely involve much more
than a simple re-definition of the T5 to include a handful of additional influential journals. A
better solution would address the flaw that is inherent in the practice of judging a scholar’s
potential for innovative work based on a track record of publications in a handful of journals
selected by their impact factors.
In this issue, Akerlof (2018) sounds the alarm about the practice of relying on external
rankings rather than individual reading of papers. The appropriate solution to the problem will require a significant shift from the current publications-based system of deciding
tenure, to a system that emphasizes departmental peer-review of a candidate’s work. Such a
system would give serious consideration to unpublished working papers and the quality and
integrity of a scholar’s work. By closely reading published and unpublished papers rather
than counting placements of publications, departments would signal that they both acknowledge and adequately account for the greater risk associated with serious scholars working
at the frontiers of the discipline – an endeavor that is more likely to result in unpublished
working papers chock-full of good ideas rather than T5 publications compared to other more
77

Due to their limited time in operation, we excluded the four new journals created by the American Economic Association: American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, and American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics

61

conventional and safer forms of research.78
A more radical proposal is to shift publication away from the current fixed format
journals and towards an open source arXiv or PLOS ONE format.79 Such formats facilitate
dissemination of new ideas and provide online realtime peer review for them. Discussion
sessions would vet criticisms and provide both authors and their readers with different perspectives. Shorter, more focused papers would stimulate dialogue and break editorial and
journal monopolies. An open source system would also allow authors to test new ideas in
an arena of serious professional discussion and enable entry into the profession of creative
out-of-network scholars. Networks and network-referential-citation circles are powerful barriers to entry into the profession that screen out new entrants with “odd ball” ideas and
isolates those not acculturated in T5 values. Citing Ellison (2011) again, online publication
is already being practiced by senior scholars. Why not broaden the practice and encourage
spirited dialogue and rapid dissemination of new ideas?
Under any event, the profession should deemphasize crass careerism and promote
creative activity. Short tenure clocks and reliance on the Top 5 to certify quality do just the
opposite.
The importance of tolerating early failure and accounting for both the end-product
and the path-to-production is illustrated in the analysis of Manso (2011), who studied optimal incentive-schemes for motivating innovation. Distinguishing between activities that
explore new untested actions and those that exploit well-known actions, Manso (2011) shows
that schemes aiming to promote exploratory activities should design reward structures to
adjust for the higher variation associated with pay-offs from such activities. Azoulay et al.
(2011) test this hypothesis on a sample of high-ability biomedical researchers by comparing
78

Some readers have objected that such a procedure would be too time-intensive and would require many
to read out of their subfields. Others say that “quality” is a subjective thing. These objections go to the
core of why economics departments exist if evaluating the work of a colleague is an onerous task. It is a
symptom of departments that are collections of isolated scholars rather than a group that learns from fellow
members.
79
See Vale (2015) for a discussion of the use of arXiv in Physics. See Eisen (2013) for remarks on PLOS
ONE by Michael Eisen, its co-founder.

62

the publication outcomes of HHMI (Howard Hughes Medical Institute) grantees who enjoy
more flexible and tolerant review processes with the publication outcomes of NIH (National
Institute of Health) grantees who are subject to the “normal science” pre-defined deliverables, shorter review cycles and grant renewal policies that are unforgiving of failure. They
find that, controlling for selection bias, HHMI grantees published high-impact articles at a
higher rate than NIH grantees. More importantly, HHMI grantees appeared more likely to
engage in exploratory research, as suggested by a lower degree of overlap between the MeSH
(Medical Subject Headers) keywords associated with works published during the pre- and
post-grant periods.
In the long run, the profession will benefit from application of more creativity-sensitive
screening of its next generation. Otherwise, academic economics risks becoming (or remaining) a group of Top Five plodders putting one foot in front of the other. Emphasis on the T5
in sorting talent creates a culture where vitae length and publication speed in select journals
rather than the development of a body of coherent and original ideas is most valued. It
incentivizes careerism rather than creative scholarship.

63

References
Akerlof, G. A. (2018). Sins of omission and the practice of economics. Submitted, Journal
of Economic Literature.
Antecol, H., K. Bedard, and J. Stearns (2018, September). Equal but inequitable: Who
benefits from gender-neutral tenure clock stopping policies? American Economic Review 108 (9), 2420–41.
Axarloglou, K. and V. Theoharakis (2003). Diversity in economics: An analysis of journal
quality perceptions. Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (6), 1402–1423.
Azoulay, P., J. S. Graff Zivin, and G. Manso (2011). Incentives and creativity: evidence
from the academic life sciences. The RAND Journal of Economics 42 (3), 527–554.
Bayer, A. and C. E. Rouse (2016, November). Diversity in the economics profession: A new
attack on an old problem. Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (4), 221–42.
Becker, G. S. (1964). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special
Reference to Education (1 ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Bertsimas, D., E. Brynjolfsson, S. Reichman, and J. Silberholz (2015). Or forum — tenure
analytics: Models for predicting research impact. Operations Research 63 (6), 1246–1261.
Bertuzzi, S. and D. Drubin (2013). No shortcuts for research assessment. Molecular Biology
of the Cell 24 (10), 1505–1506.
Brogaard, J., J. Engelberg, and C. A. Parsons (2014). Networks and productivity: Causal
evidence from editor rotations. Journal of Financial Economics 111 (1), 251 – 270.
Card, D. and S. DellaVigna (2013, March). Nine facts about top journals in economics.
Journal of Economic Literature 51 (1), 144–61.
Colussi, T. (2018). Social ties in academia: A friend is a treasure. The Review of Economics
and Statistics 100 (1), 45–50.
Combes, P.-P. and L. Linnemer (2010, September). Inferring Missing Citations: A Quantitative Multi-Criteria Ranking of all Journals in Economics. Working Papers halshs00520325, HAL.
Ductor, L., S. Goyal, and A. Prummer (2018). Gender and collaboration. Working Paper
1807.
Eisen, M. (2013, 03). The past, present and future of scholarly publishing. Remarks by
Michael Eisen, co-Founder of Public Library of Science (PLOS), at the Commonwealth
Club in San Francisco.
Ellison, G. (2002). The slowdown of the economics publishing process. Journal of Political
Economy 110 (5), 947–993.
64

Ellison, G. (2011). Is peer review in decline? Economic Inquiry 49 (3), 635–657.
Gibson, J., D. L. Anderson, and J. Tressler (2014). Which journal rankings best explain
academic salaries? evidence from the university of california. Economic Inquiry 52 (4),
1322–1340.
Ginther, D. K. and S. Kahn (2004, September). Women in economics: Moving up or falling
off the academic career ladder? Journal of Economic Perspectives 18 (3), 193–214.
Hamermesh, D. S. (2018, March). Citations in economics: Measurement, uses, and impacts.
Journal of Economic Literature 56 (1), 115–56.
Hawkins, R. G., L. S. Ritter, and I. Walter (1973). What economists think of their journals.
Journal of Political Economy 81 (4), 1017–1032.
Kahn, S. (1993). Gender differences in academic career paths of economists. The American
Economic Review 83 (2), 52–56.
Kalaitzidakis, P., T. P. Mamuneas, and T. Stengos (2003). Rankings of academic journals
and institutions in economics. Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (6), 1346–
1366.
Kapeller, J., M. Aistleitner, and S. Steinerberger (2017). Citation patterns in economics and
beyond: Assessing the peculiarities of economics from two scientometric perspectives.
Technical Report 60, ICAE Working Paper Series.
Kodrzycki, Y. K. and P. Yu (2006). New approaches to ranking economics journals. The BE
Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 5 (1).
Laband, D. N. and M. J. Piette (1994). Favoritism versus search for good papers: Empirical
evidence regarding the behavior of journal editors. Journal of Political Economy 102 (1),
194–203.
Liner, G. H. and E. Sewell (2009). Research requirements for promotion and tenure at phd
granting departments of economics. Applied Economics Letters 16 (8), 765–768.
Manso, G. (2011). Motivating innovation. The Journal of Finance 66 (5), 1823–1860.
Perry, M. and P. J. Reny (2016, September). How to count citations if you must. American
Economic Review 106 (9), 2722–41.
Radicchi, F., S. Fortunato, and C. Castellano (2008). Universality of citation distributions:
Toward an objective measure of scientific impact. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 105 (45), 17268–17272.
Sarsons, H. (2017, May). Recognition for group work: Gender differences in academia.
American Economic Review 107 (5), 141–45.
Scott, C. E. and J. J. Siegfried (2018). American economic association universal academic
questionnaire summary statistics. AEA Papers and Proceedings 108, 616–18.
65

Vale, R. D. (2015). Accelerating scientific publication in biology. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science 112 (44), 13439–13446.

66

