                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 TAKING THE COCHRANE-PIAZZESI TERM STRUCTURE MODEL OUT OF SAMPLE:
       MORE DATA, ADDITIONAL CURRENCIES, AND FX IMPLICATIONS

                                       Robert J. Hodrick
                                       Tuomas Tomunen

                                      Working Paper 25092
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25092


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




We thank Jules van Binsbergen, John Cochrane, Zhongjin Lu, Hanno Lustig, Carolin Pflueger,
Monica Piazzesi, Ken Singleton, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh for helpful comments. Hodrick is
the Nomura Professor of International Finance at the Columbia Business School, a Research
Associate at the NBER, and a Visiting Fellow at the Hoover Institution. Tomunen is a PhD
student at the Columbia Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Robert J. Hodrick and Tuomas Tomunen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Taking the Cochrane-Piazzesi Term Structure Model Out of Sample: More Data, Additional
Currencies, and FX Implications
Robert J. Hodrick and Tuomas Tomunen
NBER Working Paper No. 25092
September 2018
JEL No. G12,G15

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005, 2008) model in several out-of-sample analyzes.
The model's one-factor forecasting structure characterizes the term structures of additional
currencies in samples ending in 2003. In post-2003 data one-factor structures again characterize
each currency's term structure, but we reject equality of the coefficients across the two samples.
We derive some implications of the model for the predictability of cross-currency investments,
but we find little support for these predictions in either pre-2004 or post-2003 data. The model
fails to beat historical average returns in recursive out-or-sample forecasting of excess rates of
return for bonds and currencies.


Robert J. Hodrick
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rh169@columbia.edu

Tuomas Tomunen
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
TTomunen20@gsb.columbia.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25092
1     Introduction
In two seminal papers, Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005, 2008) document a strong one-factor structure in the
unconstrained predictability of one-year-ahead excess returns on U.S. dollar zero-coupon bonds of several
maturities. Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) note (p. 142), “The same function of forward rates forecasts hold-
ing period returns at all maturities. Longer maturities just have greater loadings on this same function.” To
model this constrained system, they develop a two-step approach in which they first estimate the forecasting
factor, which is labeled the ’CP factor’ in much of the subsequent literature, by regressing the average future
annual excess rates of return on two, three, four, and five year bonds onto a set of forward rates or forward
spreads. Then, they regress each excess return on the forecasting factor to get the factor loadings. The
constrained model fits the data remarkably well. They also demonstrate that their bond market forecasting
factor predicts excess returns in the U.S. stock market, which strengthens the case that it is capturing risk
premiums. Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008) reverse engineer an affine term structure model (ATSM) that has
the forecasting properties uncovered in the constrained regressions.
    This paper examines whether analogous one-factor forecasting structures exist in the predictability of
the excess returns on zero-coupon bonds denominated in other currencies, and we find that they do. We
initially examine samples that end in 2003, the end of the sample in the original paper. While the factor
loadings are quite similar across currencies, the coefficients of the CP factors are not.   We then examine
data from 2004-2016 and again find a strong one-factor forecasting structure with factor loadings that are
quite similar to those of the earlier sample, but the data do not support the hypothesis of equality of the
coefficients in the CP factors across the two samples.
    Because foreign exchange rates and the term structures of interest rates in the two currencies are closely
linked in theory to the stochastic discount factors of the two currencies, we derive predictions from the
Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008) ATSM for the excess rate of return on uncovered foreign currency investments.
We find that the CP factors from the bond markets of the two currencies and their squared values should
forecast the excess rate of return on uncovered foreign currency investments between the two currencies. We
investigate this prediction empirically and find that they do not. While this evidence could be viewed as
supporting uncovered interest rate parity at the annual horizon, we also find that the standard projection of
these excess returns onto the one-year interest differential does show significant forecasting power. In this
analysis, though, we also show substantial differences in estimated coefficients across our two sub-samples.
    We then explore recursive out-of-sample predictions of the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) model and find
considerable evidence of instability in the coefficients of the CP factors. Recursive forecasts of excess rates
of return from the estimated model are generally unable to beat the recursive forecasts from the historical
averages of excess rates of return for both bonds and currencies.
    While these findings are perhaps unsurprising given that the out-of-sample period contains the global
financial crisis, they demonstrate the necessity of modeling risk premiums while allowing for structural
change. We leave this challenging task for future research.




                                                         2
2     Related Literature
The Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005, 2008) papers spawned a vast literature. In this section we briefly review
what we consider to be the most important contributions in the literature that are related to our paper.1
    Dahlquist and Hasseltoft (2013, 2016) and Sekkel (2011) were the first to extend the Cochrane and Piazzesi
(2005) model to the bond markets of additional currencies. Dahlquist and Hasseltoft (2013) examine the
bond markets of the USD; the Swiss franc, CHF; the euro, EUR; and the British pound, GBP; as well as
examining the dollar denominated returns on the foreign bonds. They use a sample period from January
1975 to December 2009, and the CP factor is constructed from projections onto the five forward rates as in
the original paper.    They estimate local currency CP factors, and they also construct a global CP factor
as a GDP-weighted average of the local CP factors.              They find that the global CP factor provides some
additional explanatory power relative to the local CP factors.             In Dahlquist and Hasseltoft (2016) they
extend their analysis adding the bond markets of the Australian dollar, AUD; the Canadian dollar, CAD;
the Danish kroner, DKK; the Japanese yen, JPY; the Norwegian krone, NOK: and the Swedish krona, SEK;
and they employ a sample period from December 1999 to December 2013. They find support for the model
in all currencies, but they do not investigate the stability of the coefficients.
    Wright (2011) examines the term structures of interest rates for the G-10 countries by estimating ATSMs
as in Joslin, Priebsch and Singleton (2014). He studies the implied risk premiums or term premiums, defined
as the difference between the long-term yields and expectations of future spot interest rates, finding that
these term premiums have generally declined in most countries over the sample period from January 1990 to
May 2009. Bauer, Rudebusch and Wu (2014) dispute these conclusions noting that after correcting for small
sample bias in the coefficient estimates, the term premiums show a pronounced countercyclical pattern as
was found by Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005).
    Sekkel (2011) uses the Wright (2011) data to estimate the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) model, but
he projects the excess returns only onto the one, three, and five year forward rates.                He finds that the
performance of the model deteriorates during the global financial crisis.
    Consistent with the finding of Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) that the CP factor is not spanned by the
first three principal components of bond yields, Duffee (2011) documents that almost half of the variation
in U.S. dollar (USD) bond risk premiums cannot be detected using the cross-section of yields. He finds that
fluctuations in this hidden component have strong forecasting power for both future short-term interest rates
and excess bond returns. The hidden component is negatively correlated with aggregate economic activity,
but macroeconomic variables explain only a small fraction of variation in the hidden factor.
    Koijen, Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2017) model the stochastic discount factor as depending on the
Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) forecasting factor as well as the return on the stock market and the level of the
term structure of interest rates. They demonstrate that such a model does well in simultaneously pricing
returns on value and growth stocks in additional to USD zero-coupon bonds.
    Kessler and Scherer (2009), Thornton and Valente (2012), Zhu (2015), and Sarno, Schneider and Wagner
(2016) perform out-of-sample forecasting analyses with the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) model. Kessler
and Scherer (2009) assess the performance of trading strategies based on a one-month forecast horizon using
data from seven currencies (the AUD, CAD, CHF, EUR, GBP, JPY, and the USD) for the sample period
  1 Because the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005, 2008) papers have 1,327 and 305 Google Scholar citations, respectively, as of

August 2018, our literature review must be highly selective.




                                                            3
February 1997 to July 2007. They use either a 36 or 60 month rolling window to estimate the parameters
of the forecasting equation implying that they have either 88 or 64 true out-of-sample forecasts. They find
slightly positive but only marginally significant trading profits.
   Thornton and Valente (2012) investigate the out-of-sample predictability of USD bond excess returns
and assess the economic value of the forecasting ability of empirical models based on Fama and Bliss (1987)
and Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005). Their results show that the information content of forward rates does
not generate systematic economic value to investors in a dynamic asset allocation exercise. Furthermore,
they find that the models do not outperform the no-predictability benchmark, and their relative performance
deteriorates over time.
   Zhu (2015) explores the forecasting ability of a global CP factor constructed as the forecast of the average
returns on the two through five year maturity bonds averaged over four currencies (the EUR, JPY, GBP,
and the USD) when regressed on the four individual currency CP factors. The full sample period is January
1980 to December 2011, and the out-of-sample period begins in January 1992. In contrast to our findings,
Zhu (2015) finds statistically significant out-of-sample forecasts that beat the historical mean return for all
four countries.
   Sarno, Schneider and Wagner (2016) find for the USD bond market that the time-varying risk premiums
implied by ATSMs do not provide important increases in utility to investors over and above inferences about
expected future spot interest rates implied by the expectations hypothesis of the term structure with constant
risk premiums.
   Turning to the international implications of the modeling, Sarno, Schneider and Wagner (2012) find that
separately estimated ATSMs for two currencies, both of which provide very small pricing errors for zero-
coupon bonds denominated in those currencies, are not highly correlated with the relative rate of appreciation
of those currencies in the foreign exchange market.
   Jotikasthira, Le and Lundblad (2015) document that yield curve fluctuations across different currencies
are highly correlated. They argue that common macroeconomic shocks influence bond yields both through a
monetary policy channel and through a risk compensation channel. Using data from the U.S., the UK, and
Germany, they find that world inflation and the level of the U.S. yield curve explain over two-thirds of the
covariation of yields at all maturities and that these effects operate largely through the risk compensation
channel for long-term bonds.
   Pericoli and Taboga (2012) propose a two-country no-arbitrage term-structure model to analyze the joint
dynamics of bond yields, macroeconomic variables, and the exchange rate. The model demonstrates how
exogenous shocks to the exchange rate affect the yield curves, how bond yields co-move in different countries
and how the exchange rate is influenced by interest rates, macroeconomic variables and time-varying bond
risk premiums. Upon estimating the model with U.S. and German data, they find that time-varying bond
risk premiums account for a significant portion of the variability of the exchange rate.
   Our results are also related to the vast literature examining the uncovered interest rate parity (UIRP)
hypothesis.   Although Chinn and Meredith (2004) provide support for UIRP at the annual horizon, our
results are more consistent with the conclusions of Bekaert, Wei and Xing (2007), who argue that UIRP is
violated at longer horizons just as is typically the case at the shorter monthly horizon.
   The UIRP puzzle concerns the empirical regularity that countries with high nominal interest rates tend
to have high expected returns on uncovered short term deposits.       Engel (2016) notes that countries with
high real interest rates tend to have currencies that are stronger than can be accounted for by the path


                                                       4
of expected real interest differentials under UIRP. He observes that these two findings have contradictory
implications for the relationship of the foreign-exchange risk premium and interest-rate differentials and
shows that existing models appear unable to account for both puzzles.               He then introduces a model, in
which short-term assets can have liquidity premiums as in Nagel (2016), that potentially reconciles the two
sets of findings.


3     The Cochrane-Piazzesi Term Structure Model
In presenting the model, we mostly adopt the notation of Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005). The presentation
can be thought of as referring to the term structure of a generic currency.             For simplicity, we suppress
currency subscripts in laying out the basic term structure model.
    The natural logarithm of the price of a pure discount bond at time t that matures in n years and pays one
                                         (n)
unit of currency at that time is denoted pt . The time subscript t indexes years, in which case months, which
are the observation interval of the data, are indicated with (1/12) fractions of a year.         The continuously
compounded annualized yield on an n-year bond is therefore

                                                      (n)      1 (n)
                                                    yt      ≡ − pt .
                                                               n

The natural logarithm of the one-year forward rate at time t for loans between t + n − 1 and t + n is

                                                (n)         (n−1)          (n)
                                               ft        ≡ pt         − pt .

The forward spreads between these forward rates and the one-year yield are

                                                    (n)         (n)       (1)
                                               f st       ≡ ft        − yt .

The continuously compounded rate of return from buying an n-year bond at time t and selling it one year
later is
                                                (n)         (n−1)          (n)
                                               rt+1 ≡ pt+1            − pt ,

in which case the excess rate of return is

                                                    (n)         (n)        (1)
                                               rxt+1 ≡ rt+1 − yt .

The average of four excess rates of return on bonds with two through five years to maturity is

                                                                    5
                                                                            (n)
                                                                    X
                                             rxt+1 ≡ (1/4)                rxt+1 .
                                                                    n=2

    Bold symbols without superscripts indicate vectors or matrices. For example, the vector of excess rates
of return on bonds with two through five years to maturity is
                                         h                              i|
                                            (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)
                                  rxt+1 ≡ rxt+1 , rxt+1 , rxt+1 , rxt+1 .




                                                                5
When used as right-hand-side variables in a regression, such vectors include a constant. For example,
                                              h                               i|
                                                     (2)    (3)    (4)    (5)
                                         fst ≡ 1, f st , f st , f st , f st      .

    Whereas Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) use the levels of the forward rates as forecasting variables for the
excess rates of return on bonds, we follow Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008) and use the averages of the three
most recent monthly spreads as the forecasting variables:2

                                                              2
                                                              X
                                                fst ≡ (1/3)         fst−(j/12) .
                                                              j=0

         The unconstrained forecasting system for the excess rates of return in a particular currency’s bond
market can therefore be written as
                                                  rxt+1 = βfst + εt+1 ,                                                   (1)

    where β represents the (4 × 5) matrix of responses of excess returns to the forward spreads. Cochrane
and Piazzesi (2005, 2008) motivate their constrained one-factor model of expected bond returns from the
finding that the first principal component of the unconstrained expected returns in the system of equations
(1) explains over 99% of the variance of these expected returns.
    This constrained model of a vector of expected returns was first developed by Hansen and Hodrick (1983)
and Gibbons and Ferson (1985) who postulated that a set of expected returns could be proportional to a
common unobserved factor, vt :
                                                    Et (rxt+1 ) = bvt ,                                                   (2)
                              |
where b ≡ [b2 , b3 , b4 , b5 ] . By projecting the unobserved factor onto some observed information, in this
case fst , one can write
                                                     vt = γ | fst + ξt ,                                                  (3)

where by the properties of linear prediction, the error term, ξt , is orthogonal to the right-hand-side variables.
    Substituting equation (3) into equation (2) and assuming rational expectations produces a constrained
single factor forecasting system that can be written as

                                                 rxt+1 = bγ | fst + εt+1 ,                                                (4)

where εt+1 now represents both the rational expectations forecast errors for each equation plus bξt . Es-
timation can be done with the generalized method of moments (GMM) of Hansen (1982) because εt+1 is
orthogonal to fst Because b and γ | are multiplied together, some identifying constraint must be imposed
on the estimation, and we follow Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) in imposing the constraint on b that the
average of the bn ’s equals one:

                                                             5
                                                             X
                                                     (1/4)         bn = 1.
                                                             n=2
   2 Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008) note that levels of forward rates have near unit root components which are unlikely to match

up with rational risk premiums. Forward spreads are more likely to be stationary and hence to capture risk premiums. See
also the discussion in Cochrane (2015) who advocates using moving averages of forward spreads to avoid spurious predictability
due to measurement error in the yields.



                                                              6
   Whereas the unconstrained model in equation (1) has 20 parameters, the constrained model in equation
(4) has 8 free parameters, 5 in γ and 3 in b.
   As Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) note, estimation of the constrained model can be done in two steps.
The first step is an OLS regression of the average excess rate of return on the four long-horizon bonds on
the average of the forward spreads as in

                                             rxt+1 = γ | fst + εt+1 .                                      (5)

This imposes the constraint that the average of the bn ’s equals one. The second step involves OLS regressions
without constant terms of three individual excess rates of return on the fitted value from equation (5):

                                             (n)                 (n)
                                                      b | fst + εt+1 ,
                                                             
                                           rxt+1 = bn γ                                                    (6)

and we use the two-year, three-year, and four-year maturities.


3.1    The Affine Model with Restrictions
Before discussing the results of estimating the constrained model, we first introduce the affine term structure
model that Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008) reverse engineer to be consistent with the forecasting properties
from the constrained regressions of excess returns of the long-term bonds on forward spreads.
   In a generic ATSM the continuously compounded short-term interest rate is postulated to be a linear
function of a K-dimensional vector of state variables, Xt :

                                                rt = δ0 + δ1| Xt .

The state variables are assumed to follow a first-order vector autoregression:

                                           Xt+1 = µ + ΦXt + Συt+1 .

The vector of innovations, υt+1 , is assumed to be N (0, IK ), and the covariance matrix of the state variables
is ΣΣ | . The natural logarithm of the stochastic discount factor is specified to be

                                                   1
                                       mt+1 = −rt − λ|t λt − λ|t υt+1 ,                                    (7)
                                                   2

and the innovations to the state variables are thus potential sources of risks.    Finally, the prices of these
risks are also postulated to be affine functions of the state variables:


                                                λt = λ0 + λ1 Xt ,

where λ0 is K × 1, and λ1 is K × K.
   The solution of such an affine term structure model uses the basic no-arbitrage asset pricing model,
                                                         
                                                      (n)
                                             Et Mt+1 Rt+1 = 1,                                             (8)




                                                        7
                                           
                             (n)        (n)                              (n)
where Mt+1 = exp(mt+1 ) and Rt+1 = exp rt+1 . Substituting for Mt+1 and Rt+1 in equation (8) and
solving the conditional expectation provides the solution of the ATSM in which the natural logarithms of
the bond prices are found to be affine functions of the state variables:

                                                     (n)
                                                   pt      = An + Bn| Xt .                                                (9)

The recursive formulas for the An and Bn coefficients in equation (9) are given in Appendix B.
    From the solution of the the ATSM, one finds that the expected excess rates of return on bonds are also
affine functions of the state variables:
                               
                            (n)            |                |          |
                       Et rxt+1 = − (1/2) Bn−1 ΣΣ | Bn−1 + Bn−1 Σλ0 + Bn−1 Σλ1 Xt .                                      (10)

The three terms on the right-hand side of equation (10) are a Jensen’s inequality term related to the variance
of the rate of return, a constant risk premium, and a time-varying risk premium.                    In the general ATSM
without constraints on the parameters, time-varying expected excess rates of returns on bonds would be
driven by the K state variables. This would be inconsistent with the empirical finding that only one state
variable is required to forecast expected excess returns.
    To reconcile the theoretical analysis with the empirical findings, Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008) postulate
that the term structure of interest rates depends on four state variables, but they constrain the prices of
risks such that only one of these variables drives expected excess rates of return. At least since Litterman
and Scheinkman (1991) it has been known that time variation in zero-coupon bond yields can be effectively
modeled with the first three principal components of the yields, which are a level effect, lt , a slope effect,
st , and a curvature effect, ct . Hence, these three variables are present as state variables. The fourth state
variable is the “return forecasting factor”, that is, the CP factor:

                                                                b | fst .
                                                           xt ≡ γ                                                        (11)

                                                                                    |
The state vector can therefore be written as Xt = (xt , lt , st , ct ) .3 Because Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005)
empirically find a very strong one-factor structure in the unconstrained model in equation (1), Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2008) place a set of restrictions on the prices of risks, λt , such that a one-factor structure emerges
in equation (10). The restrictions on λt are the following:
                                                                                         
                                               0               0       0    0   0        xt
                                                                                    
                                           λ0l      λ1l             0    0   0 
                                                                                    lt  .
                                                                                        
                                     λt = 
                                           0
                                                   +
                                                     0                                                                 (12)
                                                                    0    0   0   st 
                                                                                   
                                                                                         
                                             0          0              0    0   0     ct

Thus, although innovations in the four state variables drive the zero-coupon yields and bond prices at all
maturities, the only innovation that affects the bond market’s stochastic discount factor and hence affects
expected rates of return on bonds is the innovation in the level of the term structure, denoted υl,t+1 , and
the time varying price of this risk is driven by the return forecasting factor. That is,
   3 Cieslak and Povala (2015) develop a similar ATSM with three state variables: the expected or ’trend’ rate of inflation, a

real factor orthogonal to expected inflation, and a forecasting variable that only affects the prices of the two risks.




                                                                   8
                                                                                
                                                                   0
                                                                                
                                                       (λ0l + λ1l xt ) υl,t+1
                                          λ|t υt+1
                                                                                 
                                                     =                                                                (13)
                                                      
                                                                0               
                                                                                 
                                                                 0

Substituting from equation (12) into equation (10) gives
                                                                                                  
                                                                                         0
                                                                                                  
                        
                           (n)
                               
                                          |                |
                                                                 (λ0l + λ1l xt )
                                              ΣΣ | Bn−1 + Bn−1
                                                                                                   
                      Et rxt+1 = − (1/2) Bn−1                  Σ                                  .                   (14)
                                                                
                                                                       0                          
                                                                                                   
                                                                        0

    While equation (14) is quite close to the constrained econometric model in equation (4) in that each
expected return loads with a different coefficient onto the common forecasting factor, the constrained model
makes the additional assumption that the constant terms in the equations share the same proportionality
as the slope coefficients.     The Jensen’s inequality terms do not scale in the same way, which makes this
assumption technically incorrect. Since these terms are generally considered to be small, in what follows we
ignore this issue and follow the approach of Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008).4


4     Estimation Results for Nine Term Structures
In this section we estimate the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) model for the zero-coupon government bond
yields of nine of the G-10 currencies: the AUD, CAD, CHF, EUR, GBP, JPY, NOK, SEK, and the USD.
After reviewing the available term structure data for the New Zealand dollar, we viewed it as unreliable and
therefore did not include it in our analysis. Sources of data are described in Appendix A.
    We present the results in two sections corresponding to data that would have been available when the
original model was first estimated and to data that subsequently became available.                       Because the last
observation on the dependent variable in the the first data set is December 2003, we refer to these data as
the pre-2004 sample. We begin observations on the dependent variable in the second data set in December
2004 to avoid overlap with the first data set, and we refer to these data as the post-2003 sample. To allow
for samples that coincide with the exchange rate data, the dependent variables for the first sample begin in
1974:12 for the USD, the GBP, and the EUR; in 1989:03 for the CHF; in 1987:03 for the CAD; in 1986:03 for
the JPY; in 1988:04 for the AUD; in 1988:03 for the SEK; and in 1999:03 for the NOK. The first sample is
particularly short for the NOK, so we do not think those results are particularly informative, but we choose
to include the results simply because the NOK is included in the post-2003 analysis.


4.1     Results with Pre-2004 Data
Table 1 reports the estimation of the constrained model in equation (4) with the two-step OLS procedure
described above. We report asymptotic GMM standard errors that account for the overlapping forecasts
   4 The Online Appendix presents some results of a model that relaxes this restrictive assumption by allowing for separate

constants at each maturity. We find that the relevant parameters associated with the time-varying forecasts of the two models
are quite close and inference is quite similar.



                                                              9
and the fact that the second step in the estimation uses estimated coefficients from the first step.5
    Although the unconstrained results are not reported because of the large number of parameters, the
first thing to notice in Table 1 is the strong support for the single factor forecasting structure of expected
excess returns in each of the nine term structures in the unconstrained estimations. The far right column
labelled %P C1 presents the proportion of the variance of the four unconstrained estimates of the excess
rates of return, denominated in the particular currency of that row, that is explained by their first principal
component. For all the currencies, the first principal component explains at least 98.8% of the variance of
these expected excess returns. This evidence represents strong support for the one-factor forecasting model
of expected excess bond returns in each of the currencies.
    The second noteworthy aspect of Table 1 is the remarkable similarity in the coefficient estimates of b2 ,
b3 , and b4 . The estimated values of b2 range from 0.37 for the JPY to 0.47 for the CHF. The estimated
values of b3 range from 0.80 for the SEK to 0.87 for the AUD. The estimated values of b4 range from 1.19
for the CHF to 1.23 for the USD and the JPY. From equation (14) we see that the estimated values of
the bn ’s in an ATSM differ because of the different values of B|n−1 Σ associated with the CP factor. The
recursive solution for the B|n in equation (B.3) indicates that values of B|n change as Φ∗ , the risk neutral
autocorrelation matrix of the state variables, is raised to higher powers. Thus, the finding of similar values
of the bn ’s across countries indicates that if we were to estimate an ATSM for each currency, the resulting
Φ∗ estimates would be quite similar across currencies. At this point, we leave this as a conjecture for future
research.
    While there is considerable variety in the estimates of the γj0 s across the different currencies, the χ2 (4)
statistics for all currencies except the SEK provide strong rejections of the currency-by-currency null hy-
pothesis that the time-varying, right-hand-side variables have no collective forecasting power. Particularly
large values of coefficients for the AUD, SEK, and NOK are an indication of multicollinearity. Although
Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) found a clear “tent” pattern in their projection of average returns onto the
levels of the five forward rates, we only see this pattern in projections onto the four forward spreads for the
USD and JPY data.
    There are at least two reasons why the estimates of the γ’s might differ across currencies. The first
explanation takes a rational expectations econometrics view and recognizes that the forward spreads capture
the risk exposures of a country as represented by the reduced form coefficients from an ATSM. Underlying
structural differences in the nature of risks would consequently manifest themselves in different γ’s. Mon-
etary and fiscal policies certainly differ across countries, and we do not attempt to relate the underlying
coefficients of the ATSM to more structural coefficients in equations such as the Taylor (1993) rule.
    Alternatively, one can take the perspective of Bekaert, Hodrick and Marshall (2001) who argue that
the rational expectations econometrics perspective may be too strong. Developed countries, such as those
studied here, may actually be following the same time series rule, but the realizations of the shocks hitting
the economies may have differed across countries. It may take a very long sample for a particular economy
to experience all of the possible realizations from the policy rule with their ex ante frequencies that investors
anticipated during the sample.         It is certainly true that ex post experiences with inflation have differed
across the countries, although at a casual level, all countries now seem to be converging to relatively low
   5 The standard errors could be constructed as in Hansen and Hodrick (1980), by equally weighting the 11 lagged covariances

that are non-zero by construction when forecasting annual excess returns with overlapping monthly data. These standard
errors are not guaranteed to be positive definite, and in fact in some cases they were not. Consequently, we rely on Newey and
West (1987) standard errors using 18 lags as in Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005).


                                                             10
rates of expected inflation.
   As an example of this last perspective, it is notable in Table 1 that the R2 ’s from the first-step regression
of the average return on the forward spreads are the highest for the USD and JPY. Bekaert, Hodrick
and Marshall (2001) argue that the decline in U.S. inflation under Federal Reserve Chairmen Volcker and
Greenspan represents a one-sided realization that made the ex post returns on investments in long-term
bonds better than was anticipated.6 Inflation in Japan during much of the sample was also surprisingly low.
Thus, the Japanese situation could be similar to the U.S. in that the stagnation in the Japanese economy and
its ultimate experiences with deflation resulted in surprisingly good ex post returns on long-term Japanese
bonds even though bond yields were quite low to start.


4.2     Results with Post-2003 Data
Table 2 presents analogous results to those of Table 1 but for the sample period from 2004 to 2016. While
the one-factor structure of expected excess returns, estimated from unconstrained regressions, is not quite as
strong in this sample, we still see that the first principal component of the expected returns explains between
86.6% of the variance for the NOK and 99.4% for the JPY. The remarkable similarity in the coefficient
estimates of b2 , b3 , and b4 is maintained. The estimated values of b2 range from 0.28 for the CHF to 0.38
for the CAD; the estimated values of b3 range from 0.73 for the JPY to 0.82 for the GBP and the CAD; and
the estimated values of b4 range from 1.22 for the EUR, CAD, AUD, SEK, and NOK to 1.29 for the JPY.
   As a first step in analyzing the out-of-sample performance of the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) model,
Table 3 presents tests of the equality of the vectors of bn ’s and γ’s across the two samples on a currency by
currency basis. For the vector of bn ’s, even though the coefficient estimates are quite similar across the two
samples, the small standard errors lead to rejections of equality of the three coefficients for the EUR at the
1% marginal level of significance, for the CHF at the 3% level, and for the JPY at smaller than the 1% level.
The tests of the vector of γ’s rejects equality across the two periods for the USD, the JPY, and the NOK
at less than the 1% level, for the GBP at the 9% level, and for the AUD at the 10% level. These findings
provide the first evidence of instability in the forecasting relations.


4.3     Correlation Matrix and Variance Decomposition of Country CP Factors
Since one-factor forecasting structures characterize each of the term structures quite well, a natural question
to ask is how correlated are the various CP factors. Table 4 provides a correlation matrix for the respective
currency-specific CP factors for the pre-2004 sample period.
   Of the 36 correlations, 26 are positive, but only the GBP-CHF correlation of 0.63 is larger than 0.50. Of
the nine negative ones, the JPY-NOK correlation is the most negative at -0.30. The last column in Table 4
labelled %P C(i) reports the percent of the variance of the nine CP factors that is explained by the respective
principal components. The first three principal components explain 82% of the total variance. While this
evidence is suggestive that global risk factors may be at work in explaining the ability of the CP factors to
forecast excess bond returns, it is certainly not definitive.7
   6 See Bauer and Rudebusch (2017) for an analysis of the U.S. term structure that allows for declining stochastic trends in

both the long-run expected rate of inflation and the equilibrium real interest rate.
   7 Jotikasthira, Le and Lundblad (2015) investigate the determinants of the correlations across several major currency term

structures.




                                                             11
     When we examine the post-2003 samples in Table 5, we find that six of the 36 correlations are negative,
and the largest positive correlation is now the GBP-NOK correlaiton of 0.54, which is the only correlation
greater than 0.50. Twelve of the correlations change sign, and the largest switch is the GBP-EUR corre-
lation which increased from -0.19 to 0.39. The share of the variance explained by the first three principal
components falls to 69%. These changes in correlations are another indication of instability in the model.
     We will examine out-of-sample forecasting of bond returns below, but first, we examine some international
implications of the model.


5       International Implications
This section derives some implications of the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005, 2008) model for foreign exchange
markets.     Doing so requires the introduction of subscripts for the currencies, and we subscript the USD
variables with a one and variables denominated in an arbitrary foreign currency with a j. We define ex-
change rates as Sij,t , which represents the currency j price of base currency i at time t. The continuously
compounded rate of appreciation of base currency i relative to currency j between times t and t+1 is denoted
∆sij,t+1 .
     We first argue that tight restrictions between the term structure models of the two currency markets
and the relative rate of currency appreciation are not supported empirically.8 Then, we consider some less
constrained empirical predictions.
     To understand this argument, consider the basic no arbitrage asset pricing equation for a particular
currency that must price all returns denominated in that currency as in equation (8); but now, let Qt+1
represent the SDF that prices these generic returns, Rt+1 , which include other assets and not just the bond
market returns of equation (8). Thus, we have

                                                   Et (Qt+1 Rt+1 ) = 1.                                                 (15)

The difference between the SDF in equation (15), Qt+1 , and the SDF in equation (8), Mt+1 , is that Qt+1 can
contain risks that are orthogonal to the risks that are priced in the term structure of interest rates through
Mt+1 . Analytically, we can decompose Qt+1 as

                                                   Qt+1 = Mt+1 Zt+1 .                                                   (16)

Consistency of the two no arbitrage conditions requires that Et (Zt+1 ) = 1, because the risk free rate is
correctly priced by Mt+1 ; Et (Mt+1 Zt+1 ) =
                                             Et (Mt+1 ) Et (Zt+1 ), because Zt+1 and Mt+1 are orthogonal;
                       (n)              (n)                      (n)
and for bond returns, Rt+1 , Et Zt+1 Rt+1 = Et (Zt+1 ) Et Rt+1 because Mt+1 contains all risks priced
                                                         (n)
in the bond market making Zt+1 orthogonal to Rt+1 .
    8 See
        Backus, Foresi and Telmer (2001) for a discussion of the links between fully specified SDF’s and the rate of currency
appreciation when financial markets are complete, and see Brandt and Santa-Clara (2002) for a discussion of the effects of
incomplete markets.




                                                               12
5.1       Implications for the innovation in currency appreciation
If markets are complete, it is well known that there is a tight relation between the rate of appreciation of
currency i relative to currency j and the difference between the natural logarithms of the stochastic discount
factor of currency i, qi,t+1 , and the stochastic discount factor of currency j, qj,t+1 :


                                               ∆sij,t+1 = qi,t+1 − qj,t+1 .                                          (17)

Substituting for the q’s gives

                                    ∆sij,t+1 = mi,t+1 + zi,t+1 − mj,t+1 − zj,t+1 ,                                   (18)

where zi,t ≡ ln(Zi,t ). Notice that if the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005, 2008) ATSM correctly characterized the
term structure in each currency, if asset markets were complete, and if the term structure SDF’s contained
all the sources of risks, then the z’s could be eliminated from equation (18).                  After substituting for the
innovations in the m’s from equation (13), the innovation in the rate of appreciation of currency i relative
to currency j would be


                ∆sij,t+1 − Et (∆sij,t+1 ) = (λj,0l + λj,0l xj,t ) υj,l,t+1 − (λi,0l + λi,0l xi,t ) υi,l,t+1 .        (19)

   Thus, the innovation in ∆sij,t+1 would be fully explained by the innovations in mj,t+1 and mi,t+1 .
In the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008) ATSM, the innovations in the SDF’s are innovations in the level
factors interacted with a constant and the predetermined CP factors.                 We investigate this issue for rates
of appreciation of the USD versus the other eight currencies in Table 6. Because the exact fit of equation
(19) would be unlikely to hold, we run regressions with the expectation that if the model were true, we
would have quite significant explanatory power.            We proxy the innovation in the rate of appreciation of
the USD with respect to currency j with the excess rate of return on a USD investment in the currency
j money market, −∆s1j,t+1 + rj,t − r1,t .         We proxy the innovations in the level factors with the changes
in the levels, as represented by the first principal components of the term structures, because these first
principal components are highly serially correlated. For simplicity, we also just report results for the full
sample periods associated with each currency. In the regressions in Table 6 the R2 ’s range from 2% for the
CAD and the CHF to 23% for the JPY. This represents strong evidence that the constrained Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2005) term structure models do not span the spaces of risks that characterize the rates of currency
depreciation, which we interpret as evidence for the presence of additional risks in the SDF’s that price all
assets.
   These results are consistent with the analysis of Sarno, Schneider and Wagner (2012) who estimate
four-factor, latent variable ATSM’s for the bond markets of two currencies and find that while the bonds
are priced very well, the variation of the rate of currency appreciation from the implied ATSM stochastic
discount factors does not match well with the actual rate of currency appreciation. Of course, the results
could also indicate that financial markets are incomplete as in the analysis of Brandt and Santa-Clara (2002).




                                                             13
5.2        Implications for expected cross-currency investments
To investigate expected rates of return on cross-currency investments that are implied by the model with
Zi,t+1 present, let Zi,t+1 be log-normally distributed. Then, we can assume that stochastic process for zi,t+1
is given by
                                                         1
                                               zi,t+1 = − λ|zi ,t λzi ,t − λ|zi ,t υzi ,t+1 ,                                       (20)
                                                         2
where υzi ,t+1 is a vector of risks that are distributed N (0, I) and that are orthogonal to the vector of risks,
υi,t+1 , that drive the term structure of interest rates in that currency.
     Substituting for the SDF’s from equations (7) and (20) and rearranging terms gives the excess rate of
return in currency i on a one-year investment in the money market of currency j:

                                     1 |                      1 |                                 
    − ∆sij,t+1 + rj,t − ri,t =         λi,t λi,t − λ|j,t λj,t +      λzi ,t λzi ,t − λ|zj ,t λzj ,t
                                     2                          2
                                                             + λi,t υi,t+1 − λ|j,t υj,t+1 + λ|zi ,t υzi ,t+1 − λ|zj ,t υzj ,t+1 .
                                                                |
                                                                                                                                    (21)

Taking the conditional expectation of equation (21) gives

                                                        1 |                      1 |                             
                     Et (−∆sij,t+1 + rj,t − ri,t ) =      λi,t λi,t − λ|j,t λj,t +   λzi ,t λzi ,t − λ|zj ,t λzj ,t .               (22)
                                                        2                          2
     The right-hand side of equation (22) is the expected excess rate of return to borrowing one unit of
currency i, investing that amount in the currency j money market, and bearing the foreign exchange risk.9
By imposing the constraints of the one-factor forecasting model for the two bond markets in equation (12),
we find

                                                                2
                              λ|j,t λj,t = (λj,0l + λj,1l xj,t ) = λ2j,0l + 2λj,0l λj,1l xj,t + λ2j,1l x2j,t .                      (23)

     Substituting from equation (23) into equation (22) implies that the return forecasting CP factors, xi,t
and xj,t , from the bond markets of the two currencies and their squared values should forecast the excess
rate of return to investing a unit of currency i in the currency j money market while bearing the foreign
exchange risk:

                         −∆sij,t+1 + rj,t − ri,t = ψ0 + ψ1 xi,t + ψ2 x2i,t + ψ3 xj,t + ψ4 x2j,t + sij,t+1 .                        (24)

     We leave the regression coefficients in equation (24) unconstrained because we do not observe λ|zi ,t λzi ,t −
λ|zj ,t λzj ,t .   Although equation (23) demonstrates that the return forecasting factors and their squared values
should forecast the excess rate of return in the currency j money market with tight restrictions related to
the prices of risks, the return forecasting variables may also enter the determination of the prices of risks,
λzi ,t and λzj ,t , or they may simply be correlated with the variables that drive these prices of risks, in which
case OLS regression of the excess rate of return on xi,t and xj,t and their squared values does not isolate the
pure effect of these variables that arises strictly from the fact that they are the determinants of the prices of
the term structure risks, λi,t and λj,t . Any restrictions arising from an ATSM specification of λi,t and λj,t
are lost in the general regression specification in equation (24) because the determinants of λzi ,t and λzj ,t
   9 As in equation (10), one can also express this time-varying expected excess rate of return in terms of a Jensen’s inequality

term and a logarithmic risk premium term.



                                                                    14
are not included in the regression.
     Table 7 presents the estimated coefficients for equation (24) with their asymptotic standard errors in
parenthesis for the pre-2004 sample.10 Panel A presents the forecasts of the USD excess rates of return from
investments in the eight different currencies.         Then, Panels B-G present the remaining 28 non-redundant
cross-currency forecasts of excess rates of return that do not involve the USD. Each Panel is labeled with
its base currency. The statistical significance of the estimates of the ψk coefficients is quantified with three
different tests. The χ2 (2)i statistic tests the null hypothesis that ψ1 and ψ2 equal zero, which tests whether
the CP factor associated with base currency i and its squared value have forecasting power for the excess rate
of return on an investment of base currency i in the currency j money market; the χ2 (2)j statistic tests the
null hypothesis that ψ3 and ψ4 equal zero, which tests whether the CP factor associated with currency j and
its squared value have forecasting power; and the χ2 (4) statistic tests the null hypothesis that ψ1 through ψ4
equal zero. Failure to reject these hypotheses would be consistent with the absence of time varying foreign
exchange risk premiums as specified, for example, in the uncovered interest rate parity hypothesis.
     In Panel A, only for the tests associated with the JPY do we find sufficiently large test statistics to
reject the three null hypotheses that the USD CP factor and its squared value as well as the foreign CP
factor and its squared value are not significant determinants of the expected annual excess rates of return
on investments in the foreign money markets. The adjusted R2 in the JPY regression is also a substantial
0.38.   For the other currencies, two of the χ2 (2) statistics have p-values less than the 0.1 marginal level
of significance, but such a finding would be expected by chance when examining 21 statistics. The other
adjusted R2 ’s in Panel A range from -0.00 for the SEK to 0.19 for the CAD.
     For the cross-currency results that do not involve the USD in Panels B-G, only 7 of the 63 test statistics
not involving the NOK are larger than the critical value of a χ2 statistic associated the 0.1 marginal level
of significance. Thus, the overall results do not support the ability of the CP factors to predict the excess
rates of return in foreign money markets in the sample of data that would have been available in 2005.
     How does the model do in the post-2003 sample? The answer is not particularly well. These results are
presented in Table 8, which has the same format at Table 7. Overall, the statistical significance of the CP
factors and their squared values is little better than chance as only 17% (12 of the 72) of the χ2 (2) statistics
have a p−value smaller than 0.1. For example, with the USD as the base currency in Panel A, only two of
the USD CP factor tests, in the CAD and NOK regressions, and none of the non-USD CP factor tests have
p−values smaller than 0.1. The adjusted R2 ’s range from 0.11 for the AUD to 0.36 for the NOK.
     The results are similar for the other non-USD panels.            For the GBP results in Panel B, the CHF CP
factor is the only non-GBP CP factor to have a p−value less than 0.1, and the GBP CP factor is only
statistically significant in the CAD and JPY forecasts. The adjusted R2 ’s range from 0.07 for the EUR and
the SEK to 0.30 for the JPY. In the remaining Panels, only for the CHF in Panel D is there much in the
way of statistical significance as four out of the 10 tests for the CHF factors have p−values smaller than 0.1.
     Because the CP factors are correlated, it could be the case that multicollinearity leads to insignificant
tests of individual country CP factors but joint significance across the CP factors.                Upon examining the
 2
χ (4) statistics, we see that 11 of the 36 statistics have p−values smaller than 0.1, but seven of these are
associated with the CHF. Thus, we are left with the overall impression from these data that annual excess
rates of return in foreign exchange markets are essentially unpredictable.
  10 Appendix C derives the standard errors of the parameters in equation (24). These standard errors allow for the fact that

the forecasting variables are estimated in first stage regressions.



                                                             15
5.3     Uncovered Interest Rate Parity
Although the CP factors and their squared values are unable to forecast excess rates of return on international
money market investments, this finding does not arise because uncovered interest rate parity is supported by
the data in which case the excess rates of return would be completely unpredictable. To examine this issue,
we run traditional regressions of these annual excess rates of return on the corresponding one-year interest
differential as in the following:

                                 −∆sij,t+1 + rj,t − ri,t = φ0 + φ1 (rj,t − ri,t ) + sij,t+1                                  (25)

In these regressions, the null hypothesis of no predictability of excess returns is φ1 = 0. These regressions
are analogous to the widely replicated regressions of Fama (1984) in which the rate of appreciation of base
currency i relative to currency j is regressed on the interest differential between currencies j and i as in the
following:
                                           ∆sij,t+1 = α + β (rj,t − ri,t ) + sij,t+1                                         (26)

The relation between the two slope coefficients is β = 1 − φ1 . Thus, the historical finding that estimated
β’s are negative in equation (26) translates into φ1 > 1 in equation (25).
    Tables 9 and 10 present the results of estimating equation (25) for the two samples used above for all of
the non-redundant currency pairs in our analysis. Each of the Tables contains two tests: one examining the
null hypothesis φ1 = 0, and one examining the null hypothesis φ1 = 1.
    Panel A of Table 9 presents the results with the USD as the base currency for the pre-2004 sample. For all
currencies other than the SEK, we see estimates of φ1 ranging from 1.68 for the EUR to 4.54 for the JPY.11
These estimates provide strong rejections of the null hypothesis φ1 = 0 associated with unpredictability of
the excess rates of return with χ2 (1) statistics ranging from 5.10 with a p−value of 0.02 for the EUR to 19.59
for the JPY with a p−value of 0.00. The point estimate for the SEK of 0.91 is insignificantly different from
zero. For the currencies other than the SEK and the NOK, the R2 ’s range in value from 0.09 for the EUR
to 0.39 for the JPY. Although all of the point estimates of φ1 parameters that are significantly different
from zero are larger than one, we are only able to reject the hypothesis that φ1 = 1 for the JPY.
    The results in Panels B through F of Table 9 are broadly consistent with those in Panel A. With the
GBP, the EUR, or the CHF as the base currency in Panels B-D, respectively, all of the estimates of φ1 ’s are
greater than one. We see strong rejections of the hypothesis that φ1 = 0 for the following currency pairs:
the GBP vs. the EUR, the CHF, and the JPY; the EUR vs. the CAD and the SEK; and the CHF vs. the
CAD and the SEK. The results for the JPY vs. the GBP, the CAD, and the AUD are particularly strong
and also allow rejection of the hypothesis that φ1 = 1.
    These results are completely consistent with the literature on the FX carry trade, which is a strategy
that borrows low interest rate currencies and lends high interest rate currencies. The dependent variable is
the return to the carry trade when rj,t > ri,t , and the highly positive values of the slope coefficients indicate
that expected carry trade profits are conditionally high when rj,t − ri,t is conditionally high.12
  11 Once again, for completeness we present the results for the NOK, but because the NOK sample ending in 2003 is particularly

short, we do not interpret them.
  12 See Daniel, Hodrick and Lu (2017) for a recent review of the literature on the risks of the carry trade at the monthly holding

period horizon. Lustig, Stathopoulos and Verdelhan (2017) find that investing in the carry trade with longer term bonds while
maintaining the one-month holding period is unattractive as the term premiums offset the currency premiums.




                                                                16
    Now, consider the results from estimating equation (25) for the sample in which the dependent variables
start in 2004:12 and end in 2016:12 in Table 10. These results are presented in the same format as Table 9.
The estimates of φ1 in Panel A with the USD as the base currency are now uniformly negative (except for
the CHF) and are generally as large in absolute value as the positive values from Table 9. The standard
errors are larger though, and only the test statistics for the EUR and the CAD are sufficiently large to allow
rejection of the hypothesis that φ1 = 0.
    Only 9 of the 28 estimates in Panels B through H are positive, and only 4 test statistics indicate rejection
of the hypothesis that φ1 = 0 at the 0.1 marginal level of significance. Clearly, the conclusion should be that
the later sample containing the financial crisis is quite different from the pre-2004 sample. These results are
also consistent with the post-2007 deterioration in the returns to the carry trade.


6     Out-of-Sample Results
The previous sections examined the predictability of excess returns in bond and foreign exchange markets
with classical asymptotic distribution theory. Inoue and Kilian (2005) argue that such an approach is actually
more powerful than out-of-sample experiments, yet such experiments are routinely done and are considered
to be a good indicator of instability in the underlying forecasting model. This section consequently examines
whether the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005, 2008) model can forecast the excess rates of return in bond and
foreign currency markets out of sample. As above, we use the sample period that would have been available
when the original paper was written as the in-sample period and treat post-2003 beginning in January 2004
through December 2016 as the out-of-sample period.
    We follow Welch and Goyal (2007) and Campbell and Thompson (2007) in assessing the models’ out-of-
sample forecasts by examining two statistics. The first is the R2 that compares the mean squared error of
the conditional forecasts of excess returns from the term structure model to the mean squared error from
assuming that the conditional forecasts of the excess returns are the conditional sample means using data up
to that point in time. Analytically, if r̂t represents the t−th out-of-sample forecast from the Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2005, 2008) model using parameters estimated with all the historical data available at that time,
and if rt represents the analogous forecast from the historical sample mean, using the same sample period,
then with Tos total out-of-sample observations, the mean squared error from the CP forecasts is

                                                         Tos
                                                      1 X               2
                                        M SECP =             (rt − r̂t ) ,                                 (27)
                                                     Tos t=1

and the mean squared error from the historical mean forecasts is

                                                         Tos
                                                      1 X              2
                                        M SEHM =             (rt − rt ) .                                  (28)
                                                     Tos t=1

The R2 is then defined as
                                                         M SECP
                                              R2 = 1 −                                                     (29)
                                                         M SEHM
The second closely related statistic is the Clark and McCracken (2005) M SE − F which tests for the equality




                                                       17
of the two forecasts:
                                                     M SEHM − M SECP
                                   M SE − F = Tos                    .                                    (30)
                                                         M SECP
   Table 11 presents the out-of-sample forecasts of excess bond returns for the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005)
model estimated separately for each currency. The first forecast is 2004:01, and the last is 2016:12.
   The results are quite mixed. The model’s forecasts are worse than the forecast based on the historical
mean at all maturities for the USD, the EUR, the JPY, the AUD, and the NOK. Only for the GBP do the
model forecasts beat historical mean forecast for all maturities. For the CHF, the CAD, and the SEK, the
results are mixed across maturities.


6.1    An Alternative Model with Free Constants
In discussing the relation of the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008) ATSM to the empirical model in Cochrane
and Piazzesi (2005), we noted that the former does not constrain the constant terms to have the same factor
of proportionality across maturities as is imposed by the latter.    To see whether relaxing this constraint
which formally nests the historical mean model as a constrained version of the larger model, we recursively
estimated the model with free constant terms for each maturity.
   The results of the out-of-sample forecasts are presented in Table 12. All of the R2 ’s except for maturities
3, 4, and 5 for the CHF are negative.       The forward spreads apparently provide no useful out-of-sample
forecasting power for the excess bond returns.


6.2    Constraining Parameters Across Currencies
In out-of-sample forecasting situations, it is often advised to limit the number of free parameters that are
estimated.   We experimented with this Occam’s razor intuition and recursively estimated a model that
constrains the slope coefficients in the forecasting equations to be the same across countries while freeing
the constants of the model from the constraint that they are proportional to the slope coefficients. These
out-of-sample forecasting results show that all of the model forecasts except for three maturities of the CHF
are worse than the historical mean, and these results are consequently presented in the Online Appendix.


6.3    Out-of-Sample Forecasts of Currency Returns
Given the inability of the CP forecasting factors and their squared values to forecast excess rates of return
in currency markets in in-sample regressions, the reader should expect that the model will not be useful in
out-of-sample experiments. For completeness, we present these results in Table 13. The results are indeed
as anticipated as the out-of-sample forecasts from the model are unable to beat the historical mean excess
returns of all currencies versus the USD.


6.4    Evolution of the USD Parameters
The failure of the model in the out-of-sample forecasting experiments and the rejection of equality of coef-
ficients across sub-periods suggests substantial parameter instability. While a full analysis of this issue is
not something we have space to accomplish in this article, Figure 1 presents the recursive estimates of the
parameters of the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) model for the USD term structure as they evolve in the


                                                      18
out-of-sample estimation period.13 The estimates of the bn parameters remain incredibly stable as the four
lines are virtually horizontal. It is also clear that beginning in 2008 with the advent of the financial crisis,
the estimated γ(2) changes over the course of two years from positive to negative, the estimated γ(3) begins
a slow decline, and the estimated γ(5) experiences a steady increase.           The estimated γ(4) is reasonably
constant after a blip in 2009. Because these are recursive estimates that use all of the sample to that point
in time, they are more stable than would be recursive rolling estimates that use the same sample size at each
point in time. In that sense, the slow evolution masks more dramatic changes.


7     Conclusions
In this paper we document substantive instabilities in the empirical analysis of risk premiums in bond and
foreign exchange markets.           One puzzle appears to be the observation that there is a strong one-factor
structure to the forecasts of expected returns in the bond markets in a particular sample of data, but a
different one-factor structure in another sample. Modeling the sources of the structural changes should be
high on the research agenda.           It is also puzzling that the CP factors in two currencies have such strong
predictability in their respective bond markets but not in the foreign exchange market between the two
currencies.
    There are many directions that research on time varying risk premiums in bond and foreign exchange
markets could go. Here we review some recent approaches.
    In extending the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) model to additional currencies and considering its in-
ternational implications, we have not addressed the term structure literature arguing that macroeconomic
variables, such as inflation and employment, have additional forecasting power over and above that avail-
able in bond yields.        In this regard we cite two recent critiques of this literature.   First, Ghysels, Horan
and Moench (2018) find that several studies touting the significantly improved forecasting performance of
macroeconomic variables above that provided by yields overstate their importance because the studies use
revised data. Ghysels, Horan and Moench (2018) find that use of real time U.S. data substantially reduces
the implied predictive power. Second, Bauer and Hamilton (2017) argue that after taking account of small
sample distortions in the test statistics induced by the use of macro variables with trends, the evidence
for additional predictability from macro variables is much weaker. Because addressing these issues in our
multiple currency context is beyond what can be accomplished in a given article, we leave these issues to
future research.
    We have also focused exclusively on the annual forecasting horizon.            Most bond market ATSMs are
estimated at the monthly horizon and typically find that monthly risk premiums are driven by more than
one state variable. In contrast, we find the strong one-factor structure originally documented by Cochrane
and Piazzesi (2005) at the annual horizon. Examining the dynamics of the state variables in monthly models
and seeing whether they imply a single state variable at the annual horizon would be an interesting project.
Recent papers that examine multiple horizons include Bacchetta and Van Wincoop (2010), Engel (2016),
Lustig, Stathopoulos and Verdelhan (2017), and Chernov and Creal (2018) who find interesting patterns in
expected returns at different horizons.
    While ATSMs are typically developed under the assumption of rational expectations, it may be the
 13 Figures   for the other currencies are available in the Online Appendix.




                                                               19
case that behavioral finance with its time varying sentiments could be responsible for our findings of model
instability.    One recent empirical analysis with a behavioral slant is Brooks and Moskowitz (2017), who
examine quarterly returns on bonds from Australia, Germany, Canada, Japan, Sweden, the UK, and the
U.S. Using panel data methods with time fixed effects, they argue that measures of value, carry, and
momentum dominate the CP factor in forecasting excess returns. While we are forecasting actual excess
returns on a currency by currency basis, the panel data approach of Brooks and Moskowitz (2017) implies
that they are forecasting deviations from cross-sectional average returns.
   Another alternative approach to these issues would rely on the analysis of Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2011) who argue that the supply of U.S. Treasury securities affects the level and slope of the
yield curve. Do such changes in quantities also affect the risk premiums in the other bond markets and in
the foreign exchange markets? Valchev (2017) answers this question affirmatively. It is natural to think
that major changes in monetary and fiscal policies, including the quantitative easing done by major central
banks during the international financial crisis, could induce the changes in the parameters of the CP factors
and the resulting changes in forecasting power that we observe.              Actually demonstrating this empirically
is a challenging task. Evidence of substantive structural change in the international financial markets can
also be found in the deviations from covered interest rate parity documented by Du, Tepper and Verdelhan
(2018) and Rime, Schrimpf and Syrstad (2017).14
   Rather than focusing on time varying risk premiums, Valchev (2017) and Jiang, Krishnamurthy and
Lustig (2018) are two recent papers that empirically explore differential time-varying liquidity premiums, or
non-pecuniary returns, on government bonds as explanations of rates of currency depreciation. Can these
models explain the instabilities that we document?
   Our econometric analysis also is conducted under the standard assumption that investors have rational
expectations and that the data are stationary and ergodic.              It has long been recognized that changes in
monetary policy regimes can cause problems with econometric analysis of the term structure. Fuhrer (1996)
argues that investors are aware of changes in regimes but do not anticipate future changes, which he views
as a compromise between full rationality and learning. Bekaert, Hodrick and Marshall (2001) argue that
so-called peso problems, caused by differences between the frequency of realizations of the data and the
conditional distributions investors had at the time that they set bond prices, could be responsible for the
anomalies observed in the term structure literature.
   The necessity for investors to learn about changes in monetary policy, the rate of inflation, or the real
interest rate are also important areas of recent research that relaxes the rational expectations assumption.
Piazzesi, Salomao and Schneider (2015) note that professional forecasts of interest rates differ from those
based on regressions.      They build on the insights of Froot (1989) who argued that evidence against the
expectations hypothesis of the term structure was plausibly due to the failure of the rational expectations
assumption imposed in the tests rather than to failures of the expectations hypothesis itself.
   Giacoletti, Laursen and Singleton (2016) argue that marginal investors in the bond market act as Bayesian
learners to form prospective real-time views about bond market risks. While the sources of risks are the first
three principal components of the yield curve, knowledge of the extent of disagreement among professionals
is informative about how today’s yield curve will impact its future shape and thus the prices of risks.
   The studies cited here provide some interesting directions in which research can go. Most of these papers
 14 Andersen, Duffie and Song (2018) provide a theoretical explanation for deviations from covered interest rate parity in a
world with highly levered, risky financial market makers.



                                                            20
do not investigate time variation in the parameters of their empirical models. Our paper provides a set of
challenging empirical results demonstrating more attention should be devoted to this type of analysis. The
paper also provides interesting empirical evidence showing an absence of links that should theoretically be
present between the term structures of interest rates in two currencies and the currency market between
them.


References
Andersen, Leif BG, Darrell Duffie, and Yang Song. 2018. “Funding value adjustments.” forthcoming
  Journal of Finance.

Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric Van Wincoop. 2010. “Infrequent portfolio decisions: A solution to the
  forward discount puzzle.” American Economic Review, 100(3): 870–904.

Backus, David K, Silverio Foresi, and Chris I Telmer. 2001. “Affine term structure models and the
  forward premium anomaly.” Journal of Finance, 56(1): 279–304.

Bauer, Michael D, and Glenn D Rudebusch. 2017. “Interest Rates Under Falling Stars.” San Francisco
  Federal Reserve Bank Working Paper.

Bauer, Michael D, and James D Hamilton. 2017. “Robust bond risk premia.” The Review of Financial
  Studies, 31(2): 399–448.

Bauer, Michael D, Glenn D Rudebusch, and Jing Cynthia Wu. 2014. “Term premia and inflation
  uncertainty: empirical evidence from an international panel dataset: comment.” American Economic
  Review, 104(1): 323–37.

Bekaert, Geert, Min Wei, and Yuhang Xing. 2007. “Uncovered interest rate parity and the term
  structure.” Journal of International Money and Finance, 26(6): 1038–1069.

Bekaert, Geert, Robert J Hodrick, and David A Marshall. 2001. “Peso problem explanations for
  term structure anomalies.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 48(2): 241–270.

Brandt, Michael W, and Pedro Santa-Clara. 2002. “Simulated likelihood estimation of diffusions
  with an application to exchange rate dynamics in incomplete markets.” Journal of Financial Economics,
  63(2): 161–210.

Brooks, Jordan, and Tobias J Moskowitz. 2017. “Yield curve premia.” Yale School of Management
  Working Paper.

Campbell, John Y, and Samuel B Thompson. 2007. “Predicting excess stock returns out of sample:
  Can anything beat the historical average?” Review of Financial Studies, 21(4): 1509–1531.

Chernov, Mikhail, and Drew D Creal. 2018. “Multihorizon Currency Returns and Purchasing Power
  Parity.” NBER Working Paper No. 25963.

Chinn, Menzie D, and Guy Meredith. 2004. “Monetary policy and long-horizon uncovered interest
  parity.” IMF staff papers, 51(3): 409–430.

                                                    21
Cieslak, Anna, and Pavol Povala. 2015. “Expected returns in Treasury bonds.” Review of Financial
  Studies, 28(10): 2859–2901.

Clark, Todd E, and Michael W McCracken. 2005. “Evaluating direct multistep forecasts.” Econometric
  Reviews, 24(4): 369–404.

Cochrane, John H. 2015. “Comments on “Robust Bond Risk Premia” by Michael Bauer and Jim Hamil-
  ton.” manuscript, Stanford University.

Cochrane, John H, and Monika Piazzesi. 2005. “Bond risk premia.” American Economic Review,
  95(1): 138–160.

Cochrane, John H, and Monika Piazzesi. 2008. “Decomposing the yield curve.” University of Chicago
  Working Paper.

Dahlquist, Magnus, and Henrik Hasseltoft. 2013. “International bond risk premia.” Journal of Inter-
  national Economics, 90(1): 17–32.

Dahlquist, Magnus, and Henrik Hasseltoft. 2016. “International bond risk premia.” In Handbook of
  Fixed Income Securities. , ed. Pietro Veronesi, Chapter 9. New York:Wiley.

Daniel, Kent, Robert J. Hodrick, and Zhongjin Lu. 2017. “The carry trade: Risks and drawdowns.”
  Critical Finance Review, 6(2): 211–262.

D’Ericco, John. 2011. “DERIVEST.” http: // www. mathworks. com/ matlabcentral/ fileexchange/
  13490-adaptive-robust-numerical-differentiation .

Duffee, Gregory R. 2011. “Information in (and not in) the term structure.” Review of Financial Studies,
  24(9): 2895–2934.

Du, Wenxin, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan. 2018. “Deviations from covered interest rate
  parity.” Journal of Finance, 73(3): 915–957.

Engel, Charles. 2016. “Exchange rates, interest rates, and the risk premium.” American Economic Review,
  106(2): 436–74.

Fama, Eugene F. 1984. “Forward and spot exchange rates.” Journal of monetary economics, 14(3): 319–
  338.

Fama, Eugene F, and Robert R Bliss. 1987. “The information in long-maturity forward rates.” The
  American Economic Review, 680–692.

Froot, Kenneth A. 1989. “New hope for the expectations hypothesis of the term structure of interest
  rates.” The Journal of Finance, 44(2): 283–305.

Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. 1996. “Monetary policy shifts and long-term interest rates.” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 111(4): 1183–1209.

Ghysels, Eric, Casidhe Horan, and Emanuel Moench. 2018. “Forecasting through the rear-view
  mirror: Data revisions and bond return predictability.” Review of Financial Studies, 31(2): 678–714.

                                                    22
Giacoletti, Marco, Kristoffer Laursen, and Kenneth J Singleton. 2016. “Learning, dispersion of
  beliefs, and risk premiums in an arbitrage-free term structure model.” Stanford Working Paper.

Gibbons, Michael R, and Wayne Ferson. 1985. “Testing asset pricing models with changing expectations
  and an unobservable market portfolio.” Journal of Financial Economics, 14(2): 217–236.

Hansen, Lars Peter. 1982. “Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators.”
  Econometrica, 50(4): 1029–1054.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Robert J Hodrick. 1980. “Forward exchange rates as optimal predictors of
  future spot rates: An econometric analysis.” Journal of Political Economy, 88(5): 829–853.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Robert J Hodrick. 1983. “Risk averse speculation in the forward foreign ex-
  change market: An econometric analysis of linear models.” In Exchange Rates and International Macroe-
  conomics. , ed. Jacob A. Frenkel, 113–152. Chicago, IL:University of Chicago Press.

Inoue, Atsushi, and Lutz Kilian. 2005. “In-sample or out-of-sample tests of predictability: Which one
  should we use?” Econometric Reviews, 23(4): 371–402.

Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig. 2018. “Foreign Safe Asset Demand
  and the Dollar Exchange Rate.” NBER Working Paper No. 24439.

Joslin, Scott, Marcel Priebsch, and Kenneth J Singleton. 2014. “Risk premiums in dynamic term
  structure models with unspanned macro risks.” Journal of Finance, 69(3): 1197–1233.

Jotikasthira, Chotibhak, Anh Le, and Christian Lundblad. 2015. “Why do term structures in dif-
  ferent currencies co-move?” Journal of Financial Economics, 115(1): 58–83.

Kessler, Stephan, and Bernd Scherer. 2009. “Varying risk premia in international bond markets.”
  Journal of Banking & Finance, 33(8): 1361–1375.

Koijen, Ralph SJ, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2017. “The cross-section and time
  series of stock and bond returns.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 88: 50–69.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2011. “The effects of quantitative easing
  on long-term interest rates.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 215–265.

Litterman, Robert, and Jose Scheinkman. 1991. “Common factors affecting bond returns.” Journal of
  fixed income, 1(1): 54–61.

Lustig, Hanno, Andreas Stathopoulos, and Adrien Verdelhan. 2017. “The term structure of currency
  carry trade risk premia.” Stanford University Working Paper.

Nagel, Stefan. 2016. “The liquidity premium of near-money assets.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  131(4): 1927–1971.

Newey, Whitney K, and Kenneth D West. 1987. “A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity
  and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix.” Econometrica, 55(3): 703–708.




                                                    23
Pericoli, Marcello, and Marco Taboga. 2012. “Bond risk premia, macroeconomic fundamentals and the
  exchange rate.” International Review of Economics & Finance, 22(1): 42–65.

Piazzesi, Monika, Juliana Salomao, and Martin Schneider. 2015. “Trend and cycle in bond premia.”
  Stanford University Working Paper.

Rime, Dagfinn, Andreas Schrimpf, and Olav Syrstad. 2017. “Segmented money markets and covered
  interest parity arbitrage.” Norges Bank Research Paper 15-2017.

Sarno, Lucio, Paul Schneider, and Christian Wagner. 2012. “Properties of foreign exchange risk
  premiums.” Journal of Financial Economics, 105(2): 279–310.

Sarno, Lucio, Paul Schneider, and Christian Wagner. 2016. “The economic value of predicting bond
  risk premia.” Journal of Empirical Finance, 37: 247–267.

Sekkel, Rodrigo. 2011. “International evidence on bond risk premia.” Journal of Banking & Finance,
  35(1): 174–181.

Taylor, John B. 1993. “Discretion versus policy rules in practice.” Vol. 39, 195–214, Elsevier.

Thornton, Daniel L, and Giorgio Valente. 2012. “Out-of-sample predictions of bond excess returns and
  forward rates: An asset allocation perspective.” The Review of Financial Studies, 25(10): 3141–3168.

Valchev, Rosen. 2017. “Bond convenience yields and exchange rate dynamics.” Boston College Working
  Paper.

Welch, Ivo, and Amit Goyal. 2007. “A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of equity
  premium prediction.” Review of Financial Studies, 21(4): 1455–1508.

Wright, Jonathan H. 2011. “Term premia and inflation uncertainty: Empirical evidence from an interna-
  tional panel dataset.” American Economic Review, 101(4): 1514–1534.

Zhu, Xiaoneng. 2015. “Out-of-sample bond risk premium predictions: A global common factor.” Journal
  of International Money and Finance, 51: 155–173.



A     Data
Data on the term structures of interest rates for the different currencies were obtained from several sources.
The USD data are from the CRSP Fama-Bliss database. This is the same source as Cochrane and Piazzesi
(2005). For yields from the non-USD term structures, we obtained data from Jonathan Wright’s web site.
These data were used in Wright (2011). We updated the data from the web sites of the respective central
banks. The monthly term structure data all end in December 2016. The data begin in June 1952 for the
USD, in January 1970 for the GBP, in January 1973 for the EUR spliced with the Deutsche mark prior to
1999; in March 1988 for the CHF; in January 1986 for the CAD; in January 1985 for the JPY; in February
1987 for the AUD; in January 1987 for the SEK; and in January 1998 for the NOK. The exchange rate data
are from the International Monetary Fund, and the sample period is January 1973 to December 2016 for all
exchange rates.

                                                     24
B      The Affine Model Solutions
The solutions to the coefficients of the natural logarithms of the bond prices in the affine model given in
equation (9) are the following difference equations:

                                            |                       |
                       An    = An−1 − δ0 + Bn−1 (µ − Σλ0 ) + (1/2) Bn−1 ΣΣ | Bn−1                              (B.1)
                       Bn|   = −δ1| + Bn−1
                                       |
                                           (Φ − Σλ1 )                                                          (B.2)

     with initial conditions A0 = 0 and B0 = 0. By defining Φ∗ = (Φ − Σλ1 ), we can write equation (B.2)
as
                                                                −1
                                         Bn| = −δ1| (I − Φ∗ )        (I − Φ∗n )                                (B.3)


C      The Standard Errors
This appendix derives the standard errors for the two-step estimation of the term structure models that
generate the CP forecasting factors and the corresponding forecasting equation for the excess return on base
currency i relative to currency j.     Let εi,t+1 and εj,t+1 be the error terms in equation (5) for the term
structure regressions associated with the currencies i and j, respectively. The error term, εsj,t+1 , is defined in
                                                         |
                                                                         bj| fsj,t is the return forecasting variable
                             
equation (24). Let hij,t ≡ 1, xi,t , x2i,t , xj,t , x2j,t , where xj,t = γ
from the estimation of equation (5) for currency j, and let ψ represent the vector of parameters in equation
(24). Then, the orthogonality conditions associated with the forecasts of the average excess returns in the
two bond markets and the excess rate of return in the currency market are the following:

                                                            
                                            E fs1,t × ε1,t+1 = 0
                                                            
                                            E fsj,t × εj,t+1 = 0                                               (C.1)
                                            E hij,t × εsj,t+1 = 0.
                                                            

                                                |
     The parameter vector is θ = γ1| , γj| , ψ | . Let gT (θ) denote the sample mean of the orthogonality
                                

conditions in the system of equations given in (C.1).          Because the system is just identified, these sample
orthogonality conditions can be set to zero, and the asymptotic variance of the parameter estimates can be
estimated as
                                                       1 −1
                                             V (θ) =    D ST D−1|                                              (C.2)
                                                       T T    T

     where
                                                          ∂gT (θ)
                                                  DT =                                                         (C.3)
                                                           ∂θ |
     is the sample estimate of the Jacobian of the orthogonality conditions, D, which is defined below, and

                                                    K
                                                    X K −k
                                       ST ≡ C0 +                  (Ck + C|k ) ,                                (C.4)
                                                           K
                                                    k=1


is the sample estimate of the variance of the orthogonality conditions. The autocovariances are estimated




                                                          25
with
                                                      T
                                                    1 X     |
                                            Ck ≡        gt gt−k                                         (C.5)
                                                    T
                                                      t=k+1

where gt is the vector of observations on the orthogonality conditions are time t, and we use K = 18.
   The derivatives in equation (C.3) are sample estimates of
                                                |
                                                                                 
                                       −E fs1,t fs1,t             0           0
                                                                    |
                                                                                
                              D =
                                               0          −E fsj,t fsj,t     0 
                                             D1                  D2           D3
                                                                                           
   where D1 ≡ ∇γ1| E εsj,t+1 hij,t , D2 ≡ ∇γj| E εsj,t+1 hij,t , and D3 ≡ ∇ψ| E εsj,t+1 hij,t , respectively.
We estimate DT using the jacobianest function from the Matlab DERIVEST suite of D’Ericco (2011).
   From the structure of the D matrix and the partitioned inverse formula, one sees that the variances of the
estimates of γ1 and γj are not affected by the estimation of ψ whereas the variances of the latter parameters
are affected by the estimation of the former.




                                                          26
Figure 1: Evolution of parameters (USD)




                  27
                           Table 1: The Single Factor Model (Pre-2004 Data)

The Table reports coefficient estimates for the two-step estimation of the constrained single factor model. The
first step involves OLS estimation of the average one-year excess rates of return on bonds with two through
five years to maturity, rxt+1 , on a constant and the average of the current value and two monthly lags of the
four forward spreads, fst :
                                              rxt+1 = γ | fst + εt+1 .
The second step involves OLS regressions of the individual excess rates of return on bonds with two through
four years to maturity on the fitted value from the first step:
                                              (n)                (n)
                                                       b| fst + εt+1
                                                             
                                            rxt+1 = bn γ

Standard errors in the first step are based on the usual GMM versions from OLS orthogonality conditions,
and the standard errors in the second step allow for the estimation error in the first step. All standard
errors are constructed with 18 Newey-West (1987) lags and are in parentheses. The χ2 (4) statistic tests the
hypothesis that γ2 through γ5 equal zero with p-values in angled brackets. The R2 is from the first step
regression. The column labeled %P C1 presents the percentage of the variance of the unconstrained estimates
of the four excess rates of return explained by their first principal component. The sample periods for the
dependent variables all end in 2003:12. The samples begin in 1974:12 for the USD, the GBP, and the EUR;
in 1989:03 for the CHF; in 1987:03 for the CAD; in 1986:03 for the JPY; in 1988:04 for the AUD; in 1988:03
for the SEK; and in 1999:03 for the NOK.
CUR         b2      b3       b4       γ1         γ2        γ3          γ4        γ5     χ2 (4)     R2   %PC1
USD      0.46     0.86     1.23    -0.04      2.32       3.65       1.73      -4.67    100.04    0.39    0.997
        (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.01)   (0.63)    (1.63)     (1.33)     (0.95)     (0.58)    h0.00i
GBP      0.44     0.86     1.21     1.04     -5.40      11.24      -6.54       0.39      9.46    0.09    0.996
        (0.05)   (0.03)   (0.02)   (0.53)    (4.31)    (11.72)    (14.23)     (5.97)    h0.05i
EUR      0.44     0.86     1.21     1.02     -1.77      -4.19      16.47     -10.50      9.66    0.12    0.992
        (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.01)   (0.90)    (5.07)    (14.33)    (19.38)     (9.17)    h0.05i
CHF      0.47     0.86     1.19     0.78     -1.45      -9.62      26.03     -14.60     22.25    0.24    0.994
        (0.08)   (0.04)   (0.03)   (1.45)   (11.88)    (30.09)    (38.64)    (18.01)    h0.00i
CAD      0.46     0.86     1.20     1.64      0.53      -5.16      19.68     -13.59     34.30    0.23    0.993
        (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.01)   (0.84)    (2.34)     (5.25)     (6.95)     (4.03)    h0.00i
JPY      0.37     0.81     1.23     1.00    -14.99      17.34      -0.26      -5.02     26.00    0.25    0.997
        (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.00)   (1.23)    (3.75)     (4.15)     (2.07)     (1.88)    h0.00i
AUD      0.44     0.87     1.21     0.82    -32.92     107.79    -138.85      61.21     15.97    0.11    0.996
        (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.01)   (1.07)   (12.15)    (42.03)    (61.52)    (29.98)    h0.00i
SEK      0.40     0.80     1.20     1.11     25.03     -52.71      54.15     -21.11      4.60    0.09    0.998
        (0.05)   (0.03)   (0.02)   (1.44)   (13.90)    (39.27)    (51.85)    (24.07)    h0.33i
NOK      0.44     0.86     1.21     1.99     33.21    -128.76     202.25    -102.78    116.53    0.42    0.988
        (0.03)   (0.02)   (0.01)   (1.24)   (19.50)    (70.19)    (99.33)    (47.02)    h0.00i




                                                      28
                           Table 2: The Single Factor Model (Post-2003 Data)

The Table reports coefficient estimates for the two-step estimation of the constrained single factor model.
The first step involves OLS estimation of the average one-year excess rates of return on bonds with two
through five years to maturity, rxt+1 , on a constant and the average of the current value and two monthly
lags of the four forward spreads, fst :
                                            rxt+1 = γ | fst + εt+1 .
The second step involves OLS regressions of the individual excess rates of return on bonds with two through
four years to maturity on the fitted value from the first step:
                                              (n)                (n)
                                                       b| fst + εt+1
                                                             
                                            rxt+1 = bn γ

Standard errors in the first step are based on the usual GMM versions from OLS orthogonality conditions,
and the standard errors in the second step allow for the estimation error in the first step. All standard
errors are constructed with 18 Newey-West (1987) lags and are in parentheses. The χ2 (4) statistic tests
the hypothesis that γ2 through γ5 equal zero with p-values in angled brackets. The R2 is from the first
step regression. The column labeled %P C1 presents the percentage of the variance of the unconstrained
estimates of the four excess rates of return explained by their first principal component. The sample
periods for the dependent variables for all currencies begin in 2004:12 and end in 2016:12.
CUR        b2       b3       b4       γ1          γ2        γ3         γ4       γ5     χ2 (4)     R2   %PC1
USD      0.35     0.78     1.24     0.07      -7.57      2.17      2.56      -0.80     25.20    0.37   0.974
        (0.06)   (0.06)   (0.01)   (0.69)     (2.62)    (1.75)    (0.60)     (0.61)    h0.00i
GBP      0.37     0.82     1.23     0.17      -8.33     -5.16     26.84     -15.82     64.67    0.29   0.963
        (0.08)   (0.06)   (0.02)   (0.76)     (7.58)   (19.98)   (24.83)    (10.47)    h0.00i
EUR      0.34     0.77     1.22     1.61     -21.00     35.22    -24.91       6.39      6.46    0.08   0.972
        (0.06)   (0.05)   (0.01)   (1.49)    (14.68)   (33.30)   (35.71)    (14.38)    h0.17i
CHF      0.28     0.74     1.25     0.12     -10.41     16.56    -14.21       5.73    166.37    0.39   0.983
        (0.06)   (0.06)   (0.01)   (0.47)     (2.88)    (8.60)   (11.62)     (5.46)    h0.00i
CAD      0.38     0.82     1.22     1.60       4.22    -14.46     22.67     -11.20     19.45    0.17   0.949
        (0.08)   (0.06)   (0.02)   (1.04)     (3.61)    (6.34)    (6.34)     (2.70)    h0.00i
JPY      0.30     0.73     1.29     0.40       3.33     -1.00      4.03      -3.35     37.00    0.34   0.994
        (0.03)   (0.04)   (0.02)   (0.22)     (1.73)    (2.69)    (1.72)     (1.13)    h0.00i
AUD      0.33     0.81     1.22     1.50       3.06      2.67     -4.15       0.90     17.52    0.12   0.970
        (0.11)   (0.08)   (0.02)   (1.00)     (2.61)    (2.08)    (1.46)     (1.11)    h0.00i
SEK      0.37     0.80     1.22     1.90      15.17    -41.67     49.77     -21.08     11.37    0.13   0.973
        (0.08)   (0.07)   (0.02)   (1.08)     (8.55)   (17.71)   (19.88)     (8.85)    h0.02i
NOK      0.36     0.79     1.22     0.97      -4.14     -1.65      5.95      -2.72      2.84    0.08   0.866
        (0.14)   (0.13)   (0.02)   (0.98)    (10.55)   (22.99)   (22.88)     (8.73)    h0.59i




                                                       29
                            Table 3: Tests of Equality of Coefficients

The Table reports two statistics that test the equality of the coefficient estimates in the Cochrane
and Piazzesi (2005) models for the two samples estimated in Tables 1 and 2. The first test examines
the b coefficients and is distributed as a χ2 (3). The second test examines the γ coefficients and
is distributed as a χ2 (5). The p-values are in angled brackets. The first sample periods for the
dependent variables all end in 2003:12. These samples begin in 1974:12 for the USD, the GBP,
and the EUR; in 1989:03 for the CHF; in 1987:03 for the CAD; in 1986:03 for the JPY; in 1988:04
for the AUD; in 1988:03 for the SEK; and in 1999:03 for the NOK. The second sample period for
the dependent variables is 2004:12 to 2016:12 for all currencies.
                         CUR           χ2 (3) for b’s       χ2 (5) for γ’s
                                            h p-val i            h p-val i
                         USD                   5.15                81.76
                                             h 0.16i              h 0.00i
                         GBP                   4.77                 9.52
                                             h 0.19i              h 0.09i
                         EUR                  11.64                 4.39
                                             h 0.01i              h 0.49i
                         CHF                   8.69                 5.47
                                             h 0.03i              h 0.36i
                         CAD                   5.46                 7.16
                                             h 0.14i              h 0.21i
                         JPY                  26.58                25.98
                                             h 0.00i              h 0.00i
                         AUD                   2.87                 9.37
                                             h 0.41i              h 0.10i
                         SEK                   1.55                 1.33
                                             h 0.67i              h 0.93i
                         NOK                   3.10                34.09
                                             h 0.38i              h 0.00i




                                                 30
Table 4: Correlation Matrix and Variance Decomposition of Country CP Factors (Pre-2004 Data)

   The Table presents the correlation matrix of the CP factors, the fitted return forecasting
   variables from the term structure regressions for the different currencies in Table 1. Be-
   cause the samples are different lengths, the correlations are estimated over the shorter of
   the two samples. The sample periods for the dependent variables all end in 2003:12. The
   samples begin in 1974:12 for the USD, the GBP, and the EUR; in 1989:03 for the CHF; in
   1987:03 for the CAD; in 1986:03 for the JPY; in 1988:04 for the AUD; in 1988:03 for the
   SEK; and in 1999:03 for the NOK. The last column labelled %PC reports the percent of
   variance explained by the i-th principal component.
                                  Correlations                                       %PC
           USD     GBP     EUR     CHF     CAD          JPY     AUD     SEK     NOK     i   %PC(i)
   USD      1.00    0.06    0.23    0.26    0.37         0.22    0.35    0.11   -0.02   1     0.40
   GBP      0.06    1.00   -0.19    0.63    0.49         0.45    0.10   -0.22    0.27   2     0.29
   EUR      0.23   -0.19    1.00    0.12   -0.11         0.18   -0.08    0.46    0.44   3     0.13
   CHF      0.26    0.63    0.12    1.00    0.19         0.34   -0.16   -0.17    0.34   4     0.09
   CAD      0.37    0.49   -0.11    0.19    1.00         0.24    0.12    0.09   -0.08   5     0.04
   JPY      0.22    0.45    0.18    0.34    0.24         1.00    0.02    0.02   -0.30   6     0.03
   AUD      0.35    0.10   -0.08   -0.16    0.12         0.02    1.00   -0.07    0.18   7     0.01
   SEK      0.11   -0.22    0.46   -0.17    0.09         0.02   -0.07    1.00    0.39   8     0.01
   NOK     -0.02    0.27    0.44    0.34   -0.08        -0.30    0.18    0.39    1.00   9     0.00




                                                   31
Table 5: Correlation Matrix and Variance Decomposition of Country CP Factors (Post-2003 Data)

    The Table presents the correlation matrix of the CP factors, the fitted return forecasting
    variables from the term structure regressions for the different currencies in Table 2. The
    sample period for the dependent variables is 2004:12 to 2016:12. The last column labelled
    %PC reports the percent of variance explained by the i-th principal component.
                                   Correlations                                        %PC
            USD     GBP     EUR     CHF     CAD     JPY     AUD     SEK    NOK     i   %PC(i)
    USD      1.00    0.42   -0.07    0.12   0.34     0.35    0.12   0.08    0.15   1     0.37
    GBP      0.42    1.00    0.39    0.34   0.40    -0.11    0.08   0.16    0.54   2     0.18
    EUR     -0.07    0.39    1.00    0.33   0.19    -0.32    0.08   0.13    0.35   3     0.14
    CHF      0.12    0.34    0.33    1.00   0.17     0.08   -0.01   0.18    0.44   4     0.10
    CAD      0.34    0.40    0.19    0.17   1.00     0.37    0.16   0.11    0.04   5     0.08
    JPY      0.35   -0.11   -0.32    0.08   0.37     1.00    0.06   0.01   -0.29   6     0.06
    AUD      0.12    0.08    0.08   -0.01   0.16     0.06    1.00   0.15   -0.30   7     0.04
    SEK      0.08    0.16    0.13    0.18   0.11     0.01    0.15   1.00    0.20   8     0.02
    NOK      0.15    0.54    0.35    0.44   0.04    -0.29   -0.30   0.20    1.00   9     0.01




                                               32
       Table 6: Explaining Currency Market Excess Returns with Changes in Level Factors

The Table presents estimation results for the regression

−∆s1j,t+1 + rj,t − r1,t = β0 + β1 ∆l1,t+1 + β2 ∆l1,t+1 × x1,t + β3 ∆lj,t+1 + β4 ∆lj,t+1 × xj,t + ε1j,t+1

where the dependent variable is the excess rate of return in USD on an annual investment in the
money market of currency j, which is our proxy for the innovation in the rate of dollar appreciation.
The regressors are the contemporaneous changes in the first principal components of the yields for
the USD, ∆l1,t+1 , and currency j, ∆lj,t+1 , and the interaction of these variables with their respective
currency specific CP factors, which are the term structure excess return forecasting variables, x1,t
and xj,t . Standard errors are in parentheses. The sample periods for the dependent variables all
end in 2016:12. The samples begin in 1974:12 for the GBP and the EUR; in 1989:03 for the CHF;
in 1987:03 for the CAD; in 1986:03 for the JPY; in 1988:04 for the AUD; in 1988:03 for the SEK;
and in 1999:03 for the NOK.
CUR               β0               β1               β2                β3               β4             R2
GBP            0.60            67.19           -17.42            -69.35            48.99           0.05
              (1.45)          (48.22)          (16.73)           (58.53)          (22.87)
EUR           -0.43           -53.75            -5.55             42.14           -42.59           0.04
              (1.71)          (52.77)          (23.15)           (79.43)          (43.78)
CHF            0.05            -5.23           -27.99            -29.78             1.04           0.02
              (2.01)         (102.34)          (62.41)           (75.36)          (73.78)
CAD            1.59            24.99             0.56             12.57            14.58           0.02
              (1.42)          (79.51)          (24.25)           (69.07)          (20.94)
JPY           -0.95           159.31           -79.08           -302.53            83.38           0.23
              (2.14)         (158.57)          (44.50)          (116.41)          (50.06)
AUD            3.92            21.78           -27.40             98.66            36.56           0.13
              (1.97)          (99.81)          (42.01)          (187.34)          (99.49)
SEK            0.60            30.17           -61.84            258.79           -65.46           0.20
              (1.78)         (101.23)          (51.72)           (72.19)          (43.40)
NOK            0.98            -7.12          -110.05            128.38           -26.44           0.10
              (2.51)         (204.10)         (113.57)          (309.66)         (308.21)




                                                   33
        Table 7: Forecasts of Excess Rates of Return in Currency Markets (Pre-2004 Data)

The Table presents estimation results for the regression

               −∆sij,t+1 + rj,t − ri,t = ψ0 + ψ1 xi,t + ψ2 x2i,t + ψ3 xj,t + ψ4 x2j,t + sij,t+1

where the dependent variable is the excess rate of return in base currency i on an annual investment
in the money market of currency j. The regressors are the CP factors, the fitted return forecasting
variables from the term structure regressions for currencies i and j, and their squared values. Standard
errors are in parentheses, and p-values are in angled brackets. The χ2 (2)i statistic tests the null
hypothesis that ψ1 and ψ2 equal zero, the χ2 (2)j statistic tests the null hypothesis that ψ3 and ψ4
equal zero, and the χ2 (4) statistic tests the null hypothesis that ψ1 through ψ4 equal zero. The
sample periods for the dependent variables all end in 2003:12. The samples begin in 1974:12 for the
GBP and the EUR; in 1989:03 for the CHF; in 1987:03 for the CAD; in 1986:03 for the JPY; in
1988:04 for the AUD; in 1988:03 for the SEK; and in 1999:03 for the NOK.
CUR j           ψ0       ψ1        ψ2       ψ3       ψ4 χ2 (2)i χ2 (2)j        χ2 (4)                 R2
                                           Panel A: i = USD
GBP          1.63      0.48    -0.01     0.73     -0.76     0.55       1.12     1.37                0.04
            (2.56)   (0.67)    (0.13) (1.74) (0.73) h0.76i h0.57i h0.85i
EUR         -0.57      1.44    -0.01    -2.15      0.56     4.79       1.10     5.07                0.08
            (3.16)   (0.66)    (0.11) (3.00) (0.59) h0.09i h0.58i h0.28i
CHF         -2.12     -2.80     1.08    -1.83      0.63     2.15       0.86     3.76                0.13
            (5.41)   (4.48)    (0.97) (2.18) (1.04) h0.34i h0.65i h0.44i
CAD          3.60     -1.13     0.40    -1.13     -0.17     1.13       5.22     7.26                0.19
            (2.44)   (2.20)    (0.47) (0.85) (0.26) h0.57i h0.07i h0.12i
JPY         -2.25      1.21     0.39     1.77     -1.11    11.32       6.96   22.22                 0.38
            (5.79)   (3.23)    (0.36) (3.26) (0.81) h0.00i h0.03i h0.00i
AUD          6.71     -3.16     0.80    -3.45      0.52     0.72       1.75     3.80                0.05
            (8.69)   (6.03)    (1.19) (2.70) (0.55) h0.70i h0.42i h0.43i
SEK         -0.16     -1.69     0.33     1.39     -0.10     0.11       0.95     1.51               -0.00
            (4.78)   (5.11)    (1.02) (2.27) (0.59) h0.95i h0.62i h0.82i
NOK         -0.23     -0.81     1.23     0.33     -0.26     1.58       1.85     4.61                0.36
            (6.03)   (9.06)    (1.97) (1.29) (0.25) h0.45i h0.40i h0.33i
                                           Panel B: i = GBP
EUR         -2.65      0.77     0.33    -1.96      0.78     2.31       3.70   12.21                 0.11
            (3.10)   (1.05)    (0.49) (2.62) (0.47) h0.32i h0.16i h0.02i
CHF         -4.35      0.95     1.96    -2.18     -1.01     1.66       2.28     3.00                0.43
            (5.05)   (6.42)    (2.63) (2.03) (0.90) h0.44i h0.32i h0.56i
CAD         -1.89      0.86    -0.15     1.68     -0.57     0.10       0.93     2.17                0.04
            (3.41)   (4.01)    (2.24) (1.82) (0.62) h0.95i h0.63i h0.70i
JPY         -7.10      2.51     0.72     4.34     -1.55     0.96       3.51     4.79                0.09
            (9.44)   (5.64)    (3.99) (3.07) (0.83) h0.62i h0.17i h0.31i
AUD          4.18      0.54     0.11    -3.74      0.37     0.27       2.48     2.70                0.06
            (4.64)   (4.45)    (1.99) (3.50) (0.63) h0.87i h0.29i h0.61i
SEK         -7.58      1.46     0.42     2.50     -0.11     1.71       1.10     4.39                0.14
            (5.03)   (2.85)    (1.27) (2.53) (0.43) h0.43i h0.58i h0.36i
NOK        -10.62    23.26     -8.24    -0.21     -0.21     0.25       3.57     5.76                0.21
           (65.22) (74.87) (21.61) (1.29) (0.14) h0.88i h0.17i h0.22i
                                           Panel C: i = EUR
CHF          0.76     -2.23     0.62    -0.50      0.02     0.30       0.56     2.16                0.07
            (4.67)   (8.65)    (3.49) (0.67) (0.24) h0.86i h0.76i h0.71i
CAD         -0.12      4.71    -1.63     2.31     -1.02     0.07       4.65     4.73                0.12
           (10.26) (18.01)     (6.03) (1.76) (0.49) h0.96i h0.10i h0.32i
JPY         -0.68     -4.18     1.13     4.74     -1.25     0.30       3.86     5.50                0.06


                                                      34
CUR j        ψ0        ψ1        ψ2       ψ3      ψ4 χ2 (2)i   χ2 (2)j    χ2 (4)     R2
         (7.57)   (11.09)    (3.77)   (3.77) (0.72) h0.86i     h0.15i    h0.24i
AUD       5.30      0.58      0.34    -2.04    -0.16    0.21    7.07      7.10     0.11
         (4.52)   (18.12)    (9.50)   (4.54) (0.91) h0.90i     h0.03i    h0.13i
SEK      -4.93      3.49      0.21     0.14     0.06    0.79    0.10      2.28     0.14
         (7.25)   (12.41)    (4.39)   (2.76) (0.55) h0.67i     h0.95i    h0.68i
NOK      12.53    -14.11      5.30    -1.47    -0.29    0.10    2.27      4.94     0.49
        (33.93)   (55.20)   (19.19)   (1.32) (0.37) h0.95i     h0.32i    h0.29i
                                         Panel D: i = CHF
CAD       2.21      0.67      0.06     3.29    -1.34    0.15    3.15      3.98     0.13
         (5.17)    (1.86)    (0.92)   (2.96) (0.76) h0.93i     h0.21i    h0.41i
JPY      -2.39      0.38     -0.88     5.40    -1.18    1.01    1.55      1.92     0.07
         (7.89)    (2.05)    (0.91)   (5.57) (1.05) h0.60i     h0.46i    h0.75i
AUD       1.76      1.36      0.63    -0.31    -0.39    2.22    3.13      6.66     0.16
         (6.59)    (1.07)    (0.83)   (5.63) (1.00) h0.33i     h0.21i    h0.15i
SEK      -5.25      1.95      0.68     2.98    -0.35    5.03    1.56     16.35     0.20
         (3.91)    (1.22)    (0.40)   (2.57) (0.51) h0.08i     h0.46i    h0.00i
NOK       4.00     -0.90      0.77    -1.41    -0.13    0.79   12.36     15.10     0.30
         (1.55)    (2.55)    (1.20)   (0.46) (0.12) h0.68i     h0.00i    h0.00i
                                         Panel E: i = CAD
JPY      -4.93     -1.13      0.65     4.48    -1.28    0.84    0.97      3.91     0.10
         (4.49)    (2.14)    (0.74)   (4.90) (1.32) h0.66i     h0.61i    h0.42i
AUD       3.45     -2.85      0.42    -0.17     0.04    1.79    0.02      2.07     0.14
         (4.28)    (2.15)    (0.47)   (4.43) (0.73) h0.41i     h0.99i    h0.72i
SEK       0.20     -2.79      0.72     0.94    -0.34    2.26    0.95      3.45     0.04
         (3.01)    (1.95)    (0.62)   (1.82) (0.36) h0.32i     h0.62i    h0.49i
NOK      -5.57     -1.17      1.57    -0.06    -0.16   10.07    1.71     22.94     0.46
         (7.70)    (9.87)    (2.09)   (1.34) (0.16) h0.01i     h0.42i    h0.00i
                                         Panel F: i = JPY
AUD      14.87     -7.38      1.79    -4.27     0.11    3.89    5.38      8.82     0.27
        (11.36)    (3.79)    (0.99)   (6.48) (1.28) h0.14i     h0.07i    h0.07i
SEK       2.71     -7.26      1.93     4.31    -1.08    4.23    1.80      6.58     0.11
         (8.88)    (3.67)    (0.99)   (3.85) (0.87) h0.12i     h0.41i    h0.16i
NOK      15.20     -9.81     -0.87    -0.46    -0.52    3.08    3.60     15.44     0.25
         (3.99)    (8.68)    (5.60)   (1.89) (0.29) h0.21i     h0.16i    h0.00i
                                        Panel G: i = AUD
SEK      -6.49      2.65     -0.33     3.44    -0.83    3.54    1.91      5.67     0.07
         (5.59)    (1.65)    (0.32)   (3.40) (0.60) h0.17i     h0.39i    h0.23i
NOK       5.05     -3.83      1.25    -1.42    -0.35    0.28    9.72     11.20     0.11
        (20.84)   (22.98)    (4.67)   (1.15) (0.11) h0.87i     h0.01i    h0.02i
                                         Panel H: i = SEK
NOK      -5.16     12.78     -2.85    -1.68    -0.37    1.21    3.13     13.62     0.26
        (24.81)   (33.47)   (10.57)   (1.42) (0.22) h0.55i     h0.21i    h0.01i




                                               35
        Table 8: Forecasts of Excess Rates of Return in Currency Markets (Post-2003 Data)

The Table presents estimation results for the regression

               −∆sij,t+1 + rj,t − ri,t = ψ0 + ψ1 xi,t + ψ2 x2i,t + ψ3 xj,t + ψ4 x2j,t + sij,t+1

where the dependent variable is the excess rate of return in base currency i on an annual investment
in the money market of currency j. The regressors are the CP factors, the fitted return forecasting
variables from the term structure regressions for currencies i and j, and their squared values. Standard
errors are in parentheses, and p-values are in angled brackets. The χ2 (2)i statistic tests the null
hypothesis that ψ1 and ψ2 equal zero, the χ2 (2)j statistic tests the null hypothesis that ψ3 and ψ4
equal zero, and the χ2 (4) statistic tests the null hypothesis that ψ1 through ψ4 equal zero. The
sample periods for the dependent variables all begin in 2004:12 and end in 2016:12.
CUR j           ψ0        ψ1       ψ2        ψ3         ψ4 χ2 (2)i χ2 (2)j        χ2 (4)              R2
                                           Panel A: i = USD
GBP          4.47      1.11    -1.05      -2.30      0.08      1.15     2.98      7.39              0.26
            (2.46)    (1.93)   (0.98)    (2.66)     (1.19) h0.56i h0.23i h0.12i
EUR         10.16      1.05    -1.03      -8.27      1.61      3.23     2.63      4.10              0.21
            (7.49)    (1.95)   (0.76)    (9.59)     (3.57) h0.20i h0.27i h0.39i
CHF         -0.27      3.99    -1.11       0.47     -0.38      3.82     3.76      6.69              0.08
            (3.86)    (2.13)   (0.57)    (4.68)     (0.83) h0.15i h0.15i h0.15i
CAD         -0.14     -3.31    -0.38       6.10     -0.72      5.69     1.47     11.41              0.29
           (11.69)    (1.67)   (0.57) (15.36)       (3.55) h0.06i h0.48i h0.02i
JPY        -11.21     -0.46     0.30     25.10     -10.42      0.09     1.29      4.85              0.18
           (10.92)    (6.67)   (1.75) (39.14) (25.15) h0.95i h0.52i h0.30i
AUD          6.37      2.17    -1.62      -1.76      0.66      2.36     0.14      2.47              0.11
            (4.30)    (2.64)   (1.22)    (4.69)     (2.04) h0.31i h0.93i h0.65i
SEK          9.92      4.49    -2.47      -7.75      1.44      4.29     1.09      6.50              0.32
           (10.31)    (3.93)   (1.34) (13.39)       (3.32) h0.12i h0.58i h0.16i
NOK          9.98      1.63    -1.34    -18.87       7.97      7.35     0.66      7.51              0.36
           (16.96)    (3.17)   (0.90) (25.97)       (9.95) h0.03i h0.72i h0.11i
                                           Panel B: i = GBP
EUR          9.69     -1.55     0.42      -8.23      1.74      0.11     3.60      3.63              0.07
            (7.09)    (4.88)   (1.27)    (8.56)     (3.54) h0.95i h0.17i h0.46i
CHF         -0.43     -0.99     0.78       0.23      0.61      2.68    16.37     49.82              0.18
            (3.26)    (3.34)   (0.88)    (3.10)     (0.48) h0.26i h0.00i h0.00i
CAD         18.75     -3.38     1.50    -20.67       4.73      6.07     4.18     10.11              0.26
           (12.65)    (4.60)   (0.86) (11.52)       (3.07) h0.05i h0.12i h0.04i
JPY        -20.52      8.89    -0.67     13.34       1.85      6.36     1.20     14.25              0.30
           (12.70) (10.69)     (3.10) (30.54) (30.61) h0.04i h0.55i h0.01i
AUD          2.71     -1.91     1.17      -1.15      0.42      2.07     0.26      5.31              0.11
            (4.41)    (5.54)   (1.32)    (2.31)     (1.07) h0.36i h0.88i h0.26i
SEK          5.03     -4.30     1.03      -4.83      1.87      1.96     0.44      2.52              0.07
            (9.79)    (3.43)   (0.75) (11.82)       (3.63) h0.38i h0.80i h0.64i
NOK          4.35     -3.71     0.89      -5.98      3.48      1.09     0.85      2.78              0.10
            (8.06)    (4.08)   (0.86) (12.64)       (5.09) h0.58i h0.65i h0.59i
                                           Panel C: i = EUR
CHF         -4.75      4.20    -0.39       1.20     -0.06      1.30     5.17     15.12              0.14
            (7.88)    (9.27)   (3.17)    (5.16)     (0.92) h0.52i h0.08i h0.00i
CAD         14.18     -4.51     2.47    -16.98       4.32      0.40     1.37      5.99              0.27
           (20.07) (12.62)     (4.76) (14.90)       (3.70) h0.82i h0.50i h0.20i
JPY        -14.89     -0.48     1.81     29.75     -16.12      1.16     3.57      4.63              0.16
           (10.12) (14.93)     (5.35) (26.74) (23.34) h0.56i h0.17i h0.33i
AUD          7.77    -10.75     4.51      -1.03      0.14      0.22     0.07      0.67              0.08


                                                      36
CUR j        ψ0        ψ1        ψ2        ψ3        ψ4 χ2 (2)i   χ2 (2)j    χ2 (4)     R2
        (14.66)   (24.11)    (9.64)    (5.39)    (3.23) h0.90i    h0.97i    h0.95i
SEK       5.67      0.53      0.53    -11.47      3.12    1.67     2.55      6.19     0.26
         (7.41)   (13.64)    (5.29)    (7.22)    (1.99) h0.43i    h0.28i    h0.19i
NOK       1.65     -2.98      2.34     -9.95      4.20    1.02     0.68      4.60     0.32
        (12.27)   (12.94)    (5.10)   (13.17)    (5.09) h0.60i    h0.71i    h0.33i
                                        Panel D: i = CHF
CAD      19.09      2.11     -0.55    -22.77      4.63    0.38     5.39      9.19     0.28
        (15.29)    (7.85)    (1.56)   (12.70)    (3.26) h0.83i    h0.07i    h0.06i
JPY     -14.94      7.87     -0.81     15.35     -6.27   13.48     1.94     26.27     0.22
         (8.93)    (3.83)    (0.63)   (21.39) (16.59) h0.00i      h0.38i    h0.00i
AUD       1.91      3.97     -1.26      0.15     -1.11    6.78     0.78      7.93     0.05
         (6.19)    (8.35)    (1.48)    (2.05)    (1.78) h0.03i    h0.68i    h0.09i
SEK       4.19     -0.94     -0.57     -5.76      1.52   35.32     0.96     37.03     0.16
         (9.30)    (4.68)    (0.79)    (6.25)    (1.56) h0.00i    h0.62i    h0.00i
NOK       4.34      4.28     -1.24    -16.72      6.16    8.33     0.55     11.43     0.26
        (16.39)    (7.34)    (1.23)   (24.76)    (8.39) h0.02i    h0.76i    h0.02i
                                        Panel E: i = CAD
JPY     -19.66      8.40     -1.61     33.80    -19.89    0.46     1.51      3.47     0.20
        (15.09)   (14.50)    (3.34)   (27.90) (18.16) h0.80i      h0.47i    h0.48i
AUD      -8.93     11.72     -1.58     -0.70     -0.45    6.77     1.33     11.57     0.37
         (7.85)    (8.49)    (1.70)    (1.09)    (0.65) h0.03i    h0.51i    h0.02i
SEK      -6.43      8.25     -1.44     -1.55     -0.17    0.57     0.59      2.01     0.11
        (19.38)   (17.61)    (4.21)    (8.88)    (2.70) h0.75i    h0.75i    h0.73i
NOK      -7.38      9.89     -2.29     -4.66      1.79    1.83     0.45      2.01     0.15
         (8.47)    (8.16)    (1.74)    (7.38)    (2.67) h0.40i    h0.80i    h0.73i
                                         Panel F: i = JPY
AUD      15.30    -19.91     12.63     -4.99     -0.30    2.50     3.34      4.54     0.16
         (6.04)   (12.82)   (10.13)    (4.66)    (3.16) h0.29i    h0.19i    h0.34i
SEK      15.34    -14.32      5.55     -6.16      0.23    0.67     3.43      5.63     0.12
        (18.53)   (23.37)   (19.84)   (20.36)    (5.88) h0.72i    h0.18i    h0.23i
NOK      24.79    -28.23     11.58    -26.13      9.28    1.67     0.46      2.95     0.29
        (33.01)   (27.53)   (18.72)   (38.52) (13.98) h0.43i      h0.79i    h0.57i
                                        Panel G: i = AUD
SEK      -6.08     -0.96      0.70      6.29     -2.50    0.22     1.85      1.89     0.10
         (7.38)    (4.02)    (1.89)   (11.62)    (3.13) h0.90i    h0.40i    h0.76i
NOK      -1.52     -0.61      0.04      0.63     -1.52    0.08     0.90      1.10     0.09
         (5.59)    (3.50)    (2.09)    (5.63)    (1.83) h0.96i    h0.64i    h0.89i
                                        Panel H: i = SEK
NOK      -3.97      6.07     -1.11     -5.67      2.54    2.57     0.63      3.25     0.19
         (6.40)    (6.65)    (1.78)    (7.87)    (3.24) h0.28i    h0.73i    h0.52i




                                                37
Table 9: Testing Uncovered Interest Rate Parity (Pre-2004 Data)

The Table presents estimation results for the regression

      −∆sij,t+1 + rj,t − ri,t = φ0 + φ1 (rj,t − ri,t ) + ij,t+1

where the dependent variable is the excess rate of return in base
currency i on an annual investment in the money market of cur-
rency j. The regressor is the difference in the one-year yields
between country j and country i. Standard errors are in paren-
theses, and p-values are in angled brackets. The sample periods
for the dependent variables all end in 2003:12. The samples begin
in 1974:12 for the GBP and the EUR; in 1989:03 for the CHF; in
1987:03 for the CAD; in 1986:03 for the JPY; in 1988:04 for the
AUD; in 1988:03 for the SEK; and in 1999:03 for the NOK.
   CUR j          φ0      φ1 χ2 (1)φ1 =0 χ2 (1)φ1 =1       R2
                        Panel A: i = USD
   GBP        -3.16    2.00          5.18        1.29    0.10
              (2.38) (0.88)         h0.02i      h0.26i
   EUR         2.16    1.68          5.10        0.83    0.09
              (2.05) (0.74)         h0.02i      h0.36i
   CHF         3.13    2.67          6.60        2.58    0.22
              (3.08) (1.04)         h0.01i      h0.11i
   CAD        -1.17    1.89          8.83        1.96    0.22
              (1.05) (0.64)         h0.00i      h0.16i
   JPY        14.09    4.54         19.59       11.91    0.39
              (3.82) (1.03)         h0.00i      h0.00i
   AUD        -3.98    2.46          8.83        3.12    0.23
              (2.88) (0.83)         h0.00i      h0.08i
   SEK        -1.43    0.91          0.41        0.00    0.03
              (3.11) (1.41)         h0.52i      h0.95i
   NOK        -7.57    5.45         28.86       19.24    0.62
              (2.67) (1.01)         h0.00i      h0.00i
                        Panel B: i = GBP
   EUR         4.06    1.47          4.83        0.49    0.09
              (2.05) (0.67)         h0.03i      h0.48i
   CHF         7.91    2.93          9.38        4.07    0.22
              (2.89) (0.96)         h0.00i      h0.04i
   CAD         0.59    2.43          2.15        0.74    0.09
              (1.90) (1.66)         h0.14i      h0.39i
   JPY        19.10    4.24         17.96       10.49    0.14
              (4.97) (1.00)         h0.00i      h0.00i
   AUD        -0.39    1.22          0.96        0.03    0.03
              (2.03) (1.24)         h0.33i      h0.86i
   SEK        -1.39    1.50          1.62        0.18    0.08
              (1.72) (1.18)         h0.20i      h0.67i
   NOK         0.05    2.52         10.07        3.65    0.27
              (1.57) (0.79)         h0.00i      h0.06i




                                 38
CUR j       φ0        φ1 χ2 (1)φ1 =0 χ2 (1)φ1 =1     R2
                   Panel C: i = EUR
CHF       1.52     1.71        2.02        0.35    0.05
         (1.62)   (1.20)      h0.16i      h0.55i
CAD      -3.41     2.47        9.98        3.55    0.19
         (1.90)   (0.78)      h0.00i      h0.06i
JPY       2.63     1.63        1.38        0.20    0.03
         (3.01)   (1.39)      h0.24i      h0.65i
AUD      -1.67     1.39        2.52        0.20    0.11
         (2.17)   (0.88)      h0.11i      h0.65i
SEK      -3.24     1.69        7.66        1.29    0.13
         (1.72)   (0.61)      h0.01i      h0.26i
NOK       2.63     0.45        0.03        0.05    -0.01
         (5.39)   (2.52)      h0.86i      h0.83i
                   Panel D: i = CHF
CAD      -9.07     3.91       15.44        8.55    0.25
         (2.77)   (0.99)      h0.00i      h0.00i
JPY       5.37     4.39        1.91        1.14    0.08
         (4.92)   (3.17)      h0.17i      h0.29i
AUD      -3.71     1.42        2.18        0.19    0.07
         (2.92)   (0.96)      h0.14i      h0.66i
SEK      -8.40     2.76        7.42        3.02    0.18
         (2.98)   (1.02)      h0.01i      h0.08i
NOK      -0.26     1.06        0.35        0.00    0.02
         (7.03)   (1.79)      h0.55i      h0.97i
                   Panel E: i = CAD
JPY      22.23     5.80       24.46      16.75     0.38
         (5.49)   (1.17)      h0.00i      h0.00i
AUD       0.49     0.45        0.31        0.45    0.00
         (2.22)   (0.82)      h0.58i      h0.50i
SEK      -0.96     0.67        0.13        0.03    0.01
         (2.24)   (1.89)      h0.72i      h0.86i
NOK      -6.65     4.72        6.33        3.93    0.28
         (3.12)   (1.87)      h0.01i      h0.05i
                   Panel F: i = JPY
AUD     -14.91     3.45       15.15        7.64    0.30
         (5.35)   (0.89)      h0.00i      h0.01i
SEK      -3.74     1.19        0.09        0.00    0.00
        (17.93)   (4.00)      h0.77i      h0.96i
NOK     -69.96    12.42       23.25      19.66     0.45
        (15.32)   (2.58)      h0.00i      h0.00i
                   Panel G: i = AUD
SEK      -1.86    -0.87        1.15        5.34    0.03
         (1.74)   (0.81)      h0.28i      h0.02i
NOK      -0.11     1.50        0.76        0.08    0.00
         (3.36)   (1.72)      h0.38i      h0.77i
                   Panel H: i = SEK
NOK       0.54     1.53        0.98        0.12    0.01
         (2.00)   (1.55)      h0.32i      h0.73i




                          39
 Table 10: Testing Uncovered Interest Rate Parity (Post-2003)

The Table presents estimation results for the regression

      −∆sij,t+1 + rj,t − ri,t = φ0 + φ1 (rj,t − ri,t ) + ij,t+1

where the dependent variable is the excess rate of return in base
currency i on an annual investment in the money market of cur-
rency j. The regressor is the difference in the one-year yields
between country j and country i. Standard errors are in paren-
theses, and p-values are in angled brackets. The sample periods
for the dependent variables all begin in 2004:12 and end in 2016:12.
   CUR j          φ0       φ1 χ2 (1)φ1 =0 χ2 (1)φ1 =1        R2
                        Panel A: i = USD
   GBP         0.34    -3.11          0.90         1.57    0.09
              (2.35) (3.28)         h0.34i        h0.21i
   EUR        -1.19    -3.06          5.49         9.67    0.09
              (1.69) (1.30)         h0.02i        h0.00i
   CHF         1.21     0.06          0.00         0.51   -0.01
              (2.12) (1.32)         h0.96i        h0.48i
   CAD         2.44    -6.41          9.41        12.57    0.20
              (1.60) (2.09)         h0.00i        h0.00i
   JPY        -1.54    -0.15          0.01         0.58   -0.01
              (4.10) (1.51)         h0.92i        h0.44i
   AUD         6.76    -1.56          0.33         0.89    0.01
              (7.01) (2.71)         h0.57i        h0.35i
   SEK        -0.93    -3.02          3.51         6.23    0.09
              (2.39) (1.61)         h0.06i        h0.01i
   NOK         1.00    -2.40          2.55         5.11    0.07
              (2.46) (1.51)         h0.11i        h0.02i
                        Panel B: i = GBP
   EUR        -0.32    -1.49          0.73         2.04    0.02
              (2.02) (1.75)         h0.39i        h0.15i
   CHF         4.11     0.78          0.28         0.02    0.01
              (2.43) (1.48)         h0.60i        h0.88i
   CAD         0.69    -3.96        13.38         21.00    0.22
              (1.79) (1.08)         h0.00i        h0.00i
   JPY        -0.95    -0.69          0.10         0.58    0.00
              (5.44) (2.22)         h0.76i        h0.45i
   AUD         4.25     0.12          0.01         0.30   -0.01
              (3.19) (1.62)         h0.94i        h0.59i
   SEK         0.42    -0.35          0.07         0.98   -0.00
              (2.31) (1.37)         h0.80i        h0.32i
   NOK         0.90    -0.59          0.27         1.98    0.00
              (2.26) (1.13)         h0.60i        h0.16i




                                 40
CUR j       φ0        φ1 χ2 (1)φ1 =0 χ2 (1)φ1 =1     R2
                   Panel C: i = EUR
CHF       5.15     3.96         3.42       1.91    0.17
         (2.55)   (2.14)       h0.06i     h0.17i
CAD       2.54    -3.21         1.04       1.79    0.05
         (2.60)   (3.14)       h0.31i     h0.18i
JPY      -0.81    -0.35         0.02       0.28    -0.01
         (4.76)   (2.57)       h0.89i     h0.60i
AUD       0.87     1.05         0.11       0.00    -0.00
         (9.02)   (3.17)       h0.74i     h0.99i
SEK      -0.09    -0.49         0.05       0.45    -0.01
         (1.61)   (2.21)       h0.83i     h0.50i
NOK       1.51    -1.68         1.09       2.78    0.02
         (1.09)   (1.61)       h0.30i     h0.10i
                   Panel D: i = CHF
CAD      -5.69     4.06         2.89       1.64    0.07
         (3.38)   (2.39)       h0.09i     h0.20i
JPY      -3.01    -1.04         0.07       0.27    -0.00
         (3.53)   (3.94)       h0.79i     h0.61i
AUD      -4.56     1.78         0.26       0.05    0.01
        (12.73)   (3.47)       h0.61i     h0.82i
SEK      -2.23    -0.06         0.00       0.06    -0.01
         (3.90)   (4.27)       h0.99i     h0.80i
NOK       4.06    -3.75         0.93       1.49    0.03
         (7.82)   (3.89)       h0.33i     h0.22i
                   Panel E: i = CAD
JPY       0.52     1.26         0.22       0.01    0.01
         (4.34)   (2.67)       h0.64i     h0.92i
AUD       2.25     0.10         0.00       0.22    -0.01
         (4.02)   (1.94)       h0.96i     h0.64i
SEK      -2.00    -2.29         3.38       6.99    0.04
         (1.55)   (1.24)       h0.07i     h0.01i
NOK      -1.16    -0.06         0.00       1.17    -0.01
         (1.38)   (0.98)       h0.95i     h0.28i
                    Panel F: i = JPY
AUD       8.91    -1.24         0.12       0.40    0.01
        (13.59)   (3.55)       h0.73i     h0.53i
SEK       3.37    -2.26         0.32       0.67    0.02
         (6.14)   (3.99)       h0.57i     h0.41i
NOK       6.65    -2.92         0.56       1.01    0.05
         (9.29)   (3.90)       h0.45i     h0.31i
                   Panel G: i = AUD
SEK      -1.95     0.75         0.08       0.01    -0.00
         (7.89)   (2.60)       h0.77i     h0.92i
NOK      -6.15    -1.39         1.83       5.42    0.03
         (2.93)   (1.03)       h0.18i     h0.02i
                   Panel H: i = SEK
NOK       1.86    -2.25         1.92       4.00    0.05
         (1.41)   (1.63)       h0.17i     h0.05i




                           41
Table 11: Out-of-Sample Forecasts for Excess Bond Returns: Cochrane-Piazzesi Models vs. Historical Means

              The Table reports two statistics that compare the out-of-sample forecasts
              from recursive estimations of the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) model for
              the excess rates of returns on bonds denominated in different currencies to
              the forecasts based only on the historical mean excess rates of return. The
              first statistic is the R2 , which is calculated as one minus the ratio of the
              mean squared error of the CP forecasts to the mean squared error of the
              historical mean. The second statistic tests the equality of the forecasts and
              is the Clark and McCracken (2005) M SE − F statistic. The sample periods
              for the dependent variables during the initial in-sample estimation all end in
              2003:12, which is the end of the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) sample. The
              samples begin in 1974:12 for the USD, the GBP, and the EUR; in 1989:03
              for the CHF; in 1987:03 for the CAD; in 1986:03 for the JPY; in 1988:04
              for the AUD; in 1988:03 for the SEK; and in 1999:03 for the NOK. The
              out-of-sample periods are all 2004:01 to 2016:12.
                                       R2                                 MSE-F
                        (2)      (3)          (4)     (5)      (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)
              CUR     rxt+1    rxt+1        rxt+1   rxt+1    rxt+1     rxt+1    rxt+1    rxt+1
              USD      -1.51   -1.95        -1.90   -1.68    -87.26    -95.86   -94.97   -90.85
              GBP       0.06    0.10         0.11    0.09      9.29     16.50    18.14    15.01
              EUR      -0.10   -0.17        -0.25   -0.31    -13.20    -20.65   -28.77   -34.07
              CHF      -0.16    0.05         0.05    0.01    -19.75      7.64     7.99     0.73
              CAD       0.01    0.00        -0.06   -0.15      1.36      0.62    -7.59   -19.13
              JPY      -0.23   -0.13        -0.17   -0.21    -26.63    -16.26   -20.54   -24.88
              AUD      -2.28   -2.26        -2.21   -2.08   -100.78   -100.48   -99.86   -97.98
              SEK      -0.14   -0.08        -0.01    0.03    -17.69    -11.16    -2.11     4.86
              NOK      -1.07   -1.18        -1.17   -1.07    -74.81    -78.62   -78.09   -74.91




                                                       42
Table 12: Out-of-Sample Forecasts of Excess Bond Returns: Cochrane-Piazzesi Models with Free Constants
vs. Historical Means

              The Table reports two statistics that compare the out-of-sample forecasts
              from recursive estimations of an alternative version of the Cochrane and Pi-
              azzesi (2005) model, which allows for free constant terms, for the excess rates
              of returns on bonds denominated in different currencies to the forecasts based
              only on the historical mean excess rates of return. The first statistic is the
              R2 , which is calculated as one minus the ratio of the mean squared error of the
              CP forecasts to the mean squared error of the historical mean. The second
              statistic tests the equality of the forecasts and is the Clark and McCracken
              (2005) M SE − F statistic. The sample periods for the dependent variables
              during the initial in-sample estimation all end in 2003:12, which is the end
              of the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) sample. The samples begin in 1974:12
              for the USD, the GBP, and the EUR; in 1989:03 for the CHF; in 1987:03 for
              the CAD; in 1986:03 for the JPY; in 1988:04 for the AUD; in 1988:03 for the
              SEK; and in 1999:03 for the NOK. The out-of-sample periods are all 2004:01
              to 2016:12.
                                       R2                                 MSE-F
                        (2)      (3)          (4)     (5)     (2)      (3)        (4)      (5)
              CUR     rxt+1    rxt+1        rxt+1   rxt+1   rxt+1    rxt+1     rxt+1     rxt+1
              USD      -1.36   -2.14        -2.23   -2.21   -83.51   -98.89   -100.06    -99.87
              GBP      -0.07   -0.08        -0.10   -0.13    -9.01   -10.57    -13.42    -16.34
              EUR      -0.08   -0.11        -0.20   -0.28   -10.21   -14.39    -23.80    -31.88
              CHF      -0.36    0.04         0.10    0.07   -38.24     6.13     16.57     11.38
              CAD      -0.21   -0.13        -0.16   -0.27   -25.50   -16.85    -20.13    -31.15
              JPY      -0.17   -0.09        -0.14   -0.21   -21.34   -11.59    -18.35    -24.71
              AUD      -1.89   -2.08        -2.34   -2.42   -94.90   -97.91   -101.57   -102.66
              SEK      -0.15   -0.12        -0.08   -0.06   -18.49   -15.37    -11.31     -7.84
              NOK      -0.60   -0.82        -0.98   -1.07   -54.17   -65.24    -71.82    -75.12




                                                       43
Table 13: Out-of-Sample Forecasts for Excess Foreign Exchange Returns: Cochrane-Piazzesi Factors vs.
Historical Means

                     The Table reports two statistics that compare the out-of-
                     sample forecasts from recursive estimation of equation (24) for
                     the excess return in USD on one-year investments in the money
                     markets of different currencies to the forecasts based on the his-
                     torical mean excess rates of return on those currencies. The
                     first statistic is the R2 , which is calculated as one minus the
                     ratio of the mean squared error of the CP forecasts to the mean
                     squared error of the historical mean. The second statistic tests
                     the equality of the forecasts and is the Clark and McCracken
                     (2005) M SE − F statistic. The sample periods for the depen-
                     dent variables during the initial in-sample estimation all end in
                     2003:12, which is the end of the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005)
                     sample. The samples begin in 1974:12 for the USD, the GBP,
                     and the EUR; in 1989:03 for the CHF; in 1987:03 for the CAD;
                     in 1986:03 for the JPY; in 1988:04 for the AUD; in 1988:03
                     for the SEK; and in 1999:03 for the NOK. The out-of-sample
                     periods are all 2004:01 to 2016:12.
                                         CUR        R2   MSE-F
                                         GBP     -0.04      -6.08
                                         EUR     -0.37     -38.86
                                         CHF     -0.57     -52.63
                                         CAD     -0.27     -31.09
                                         JPY     -0.26     -29.91
                                         AUD     -0.84     -66.07
                                         SEK     -0.56     -52.33
                                         NOK     -0.56     -52.02




                                                    44
