                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE EFFECTS OF MEDICAID EXPANSION ON LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES:
                     EVIDENCE FROM BORDER COUNTIES

                                          Lizhong Peng
                                      Xiaohui (Ronnie) Guo
                                      Chad D. Meyerhoefer

                                       Working Paper 25105
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25105


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2018




We thank Steven Hill and participants of the 7th Biennial ASHEcon Conference for helpful
comments and suggestions. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25105.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Lizhong Peng, Xiaohui (Ronnie) Guo, and Chad D. Meyerhoefer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Medicaid Expansion on Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from Border Counties
Lizhong Peng, Xiaohui (Ronnie) Guo, and Chad D. Meyerhoefer
NBER Working Paper No. 25105
September 2018
JEL No. H51,I13,J20

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper provides new empirical evidence on the employment and earning effects of the recent
Medicaid expansion. Unlike most existing studies that use a conventional state and year fixed
effects approach, our main identification strategy is based on the comparison of employment and
wages in contiguous county-pairs in neighboring states (i.e. border counties) with different
Medicaid expansion status. Using the 2008-2016 Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages,
we estimate a set of distributed lag models in order to examine the dynamic effects of Medicaid
expansion. Results from our preferred specification suggest a small but statistically significant
decrease in employment of 1.3 percent one year after the Medicaid expansion. This
disemployment effect is transitory and appears to primarily occur in low-wage sectors. In
particular, employment returns to pre-expansion levels within two years. We also do not find any
statistically significant effect of the Medicaid expansion on wages at any point.

Lizhong Peng                                    Chad D. Meyerhoefer
Department of Economics                         Rauch Business Center
University of West Georgia                      Lehigh University
1601 Maple Street                               621 Taylor Street
Carrollton, GA 30118                            Bethlehem, PA 18015
lpeng@westga.edu                                and NBER
                                                chm308@lehigh.edu
Xiaohui (Ronnie) Guo
University of International Business
and Economics
10 Huixin East Street
Beijing, 100029
China
guo.xiaohui007@hotmail.com
1. Introduction

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) has substantially increased health insurance coverage across all

income and demographic groups. It is estimated that nearly 20 million previously uninsured

nonelderly adults gained coverage since the enactment of the law in 2010, resulting in a

historically low uninsured rate of 8.6 percent as of early 2016 (Avery et al., 2016). Although the

ACA has multiple provisions that aim to expand coverage, most of the gains in coverage resulted

from the expansion of state Medicaid programs and establishment of individual health insurance

exchanges (i.e. “Health Insurance Marketplaces”).1 However, due to state decisions to reject

Medicaid expansion, there is a large imbalance in the increase in Medicaid enrollment between

expansion and non-expansion states: enrollment gains exceeded 12 million in states that adopted

the Medicaid expansion, compared to enrollment growth of just 2 million people in non-

expansion states.

        Given this sharp increase in Medicaid enrollment across the U.S., it is important to assess

the consequences for labor markets. Standard economic theory suggests that public insurance

programs such as Medicaid may create disincentives to work by weakening the link between

health insurance coverage and employment. This disincentive effect has been cited by many

opponents of Medicaid expansion as one of the main arguments against expanding the program.

In fact, a number of states that adopted the expansion are now contemplating the introduction of

work requirements in Medicaid for able-bodied individuals.




1
  Uberoi et al. (2016) reports that enrollment in Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP)
increased by over 14 million between September 2013 and December 2015; the number of insurance plans issued
through the Health Insurance Marketplaces reached 12.7 million in the 2016 open enrollment period. Note that the
sum of these enrollment gains is greater than the net change because of “churning” (i.e. individuals switching among
different sources of health insurance coverage).

                                                         1
        Since its establishment, traditional Medicaid has been an entitlement program where

coverage is not contingent upon employment requirements, and no state had been successful in

imposing work requirements before 2018.2 On January 12, 2018 Kentucky became the first state

to obtain approval from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to institute a

work requirement in its Medicaid program. As of August 2018, three additional states (Arkansas,

Indiana, and New Hampshire) have obtained waivers from CMS to impose work requirements,

and several other states currently have applications pending with CMS (Garfield et al., 2018a).

However, on June 29, 2018 a federal judge issued a ruling that blocks the implementation of

work requirements in Kentucky, further stoking controversy around the issue. 3

        In light of these initiatives by state policy makers it is important to accurately assess the

labor market effects of the ACA Medicaid expansion. Unfortunately, current empirical evidence

on this front is rather inconclusive. While there is a vast literature on how public insurance

programs affect individual labor supply decisions, much of this literature focuses on low-income

women (such as pregnant women or women with or without dependent children) and the results

are mixed (for example, see Gruber and Madrian, 2002; Hamersma and Kim, 2009; Dave et al.,

2015). Furthermore, these studies are not informative in the current policy context since the ACA

Medicaid expansion mainly targets low-income adults without dependent children.

         To date, the strongest empirical evidence on the labor supply decisions of nonelderly

childless adults with public health insurance coverage comes from three studies that exploit

exogenous changes in state Medicaid eligibility requirements and enrollment policies. Baicker et




2
  For example, during its negotiations on Medicaid expansion with the federal government, Pennsylvania attempted
to include a “watered down” version of the work requirement (i.e. “actively search for work”). The provision was
opposed by CMS and was not included in the final agreement between the state and federal governments.
3
  See media coverage of the ruling at https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/29/health/kentucky-medicaid-work-
rules.html. Accessed September 5, 2018.

                                                       2
al. (2014) does not find any statistically significant change in employment after Medicaid

enrollment using data from the Oregon Medicaid Experiment. In contrast, Garthwaite et al.

(2014) estimates a large increase in labor supply as a result of forced disenrollment in

Tennessee’s Medicaid program. Similarly, Dague et al. (2017) exploits an unexpected

suspension in enrollment in Wisconsin’s previous expansion of its Medicaid program and reports

a sizable reduction in employment among individuals who gained public health insurance

coverage. It is worth noting that the different findings in these studies may stem from differences

in the particular population studied and macroeconomic context (Dague et al., 2017).

       There are also several studies that directly examine how the ACA Medicaid expansion

affects labor market outcomes by exploiting state decisions to reject Medicaid expansion for

identification. Using standard state-year difference-in-differences models applied to nationally

representative survey data, none of these studies detect any statistically significant changes in

employment, wages, or hours worked after the implementation of the Medicaid expansion

(Gooptu et al., 2016; Kaestner et al., 2017; Leung and Mas, 2016; Frisvold and Jung, 2018).

However, as pointed out in a recent paper by Duggan et al. (2017), labor market effects may be

masked at the aggregate (state) level if changes in labor supply in smaller geographic areas are

averaged out in a state-level model. In particular, Duggan et al. (2017) reports that labor force

participation increased in areas with greater potential for Medicaid enrollment and decreased in

areas with greater potential for Marketplace enrollment.

       In this paper, we provide new empirical evidence on the employment and earnings effects

of the recent Medicaid expansion. Unlike the aforementioned studies, our main identification

strategy is based on the comparison of employment and wages in contiguous county-pairs in

neighboring states (i.e. border counties) with different Medicaid expansion status. This approach



                                                 3
is similar to Dube et al. (2010), which uses minimum wage differentials between contiguous

counties to study the employment and wage effects of state minimum wage laws. Compared to a

standard difference-in-differences approach, restricting the analysis to border-county pairs

greatly improves the comparability between treatment and control units and accounts for spatial

heterogeneity, which can confound the relationship between Medicaid expansion status and

employment or wages. Consequently, our preferred specification uses only within county-pair

variation in Medicaid expansion status for identification and allows for arbitrary time effects

across county pairs. Using data from the 2008-2016 Quarterly Census of Employment and

Wages (QCEW), we estimate a set of county-level distributed lag models which allow us to

examine the dynamic effects of the Medicaid expansion. 4 In addition, we take advantage of

detailed industry-level data afforded by the QCEW to examine whether Medicaid expansion has

a differential impact on individuals employed across different industries.

         Consistent with previous studies, we do not find any statistically significant effects on

either employment or wages when estimating a conventional county and year fixed effects model

on the full sample. However, in our border county-pair sample we find a small but statistically

significant decrease in employment of 1.3 percent one year after the implementation of the

Medicaid expansion. Importantly, this effect is transitory and quickly dissipates in the second

post-expansion year. In addition, we find suggestive evidence that this disemployment effect is

concentrated in low-wage industries. We do not detect any statistically significant change in

wages in our border sample. Overall, our estimates suggest that the ACA Medicaid expansion

had a modest and transitory effect on labor supply at the extensive margin. These findings not

only enhance our understanding of the total costs of the ACA Medicaid expansion, but also


4
 Almost all existing studies use annual data with a timeframe up to 2015, which effectively rules out the inclusion
of dynamic effects in the model.

                                                          4
contribute to the growing literature on the impact of public insurance programs on labor market

outcomes.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the institutional

background of the ACA Medicaid expansion. Section 3 details our empirical strategy and section

4 describes the data. Section 5 presents the main results and robustness checks, and Section 6

contains the discussion and conclusions.



2. The ACA Medicaid expansion and labor market

Prior to the ACA Medicaid expansion, there was significant variation in Medicaid eligibility

across states. While most states provided generous coverage to children (either through

traditional Medicaid or a standalone Children’s Health Insurance Program), many states did not

cover able-bodied adults regardless of their income unless they had dependent children or were

pregnant. Among the few states that did provide full Medicaid benefits to certain low-income

childless adults, only Vermont, Hawaii, and the District of Columbia had an income eligibility

threshold above 100 percent of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL). Although a number of other

states offered more limited coverage to childless adults, the majority of these programs stopped

accepting new enrollees before 2014 (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2013).

       The provisions of the ACA mandated that states expand their Medicaid programs by

raising the income eligibility threshold for all individuals to 138 percent FPL. However, a

Supreme Court ruling in 2012 gave states the right to opt out, and as of December 31, 2016,

thirty one states and the D.C. have implemented the expansion. In most of these states expanded

coverage became available at the beginning of 2014, while a few states (such as Pennsylvania

and Indiana) adopted the expansion later in 2015 and 2016. As discussed above, this led to a

large discrepancy in Medicaid enrollment growth between expansion and non-expansion states.
                                                5
As of June 2018, the rejection of the Medicaid expansion by some states created a coverage gap

in which approximately 2.2 million childless adults in non-expansion states with incomes below

100 percent FPL are too poor to qualify for subsidies provided to the low-income purchasers of

Marketplace plans. But at the same time, these individuals are not eligible for Medicaid (Garfield

et al., 2018b).

        The labor market effects of the ACA Medicaid expansion might be empirically

ambiguous for several reasons. First, just as standard economic theory would predict, gaining

public insurance may reduce labor supply for those with the highest disutility from work (e.g.

sick individuals now do not have to be employed in order to maintain health insurance). But

since access to public coverage could also improve job mobility, it is possible that individuals

could re-sort to different jobs after acquiring Medicaid coverage (leading to no overall change in

employment) or that newly eligible Medicaid beneficiaries would be more willing to accept

employment even when employers do not provide health insurance (leading to higher overall

employment). For the same reason, it is unclear how wages would change under the Medicaid

expansion. Reservation wages may be higher since individuals no longer need to work to

maintain coverage. At the same time, individuals with incomes near the Medicaid eligibility

threshold may have an incentive to manipulate (or misreport) incomes to become (or remain)

eligible for Medicaid benefits.5

          Second, the establishment of the Marketplaces gives low-income individuals access to

heavily subsidized coverage even when their incomes exceed the Medicaid eligibility threshold.

This could potentially dampen the work disincentive effect of the Medicaid expansion.




5
 For example, Shi (2016) finds evidence of income manipulation to gain subsidized insurance in the Massachusetts
health insurance exchange by individuals with incomes near the established thresholds.

                                                       6
3. Empirical Strategies

We begin our analysis with a standard difference-in-differences specification that includes

county and year fixed effects. Specifically, we estimate a baseline model of the following form:

                   ‫ܻ ݊ܮ‬௖௦௧ = ߙ + ߚ ∙ ‫ܦ‬௖௦௧ + ߛ′ ∙ ܺ௖௦௧ + ߠ௖ + ߬௧ + ߝ௖௦௧ ,                   (1)

where Y௖௦௧ is the outcome of interest (total employment or average wage) in county ܿ and state ‫ݏ‬

in year ‫ܦ ;ݐ‬௖௦௧ is a binary indicator that equals one for counties in state ‫ ݏ‬after the state’s

adoption of the Medicaid expansion; ܺ௖௦௧ is a vector of time-varying county characteristics; ߠ௖ is

a county fixed effect that removes time-invariant unobserved county-level factors; ߬௧ is a time

fixed effect that captures contemporaneous shocks common to all states; and ߝ௖௦௧ is a random

error term. The parameter of interest ߚ represents the difference-in-differences estimate of the

labor market effect of the ACA Medicaid expansion.

        Note that identification in equation (1) hinges on the assumption that employment and

wages would have followed similar paths in expansion and non-expansion states in the absence

of the ACA’s implementation. Although it is unlikely that states rejected the Medicaid expansion

on the basis of local labor market conditions (i.e., no policy endogeneity), it is still possible that

employment and wages evolved differently in expansion states before they opted to expand their

Medicaid programs. A technique commonly used in the program evaluation literature is to

estimate an augmented model that controls for a set of state-specific linear trends. Unlike

equation (1), identification in this specification comes from sharp deviations in the outcomes

from linear trends in the expansion states relative to non-expansion states. However, as pointed

out by Dube et al. (2010), although these linear trends can help control for unobserved

heterogeneity under a set of parametric assumptions, it is possible that some useful variation for

identification is removed because the estimated trends can also be affected by the treatment.


                                                   7
           Following Dube at al. (2010), we further address spatial heterogeneity by restricting our

analysis to contiguous counties in neighboring states with different decisions on Medicaid

expansion. We re-formulate equation (1) for estimation on the border county-pair sample:

                         ‫ܻ ݊ܮ‬௖௣௧ = ߙ + ߚ ∙ ‫ܦ‬௖௦௧ +ߛ ᇱ ∙ ܺ௖௣௧ + ߠ௖ + ߬௧ + ߝ௖௣௧ ,                           (2)

where ‫ ݌‬denotes county pairs. Note that under this specification a county can enter the estimation

sample more than once if it is included in multiple border-county pairs. Estimation of equation

(2) is still subject to the implicit assumption that counties in the non-expansion states are good

control units for all treatment counties. Therefore, we add to equation (2) a set of county-pair

fixed-effects ߰௣ :

                         ‫ܻ ݊ܮ‬௖௣௧ = ߙ + ߚ ∙ ‫ܦ‬௖௦௧ + ߛ ᇱ ∙ ܺ௖௣௧ + ߠ௖ + ߰௣ + ߬௧ + ߝ௖௣௧ .                     (3)

Since this specification only uses within county-pair variation for identification, for a given

treatment county only the contiguous county in the neighboring non-expansion state is used as

the control unit. To correct for possible pre-existing differential trends across treatment and

control counties, we modify equation (3) to allow for county-pair-by-year fixed effects

                            ‫ܻ ݊ܮ‬௖௣௧ = ߙ + ߚ ∙ ‫ܦ‬௖௦௧ +ߪ ᇱ ∙ ܺ௖௣௧ + ߠ௖ + ߤ௣௧ + ߝ௖௣௧ ,                       (4)

where ߤ௣௧ is the full set of interactions between county-pair and year fixed effects.6 By allowing

for arbitrary time effects across county-pairs, equation (4) it does not rely on any untestable

parametric assumption on the evolution of the outcomes (unlike models with state-specific linear

trends). Finally, to uncover the dynamic effects of the Medicaid expansion on employment and

wages, we include a set of distributed lags in equations (1) – (4). Since our sample period ends in

2016, we are able to include up to two lags as the earliest expansions under the ACA were




6
    In other words, we include a separate county-pair fixed effect for each year of the sample period.

                                                            8
implemented in 2014. This distributed lag model with county-pair-by-year fixed effects is our

preferred specification.

          Due to the fact that the authority to implement the Medicaid expansion rests with state

governments, it is natural to cluster the standard errors at the state level when conducting

statistical inference. This accounts for both serial correlation in the outcomes and within-state

correlation in the error terms. However, one complication in our border county-pair analysis is

that a county may belong to multiple county-pairs along a single border segment, which creates

another source of correlation across county-pairs. To address this issue, we adjust the standard

errors using a two-way clustering method to correct for both within-state and within-county-pair

correlations (Dube et al., 2010; Cameron and Miller, 2015).



4. Data

We use data from the 2008-2016 Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW)

compiled by the Bureaus of Labor Statistics (BLS). The QCEW is a comprehensive census of all

business establishments that report to the unemployment insurance programs. These data contain

detailed information on quarterly and annual employment and earnings by industry and by three

different levels of geographic aggregation (national, state, and county). According to the BLS,

the QCEW covers 97 percent of U.S. civilian employment.7 Despite almost being a census of

jobs, the QCEW has been rarely used in the health economics literature due to its lack of

information on individual characteristics. Instead, most existing studies on the labor market

effects of the ACA Medicaid expansion either use the American Community Survey (ACS) or

the Current Population Survey (CPS). However, one significant advantage of the QCEW is that it



7
    For more information on the QCEW, see https://www.bls.gov/cew/cewfaq.htm (accessed on March 21, 2018).

                                                        9
allows the measurement of changes in employment and wages over time at the county-level,

which is a more appropriate approximation for the boundaries of local labor markets. By

supplementing the QCEW data with other county demographic and economic characteristics, we

are able to conduct a county-level analysis of the labor market effects of the Medicaid expansion.

       One issue when estimating distributed lag models is multicollinearity among the

contemporaneous term and lags. As the number of included lags increases, estimated coefficients

on the lagged terms tend to become unstable, sometimes in ways that are at odds with economic

theory. For this reason, we limit the lag length by collapsing the monthly county-level total

employment counts and quarterly weekly wages to county-year cells. We use as dependent

variables the logarithm of these annual averages in our regression models. Although we

primarily focus on the annual-level analyses, we also present results using quarterly outcome

measures as a robustness check. Note that since the total employment counts include both part-

time and full-time jobs, it is possible that an individual may be counted multiple times in the data

if the person holds more than one job. For this reason, we use the raw employment count instead

of employment rate as our outcome variable, while controlling for county population. It is also

worth noting that the wages reported in the QCEW represent the total compensation received by

workers, which may include non-wage compensation such as bonuses, stock options, and even

employers’ contributions to retirement plans. Finally, the QECW does not contain information

on hours worked. As a result, we are not able to investigate the labor supply effect of the

Medicaid expansion at the intensive margin.

       Next, we describe the construction of our estimation samples. To create a balanced panel,

we exclude counties that have missing employment counts or wages in the QCEW for any of the

36 quarters between 2008 and 2016. We also drop counties in Alaska and Hawaii as they do not



                                                10
border any states. We merge information on each state’s decision to expand Medicaid between

January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2016 to our main dataset (see Table A1). The final

sample consists of 3,058 counties, representing 27,522 county-year observations (hereafter

referred to as the “full sample”). In order to improve the comparability between the treated and

control counties, we further create two contiguous border-county pairs samples. We first identify

all contiguous border-county pairs using the 2010 Census county adjacency file, and then subset

the full sample to county-pairs in neighboring states with different Medicaid expansion status.8

The resulting sample contains 584 distinct counties in 38 states, yielding 590 county-pairs and

10,620 county-year observations (hereafter referred to as “border sample 1”). Note that a county

can be included in multiple county-pairs along a single border segment. Additionally, county-

pairs in two neighboring states can be included in this analysis even if both states expanded their

Medicaid programs, but did so at different times (for example, Michigan and Indiana).

        The inclusion of the late adoption states in the estimation sample may attenuate the

coefficients on the Medicaid expansion variables if the expansion has long lagged effects. To

address this concern, we further refine our border sample by removing states that implemented

the Medicaid expansion after January 1, 2014. This reduces the number of county-pairs to 360

(in 27 states), representing 6,480 county-year observations (hereafter referred to as “border

sample 2”). Although we present results from both border samples, we use border sample 2 as

our preferred analysis sample. In Figure 1 we display the locations of the county-pairs in these

two border samples.

         All of our regression models include controls for the following time-varying county

characteristics: the effective minimum wage rate, county population, poverty rate, and median


8
  The Census county adjacency file can be accessed at https://www.census.gov/geo/reference/county-adjacency.html
(accessed on November 1, 2017).

                                                      11
household income.9 The effective minimum wage is calculated by the higher of federal and state

minimum wages obtained from the January edition of Monthly Labor Review. County population

estimates and economic data are obtained from the Census Bureau Population Estimates Program

(PEP) and the Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates (SAIPE) Program, respectively. In

Table 1 we compare the demographic and economic characteristics of counties in expansion and

non-expansion states in all of our three estimation samples. These statistics show that the

treatment and control counties are clearly more similar along a few key economic indicators in

the two border samples than in the full sample. For example, the gap in poverty rate between

treatment and control counties is about 2 percentage points in the full sample (and statistically

significant at 1 percent level), but no statistically significant difference exists in the poverty rate

between the treatment and control counties in both border samples. Overall, these comparisons

support restricting the analysis to border county-pairs.



5. Results

5.1 Main results

In Table 2, we present the conventional difference-in-differences estimates from the full sample.

Columns 1-3 of Table 2 contain estimates from models that control for county and year fixed

effects with a different number of lags. We do not find any statistically significant changes in

either employment or wages after the implementation of the Medicaid expansion from these

specifications. Also, the estimates remain statistically insignificant after we add state-specific

linear trends to the models (see columns 4-6 of Table 2). Overall, these results are consistent




9
  Since poverty rates are potentially endogenous, we re-estimated our models without the poverty rate variable and
the results were largely unchanged.

                                                        12
with the findings from most existing studies that the ACA Medicaid expansion had no detectable

impact on labor markets.

       Next, we turn to the results from our border county-pairs analysis. We report in Table 3

the estimates using border sample 1 (all expansion states). Just as in the full sample, none of the

estimated coefficients are statically significant in employment or wage models with only county

and year fixed effects (see columns 1-3 of Table 3). This is not surprising since this specification

still relies on within-county variation for identification. We then estimate a set of models that

additionally control for county-pair fixed effects. Unlike earlier models, identification under this

specification is from variation in Medicaid expansion status within each county-pair. We find

that the coefficients on the contemporaneous or lagged treatment dummies remain imprecisely

estimated (see columns 4-6 of Table 3). However, one caveat with these models is that the year

fixed effects impose a common path for time-varying unobserved factors across county-pairs,

and when the late expansion states are included in the sample, this restriction may fail to account

for differences in how employment or wages evolve over time within county-pairs. Therefore,

we estimate a set of models with county-pair-by-year fixed effects that allow for arbitrary time

effects across county-pairs (see columns 7-9 of Table 3). These results suggest that the Medicaid

expansion is associated with a 1.3 percent decrease in total county-level employment one year

after its implementation. Also, the coefficient estimate on the second lag of the treatment dummy

is small and imprecisely estimated. We, however, continue to find no evidence of any

statistically significant change in wages.

       To address the concern that the inclusion of late expansion states in the sample may

attenuate the estimated effects, we repeat the analysis in Table 3 using border sample 2 where all

late expansion states (IN, LA, MI, MT, NH, and PA) are excluded. We report the estimates from



                                                 13
this exercise in Table 4. In this case, the estimated effects on employment are remarkably similar

across all three specifications. The estimates from our preferred specification with county-pair-

by-year fixed effects suggest that total employment in the treatment counties decreased by 1.3

percent relative to their neighboring control counties one year after the adoption of the Medicaid

expansion. Just as with the estimates using border sample 1, the second lag of the treatment

dummy is small in magnitude and falls below conventional levels of statistical significance.

Again, we find no effect on wages.

        Since coverage eligibility gains primarily occur among low-income childless adults, the

effects of Medicaid expansion are likely to be more pronounced in low-wage industries.10 To

explore potential heterogeneous effects across industries, we extend our analysis to three

industries: retail trade (NAICS code 44-45), accommodation and food services (NAICS code

72), and construction (NAICS code 23).11 We select these industries based on a few practical

considerations. First, among all 2-digit NAICS industries, the retail trade and accommodation

and food services industries contain the largest proportion of low-wage workers and have been

studied extensively in the literature (Addison et al., 2009; Dube et al., 2010). Second, since the

QCEW suppresses data reporting for industries with few employers, these two industries are

among the few low-wage industries containing a sufficient sample size for county-level




10
   McMorrow et al. (2017) estimates that the ACA Medicaid expansion is associated with a 21.4 percentage-point
decrease in uninsurance among low-income childless adults between 2013 and 2015.
11
   We chose to conduct our analysis using the two-digit NAICS codes because more disaggregated data based on the
three- or more digit NAICS codes do not provide sufficient sample size for our analysis.

                                                      14
analysis.12 In contrast to retail trade/accommodation and food services, the construction industry

has the lowest proportion of minimum wage workers.13

         We report the industry-specific results using our preferred border sample 2 in Table 5. In

these models the point estimates on the contemporaneous and lagged treatment dummies are

consistently negative for employment across all three specifications in the retail trade and

accommodation and food services industries. Although we find the same transitory

disemployment effect for retail trade and accommodation and food services as in the main

model, this effect is only precisely estimated in the model with county-pair, county and year

fixed effects (columns 5 and 8). In contrast, none of the Medicaid expansion variables are

statistically significant when the model is estimated using the construction industry.

         The imprecision of the point estimates in these models is not surprising due to the

multicollinearity among the treatment dummies, especially in the small samples. Following Meer

and West (2016), we calculate the sum of the estimated coefficients on the contemporaneous

term and lags, which provides a more accurate assessment of the impact of the Medicaid

expansion when multicollinearity makes it difficult to separately identify the lagged effect in

each period. Based on the sum of coefficients in all time periods we find that the Medicaid

expansion is associated with a decrease of 2.9 and 2.6 percent in total employment in the retail

trade and food and accommodation industries, respectively (see columns 5 and 8 in Table 5) in

estimates from models with county-pair, county and year fixed effects. Both estimates remain



12
   The QCEW employs a set of complex suppression rules to protect the identity of employers. For our applications,
this creates discrepancies in sample size across different industries. In particular, we note that the retail trade
industry border sample has slightly more observations than the all-industry border sample. This is because data are
suppressed for all-industry employment but not for retail trade employment in a few counties.
13
   According to the 2016 CPS data, retail trade and accommodation and food services have the highest number of
workers earning at or below the federal minimum wage, accounting for approximately 73 percent of all such
workers in the U.S. In contrast, only 0.4 percent of all workers in construction earn at or below the federal minimum
wage.

                                                         15
negative but lose statistical significance when we augment the models with county-pair by year

fixed effects (see columns 6 and 9 in Table 5), although the estimate for retail trade is marginally

significant (p=.13). Consistent with our main results, we do not find any statistically significant

changes in wages in any of these three industries.

       Taken together, the results from our contiguous border county analysis provide strong

evidence for a transient overall reduction in employment after states implemented the Medicaid

expansion. And there is suggestive evidence that the disemployment effect is concentrated in the

low-wage industries.



5.2 Robustness checks

We conduct a series of additional checks to assess the robustness of our main findings on

employment. To streamline the presentation of the results, we only discuss findings using border

sample 2 since the results are similar when border sample 1 is used.

       We first conduct a set of falsification tests by re-estimating our main models using the

employment outcomes of public-sector workers who typically have employer-sponsored health

insurance. In particular, we compare changes in combined employment at local and state

governments in expansion counties relative to their non-expansion neighboring counties. Finding

a statistically significant decrease in the number of government jobs would indicate the presence

of unobserved heterogeneity in employment growth that could also be confounding the

relationship between Medicaid expansion and private-sector employment. In support of our

empirical approach, we do not find any statistically significant decrease in employment at state

and local governments after the implementation of the Medicaid expansion (see Table 6).

       Next, we test whether pre-existing trends in employment are causing us to overestimate

the effect of the Medicaid expansion. This could occur if counties in expansion states were
                                                 16
already experiencing slower growth in employment relative to their counterparts across the state

border in non-expansion states. In order to examine the presence of such pre-existing trends, we

re-estimate equations (2) - (4) with three leads of the treatment dummy. As shown in Table 7, we

do not find the coefficient on any lead variable to be statistically significant. Although the

parallel trend assumption in our model cannot be proven using empirical methods, these results

suggest that it is unlikely our main finding on employment from the contiguous border samples

is driven by pre-existing differential trends across county-pairs.14

         One potential issue with the aggregation of the QCEW to county-year cells is that we

may not fully capture the dynamic relationship between Medicaid expansion and employment.

To further explore this possibility, we re-estimate our main specification on employment using

quarterly data. We report in column 1 of Table 8 estimates from a model that includes seven

quarterly lag terms. In general, these estimates mirror the findings from the annual models. In

particular, the sum of estimated coefficients on the contemporary through the third quarterly lag

terms (equivalent to the contemporary term in the annual models) is close to zero, and the sum of

the fourth to seventh lags (the first lag in the annual models) equals -0.02 (p<0.01), suggesting a

statistically significant decrease in employment one year after the Medicaid expansion. These

estimates correspond closely to the findings from the annual models.

         Because multicollinearity in these models may contribute to instability in the point

estimates of individuals lag coefficients, we re-estimated the models using a third-order

polynomial distributed lag specification (Amemiya and Morimune, 1974; Baldwin, 1988). 15




14
   We do not find any evidence against the parallel trend assumption in the industry-specific analysis either. Results
are available from the authors upon request.
15
   The eigenvalue condition number for the unrestricted quarterly model in Table 8 is 16.87, which exceeds 10, the
conventional minimum standard for instability of regression coefficients due to multicollinearity. In contrast, the
eigenvalue condition number for our preferred annual model is 4.13, which falls well below the instability threshold.

                                                         17
Consistent with the unstructured model, estimates from the restricted model also show a

transitory decline in employment that occurs about one year after the Medicaid expansion, with

the effect disappearing after seven quarters post-implementation (see column 2 in Table 8).

However, in this case the individual lag coefficients for quarters 4 – 6 (and only these

coefficients) are precisely estimated. Overall, results from the quarterly models lend support to

our main findings, and suggest that the true labor market effects are not masked when the models

are estimated using annual data.

         Next, we assess whether our results are sensitive to alternative definitions of the

analytical sample. Specifically, we re-estimate our preferred specification after excluding 1)

states that expanded Medicaid eligibility to childless low-income adults before 2014;16 and 2) ten

large counties that are less densely populated in the western U.S. 17 The estimates are largely

unchanged using these alternative samples, indicating that our main results are not affected by

either states’ early adoption decisions or county population density (see Table A2).

         Finally, we evaluate whether the Medicaid expansion results in employment spillovers

across borders. In particular, our estimates will understate any disemployment effect if residents

in a non-expansion state leave their jobs and migrate across state borders to receive Medicaid

benefits. Following Dube et al. (2010), we conduct an analysis designed to compare the

employment effects of the Medicaid expansion between border counties and those in the interior



16
   We remove from border sample 2 the states of California, Connecticut, Maine, and Minnesota, all of which
implemented Medicaid expansion at some point prior to 2014. We obtain information on states’ prior expansions
from Kaestner et al. (2017) and Simon et al. (2017). When there are discrepancies between the two sources, we use
the information directly from state Medicaid websites. See Table A1 for more details.
17
   Meer and West (2016) note that population density is an important determinant of both demand for and supply of
local labor markets. Large counties in the western U.S. are typically less densely populated. To address this issue,
we remove from our preferred border sample 2 ten counties with land areas greater than 10,000 square miles. These
counties include San Bernardino County and Inyo County in California, Coconino County, Mohave County, and
Apache County in Arizona, Nye County, Elko County, and Lincoln County in Nevada, Sweetwater County in
Wyoming, and Harney County in Oregon.

                                                         18
of the state. Specifically, we re-estimate our preferred model after demeaning the dependent

variable and all control variables by subtracting the corresponding means of the state interior

counties. Finding statistically significant positive coefficients on the treatment dummies would

indicate a downward bias in our main results due to migration. For this exercise we exclude

county-pairs in states that are either in the Mountain Time Zone or Pacific Time Zone since

border counties in these states tend to be larger and not as similar to their interior counterparts in

terms of demographics and economic conditions as county pairs in the rest of the country. For

comparison purposes, we replicate our main analysis with two lags using this subsample. As

shown in Table A3, the estimated disemployment effects are virtually unchanged (columns 1-3);

and none of the point estimates are statistically significant in our spillover analysis (columns 4-

6), suggesting that it is unlikely that cross-border spillovers bias our main results.



6. Discussion and Conclusions

In this paper, we study the labor market effects of the ACA Medicaid expansion. Unlike most

existing studies that conduct the analysis at the state-level with a standard difference-in-

differences approach, our main empirical strategy compares the employment and wages in

contiguous county-pairs in neighboring states with different Medicaid expansion status. Most

notably, our approach does not involve any parametric assumption on state- or county-specific

trends when estimating the treatment effect of the expansion. Consistent with previous studies,

we do not find any statistically significant effects on either employment or wages when

estimating a conventional county and year fixed effects model on the full sample (Gooptu et al.,

2016; Kaestner et al., 2017; Leung and Mas, 2016; Frisvold and Jung, 2018). Using only within-

county-pair variation, our preferred estimates from the border county samples suggest a 1.3

percent decrease in employment one year after states implemented the Medicaid expansion. We
                                                  19
also provide suggestive evidence that the disemployment effect is concentrated in low-wage

industries. However, we do not find any evidence of an effect of the Medicaid expansion on

wages. Overall, our findings contribute to the growing literature on the impact of the ACA

Medicaid expansion on labor market outcomes and highlight the importance of controlling for

spatial heterogeneity when studying the effects of public insurance programs.

        We find it interesting that the Medicaid expansion had a modest and transient effect on

labor supply at the extensive margin but did not affect wages. One possible explanation for these

findings is that the Medicaid expansion may have induced a small number of low-income

individuals with the highest disutility from work (possibly due to the presence of chronic

conditions) to leave the labor force. If these workers were easily replaced, which is consistent

with the transient nature of the disemployment effect, then wages need not increase in the local

labor market for employers to maintain adequate staffing. Another possibility is that low-wage

industries typically have low rates of unionization. The lack of collective bargaining power

makes it difficult for low-skilled workers to leverage a short-term decrease in labor supply to

boost their wages.

        A particularly important consideration in the context of the ACA Medicaid expansion is

the establishment of the Health Insurance Marketplaces. These government-run health insurance

exchanges may have muted the labor market responses to the Medicaid expansion since low-

income individuals are now eligible for generous subsidies to purchase private insurance

coverage, even if their incomes exceed the Medicaid eligibility threshold.18 For this reason, the

potential increase in job mobility from the Medicaid expansion and Marketplaces may mean that



18
  Recent studies suggest that the ACA Medicaid expansion is also associated with lower premiums in the Health
Insurance Marketplaces (Peng, 2017; Sen and DeLeire, 2018). This may further weaken the link between
employment and insurance for residents in the expansion states.

                                                       20
the temporary decrease in employment we find is a composition of employment effects in

different industries. For example, it is possible that employers have compensated for the initial

loss of workers due to the Medicaid expansion without hiring replacement workers, but at the

same time, employment increased in other industries that benefited the most from workers

having improved access to health insurance. Unfortunately, we are not able to fully investigate

the heterogeneity of the disemployment effects across a wide range of different industries due to

data limitations.

        A final possibility is that the transitory nature of the disemployment effect identified in

our models is a result of the same workers re-sorting into different jobs. Because Medicaid

insurance is portable across jobs, these workers are able to separate from their current job, enroll

in Medicaid and re-enter the labor market after selecting a job that better suits their needs and

abilities. Under this scenario it is possible that the costs of providing public coverage could be

partially or fully offset by greater productivity in the labor market after workers re-sort to

different jobs.

        We note that our study is subject to several limitations. First, the QCEW does not contain

information on hours worked or what proportion of the total employment counts are part-time

jobs. As a result, we are not able to examine how the Medicaid expansion affects labor supply at

the intensive margin. In addition to the disemployment effect, it is also possible that individuals

worked fewer hours in order to qualify for Medicaid coverage in response to rising income

eligibility. Likewise, workers with the highest disutility from full time work may have reduced

their hours beyond the threshold necessary to receive benefits and acquire health insurance

through Medicaid. Therefore, there may be other work disincentive effects of the Medicaid

expansion that are not reflected in our analysis of total employment.



                                                  21
        Despite the limitations, the findings in this study have several important policy

implications. As discussed above, opponents of the ACA Medicaid expansion often cite the

concern that more generous public insurance programs reduce labor supply and may even trap

beneficiaries in poverty. Our findings show that such work disincentive effects are rather limited

and transient in this case. A related point is that a few states are actively pursuing work

requirements in their Medicaid programs, which are aimed at further weakening the work

disincentives commonly associated with social assistance programs. Although our estimates do

not speak directly to how these work requirements will affect the labor supply decisions of

existing Medicaid beneficiaries, they do suggest that it is unlikely that a large of number of

individuals would terminate their employment to qualify for Medicaid coverage. Furthermore,

Musumeci et al. (2018) presents evidence that only 7 percent of Medicaid beneficiaries would be

subject to new work requirements, as the majority of able-bodied adults covered by Medicaid are

already working. Policy makers will therefore need to determine whether the administrative cost

of implementing the work requirements is justified by the benefits of higher employment among

a limited set of Medicaid beneficiaries.19 A related issue that requires further study is whether

work requirements could adversely affect beneficiaries with chronic medical conditions that have

a limited ability to work. In general, a complete welfare analysis of the proposed work

requirements that builds on our findings would be a beneficial area of future research.




19
  According to a report by Fitch Ratings, the administration costs increased more than 40 percent in Kentucky’s
Medicaid program after the state instituted work requirements (See https://www.fitchratings.com/site/pr/10038515.
Accessed on September 5, 2018).

                                                       22
References

Addison, J., Blackburn, M., Cotti, C., 2009. “Do minimum wages raise employment? Evidence
from the U.S. retail-trade sector.” Labour Economics, 16(4): 397-408.

Amemiya, T., Morimune, K., 1974. “Selecting the optimal order of polynomial in the Almon
distributed lag.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 56(3): 378-386.

Avery, K., Finegold, K., Whitman, A., 2016. “Affordable Care Act has led to historic, widespread
increase in health insurance coverage.” Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. URL:
https://aspe.hhs.gov/system/files/pdf/207946/ACAHistoricIncreaseCoverage.pdf. Accessed on
February 5, 2018.

Baicker, B., Finkelstein, A., Song, J., Taubman, S., 2014. “The impact of Medicaid on labor
market activity and program participation: Evidence from the Oregon health insurance
experiment.” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 104(5): 322–328.

Baldwin, R., 1988. “Hysteresis in import prices: The beachhead effect.” American Economic
Review, 78(4): 773-785.

Cameron, A. C., Miller, D. L., 2015. “A practitioner’s guide to cluster-robust inference.” Journal
of Human Resources, 50(2): 317–372.

Dague, L., D., DeLeire, T., Leininger, L., 2017. “The effect of public insurance coverage for
childless adults on labor supply.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(2): 124-154.

Dave, D., Decker, S. L., Kaestner, R., Simon, K. I., 2015. “The effect of Medicaid expansions in
the late 1980s and early 1990s on the labor supply of pregnant women.” American Journal of
Health Economics, 1(2): 165–193.

Dube, A., Lester, T. W., Reich, M., 2010. “Minimum wage effects across State borders:
Estimates using contiguous counties.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4): 945-964.

Duggan, M., Goda, G. S., Emilie, J., 2017. “The effects of the Affordable Care Act on health
insurance coverage and labor market outcomes.” NBER Working Paper 23607.

Frisvold, D. E., Jung, Y., 2018. “The impact of expanding Medicaid on health insurance coverage
and labor market outcomes.” International Journal of Health Economics and Management, 18(2):
99-121.

Garfield, R., Rudowitz, R., Musumeci, M., Damico, A., 2018a. “Implications of Work
Requirements in Medicaid: What Does the Data Say?” Kaiser Family Foundation. URL:
http://files.kff.org/attachment/Issue-Brief-Implications-of-Work-Requirements-in-Medicaid-
What-Does-the-Data-Say. Accessed on September 5, 2018

Garfield, R., Damico, A., Orgera, K., 2018b. “The coverage gap: Uninsured poor adults in States
that do not expand Medicaid.” Kaiser Family Foundation. URL:
https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/the-coverage-gap-uninsured-poor-adults-in-states-that-
do-not-expand-medicaid/. Accessed on August 26, 2018.

                                                23
Garthwaite, C., Gross, T., Notowidigdo, M. J., 2014. “Public health insurance, labor supply, and
employment lock.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2): 653–696.

Gruber, J., Madrian, B. C., 2002. “Health insurance, labor supply, and job mobility: A critical
review of the literature.” NBER Working Paper 8817.

Gooptu, A., Asako, S. M., Kosali, I. S., Benjamin, D. S., 2016. “Medicaid expansion did not
result in significant employment changes or job reductions in 2014.” Health Affairs, 35(1): 111–
118.

Hamersma, S., Kim, M., 2009. “The effect of parental Medicaid expansions on job mobility.”
Journal of Health Economics, 28(4): 761-770.

Kaestner, R., Garrett, B., Chen, J., Gangopadhyaya, A., Fleming, C., 2017. “Effects of ACA
Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage and labor supply.” Journal of Policy Analysis
and Management, 36(3): 608-642.

Kaiser Family Foundation, 2013. “Where are States today? Medicaid and CHIP eligibility levels
for children and non-disabled adults.” URL:
https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/04/7993-03.pdf. Accessed on February
7, 2018.

Leung, P., Mas, A., 2016. “Employment effects of the ACA Medicaid expansions.” NBER
Working Paper 22540.

Meer, J., West, J., 2016. “Effects of the minimum wage of employment dynamics.” Journal of
Human Resources, 51(2): 500-523.

McMorrow, S., Kenney, G. M., Long, S. K., Gates, J., 2017. “The ACA Medicaid expansion led
to widespread reductions in uninsurance among poor, childless adults.” Urban Institute. URL:
https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/89536/2001222-
aca_medicaid_expansion_led_to_widespread_reductions_in_uninsurance_among_poor_childless
_adults.pdf. Accessed on September 12, 2018.

Musumeci, M., Garfield, R., Rudowitz, R., 2018. “Medicaid and work requirements: New
guidance, State waiver details and key issues.” Kaiser Family Foundation. URL:
http://files.kff.org/attachment/Issue-Brief-Medicaid-and-Work-Requirements-New-Guidance-
State-Waiver-Details-and-Key-Issues. Accessed on March 23, 2018.

Peng, L., 2017. “How does Medicaid expansion affect premiums in the health insurance
marketplaces? New evidence from late adoption in Pennsylvania and Indiana.” American Journal
of Health Economics, 3(4): 550-576.

Sen, A. P., DeLeire, T., 2018. “How does expansion of public health insurance affect risk pools
and premiums in the market for private health insurance? Evidence from Medicaid and the
Affordable Care Act Marketplaces.” Health Economics, forthcoming.

Shi, J., 2016. “Income responses to health insurance subsidies: Evidence from Massachusetts.”
American Journal of Health Economics, 2(1): 96–124.

Simon, K., Soni, A., Cawley, J., 2017. “The impact of health insurance on preventive care and

                                                24
health behaviors: Evidence from the first two years of the ACA Medicaid expansions.” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 36(2), 390-417.

Uberoi, N., Finegold, K., Gee, E., 2016. “Health insurance coverage and the Affordable Care Act,
2010-2016.” Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Planning and Evaluation. URL: https://aspe.hhs.gov/system/files/pdf/187551/ACA2010-
2016.pdf. Accessed on February 8, 2018.




                                              25
Tables and Figures

Table 1. Comparisons of treatment and control counties in 2013
                                              Full sample                            Border sample 1                           Border sample 2
                                      Expansion      Non-expansion              Expansion     Non-expansion               Expansion     Non-expansion
 Wage                                     746.2                696.1                740.2                705.0                696.6                702.4
                                         (192.1)              (168.1)              (178.5)              (179.8)              (157.7)              (183.0)
 Employment count                       47,590.7             24,962.2             36,132.9             21,568.9             19,394.4             22,961.5
                                      (16,3713.7)           (88,318.5)          (126,875.7)           (63,194.1)           (44,597.4)           (67,710.5)
 Population estimate                   133,514.6             74,245.2            104,830.5             62,054.4             62,646.8             65,019.8
                                      (418,831.4)          (209,671.4)          (317,486.0)          (145,100.6)          (131,957.1)          (154,867.9)
 Minimum wage                              7.58                 7.28                 7.46                 7.27                 7.51                 7.27
                                          (0.49)               (0.11)               (0.38)               (0.04)               (0.45)               (0.04)
 Poverty rate (%)                          16.1                 18.2                 16.5                 17.0                 17.5                 16.7
                                           (6.1)                (6.8)                (6.7)                (7.4)                (7.4)                (7.4)
 Median household income
                                         49.86                45.83                48.90                48.03                47.03                48.50
 (in thousands)
                                        (12.53)               (11.24)             (13.02)               (14.64)              (13.21)              (15.03)

 Number of counties                      1,431                1,627                 363                  221                  174                  189
 Number of states                         29                   19                    24                   14                   14                   13
 Number of county-pairs                                NA                                          590                                     360
Notes: Standard deviation is reported in parenthesis. Border sample 1 includes states that adopted the Medicaid expansion any time between 2014 and 2016.
Border sample 2 includes only states that implemented the Medicaid expansion on January 1, 2014.




                                                                           26
Table 2. Estimated effects of Medicaid expansion from standard difference-in-difference models, 2008-2016
                                             (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)                 (5)                (6)
 Panel A. log of total employment
 Medicaid expansion                         0.004              0.000               -0.001              -0.005             -0.004              -0.001
                                           (0.005)            (0.005)             (0.004)             (0.006)            (0.003)             (0.004)
 1st lag of Medicaid expansion                                 0.003                0.003                                 -0.000              0.002
                                                              (0.006)             (0.004)                                (0.009)             (0.007)
 2nd lag of Medicaid expansion                                                      0.001                                                     0.001
                                                                                  (0.006)                                                    (0.009)

 Panel B. log of average weekly wage
 Medicaid expansion                         -0.004             -0.007              -0.006              -0.003             -0.002              -0.000
                                           (0.006)            (0.006)             (0.005)             (0.004)            (0.004)             (0.004)
 1st lag of Medicaid expansion                                  0.004               0.005                                  0.009              0.009
                                                              (0.005)             (0.004)                                (0.008)             (0.006)
 2nd lag of Medicaid expansion                                                      0.000                                                     0.004
                                                                                  (0.004)                                                    (0.007)

 N                                         27,522              24,464             21,406              27,522             24,464              21,406
 County fixed effects                         X                  X                   X                  X                   X                   X
 Year fixed effects                           X                  X                   X                  X                   X                   X
 State-specific linear trends                                                                           X                   X                   X
Notes: Levels of significance are *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Standard errors that are clustered on the state only are reported in parentheses. All models
include county and year fixed effects. Other control variables include the county-level poverty rate, median household income, population, and state
minimum wage.




                                                                            27
Table 3. Estimated effects from contiguous county-pair models: All expansion states
                                       (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
 Panel A. log of total employment
 Medicaid expansion                   0.008        0.011        0.008          0.008      0.011         0.008        0.007        0.014        0.013
                                     (0.009)      (0.008)      (0.007)        (0.009)    (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.009)
 1st lag of Medicaid expansion                     -0.006       -0.006                    -0.006        -0.006                   -0.013*     -0.013**
                                                  (0.007)      (0.006)                   (0.007)       (0.006)                   (0.007)      (0.006)
 2nd lag of Medicaid expansion                                  -0.004                                  -0.004                                 -0.001
                                                               (0.003)                                 (0.003)                                (0.004)

 Panel B. log of average weekly wage
 Medicaid expansion                 0.001          -0.001       -0.002         0.001      -0.001        -0.001       0.003        0.003        0.002
                                   (0.006)        (0.005)      (0.005)        (0.006)    (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.003)
 1st lag of Medicaid expansion                     0.002        0.002                     0.002         0.002                     0.000        -0.000
                                                  (0.003)      (0.002)                   (0.003)       (0.002)                   (0.003)      (0.003)
 2nd lag of Medicaid expansion                                  -0.000                                  -0.000                                 0.001
                                                               (0.005)                                 (0.005)                                (0.004)

 N                                   10,620        9,440        8,260         10,620        9,440        8,260        10,620        9,440        8,260
 County fixed effects                  X             X            X             X             X            X             X            X            X
 Year fixed effects                    X             X            X             X             X            X
 County-pair fixed effects                                                      X             X            X
 County-pair-by-year fixed
                                                                                                                         X            X            X
 effects
Notes: Levels of significance are *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Two-way clustered standard errors (state and county border segment) are reported in
parentheses. All models include county and year fixed effects. Other control variables include the county-level poverty rate, median household income,
population, and state minimum wage.




                                                                         28
Table 4. Estimated effects of Medicaid expansion from contiguous county-pair models: States that adopted expansion on January 1,
2014
                                       (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
 Panel A. log of total employment
 Medicaid expansion                   -0.006       0.006        0.005          -0.006      0.006        0.004        -0.010       0.002         0.001
                                     (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.009)        (0.011)     (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.010)      (0.008)       (0.008)
 1st lag of Medicaid expansion                  -0.013***     -0.012**                   -0.013**     -0.012**                 -0.014***     -0.013***
                                                  (0.005)      (0.005)                    (0.005)      (0.005)                   (0.005)       (0.004)
 2nd lag of Medicaid expansion                                  -0.002                                  -0.002                                  -0.004
                                                               (0.004)                                 (0.004)                                 (0.004)

 Panel B. log of average weekly wage
 Medicaid expansion                 0.002          0.003        0.002          0.002      0.003         0.002        0.001        0.001        0.000
                                   (0.008)        (0.008)      (0.008)        (0.008)    (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.005)
 1st lag of Medicaid expansion                     -0.001       0.001                     -0.001        0.000                     0.001        0.002
                                                  (0.005)      (0.004)                   (0.005)       (0.004)                   (0.005)      (0.004)
 2nd lag of Medicaid expansion                                  -0.002                                  -0.002                                 -0.001
                                                               (0.005)                                 (0.005)                                (0.004)

 N                                   6,480         5,760        5,040         6,480         5,760        5,040        6,480         5,760        5,040
 County fixed effects                  X             X            X             X             X            X             X            X            X
 Year fixed effects                    X             X            X             X             X            X
 County-pair fixed effects                                                      X             X            X
 County-pair-by-year fixed
                                                                                                                         X            X            X
 effects
Notes: Levels of significance are *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Two-way clustered standard errors (state and county border segment) are reported in
parentheses. All models include county and year fixed effects. Other control variables include the county-level poverty rate, median household income,
population, and state minimum wage.



                                                                         29
Table 5. Estimated employment effects of Medicaid expansion by sector from contiguous county-pair models: States that adopted
expansion on January 1, 2014
                                                                                                                               Accommodation and
                                                        Construction                         Retail trade
                                                                                                                                  food services
                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)         (9)
 Medicaid expansion                             0.043      0.022        0.026       -0.004       -0.014      -0.005       0.002      -0.007       0.000
                                              (0.031)     (0.030)      (0.022)     (0.009)      (0.010)     (0.008)      (0.012)    (0.012)     (0.009)
 1st lag of Medicaid expansion                 -0.014      -0.013       -0.016      -0.005      -0.008*      -0.007       -0.007    -0.013*      -0.009
                                              (0.023)     (0.021)      (0.017)     (0.005)      (0.004)     (0.005)      (0.008)    (0.007)     (0.008)
 2nd lag of Medicaid expansion                  0.006      0.005        0.004       -0.004       -0.007      -0.007       0.001      -0.005      -0.001
                                              (0.018)     (0.013)      (0.016)     (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.005)      (0.009)    (0.010)     (0.009)
 Sum of Medicaid expansion effects              0.035      0.014        0.013       -0.013     -0.029**      -0.019       -0.004    -0.026*      -0.010
                                              (0.045)     (0.038)      (0.033)     (0.013)      (0.012)     (0.012)      (0.013)    (0.013)     (0.012)

 N                                            3,080       3,080       3,080        5,082        5,082        5,082        1,750       1,750       1,750
 County fixed effects                           X           X           X            X            X            X            X           X           X
 Year fixed effects                             X           X                        X            X                         X           X
 County-pair fixed effects                                  X                                     X                                     X
 County-pair by year fixed effects                                      X                                      X                                    X
Notes: Levels of significance are *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Two-way clustered standard errors (state and county border segment) are reported in
parentheses. We estimate the model that include county and county-pair by year fixed effects. Other control variables include the county-level poverty rate,
median household income, population, and state minimum wage.




                                                                            30
Table 6. Falsification tests of Medicaid expansion effect on public-sector employment
from contiguous county-pair models: States that adopted expansion on January 1, 2014
                                                (1)                  (2)                   (3)
 Medicaid expansion                           -0.001                -0.001                -0.001
                                             (0.007)               (0.006)               (0.006)
 1st lag of Medicaid expansion                 0.004                 0.004                 0.005
                                             (0.004)               (0.004)               (0.004)
 2nd lag of Medicaid expansion                -0.000                -0.000                 0.001
                                             (0.005)               (0.005)               (0.004)

 N                                              3,010                 3,010               3,010
 County fixed effects                             X                     X                   X
 Year fixed effects                               X                     X                   X
 County-pair fixed effects                                              X
 County-pair by year fixed effects                                                          X
Notes: Levels of significance are *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Two-way clustered standard errors
(state and county border segment) are reported in parentheses. All models include county and year fixed
effects. Other control variables include county-level poverty rate, median household income, population,
and state minimum wage.




                                                  31
Table 7. Pre-trend tests of Medicaid expansion effect on employment from contiguous
county-pair models: States that adopted expansion on January 1, 2014
                                                (1)                  (2)                   (3)
 Medicaid expansion                            0.000                -0.008                -0.010
                                             (0.000)               (0.008)               (0.009)
 1st lead of Medicaid expansion               -0.002                -0.002                -0.003
                                             (0.005)               (0.005)               (0.004)
 2nd lead of Medicaid expansion                0.000                 0.000                -0.001
                                             (0.005)               (0.005)               (0.004)
 3rd lead of Medicaid expansion               -0.000                -0.000                 0.002
                                             (0.007)               (0.007)               (0.006)

 N                                              4,320                 4,320               4,320
 County fixed effects                             X                     X                   X
 Year fixed effects                               X                     X                   X
 County-pair fixed effects                                              X
 County-pair by year fixed effects                                                          X
Notes: Levels of significance are *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Two-way clustered standard errors
(state and county border segment) are reported in parentheses. All models include county and year fixed
effects. Other control variables include county-level poverty rate, median household income, population,
and state minimum wage.




                                                  32
Table 8. Estimated employment effect using quarterly QCEW data from contiguous
county-pair models: States that adopted expansion on January 1, 2014
                                                      Unstructured                 Polynomial
                                                 Distributed Lag Model       Distributed Lag Model
                                                             (1)                        (2)
 Medicaid expansion                                        0.007                      -0.003
                                                          (0.008)                    (0.007)
 1st lag of Medicaid expansion                           -0.012**                      0.003
                                                          (0.005)                    (0.003)
 2nd lag of Medicaid expansion                             0.003                       0.003
                                                          (0.003)                    (0.003)
 3rd lag of Medicaid expansion                             0.007                      -0.000
                                                          (0.006)                    (0.002)
 4th lag of Medicaid expansion                             0.003                    -0.005***
                                                          (0.004)                    (0.001)
 5th lag of Medicaid expansion                          -0.021***                   -0.008***
                                                          (0.007)                    (0.002)
 6th lag of Medicaid expansion                            -0.007*                   -0.007***
                                                          (0.004)                    (0.002)
 7th lag of Medicaid expansion                             0.004                       0.000
                                                          (0.005)                    (0.003)
 Sum of coefficients (treat to 3rd lag)                    0.004                       0.003
                                                          (0.010)                    (0.009)
 Sum of coefficients (4th to 7rd lag)                   -0.020***                   -0.020***
                                                          (0.005)                    (0.005)

 Eigenvalue condition number                                16.869
 N                                                          20,880                      20,880
 County fixed effects                                          X                          X
 County-pair by quarter fixed effects                          X                          X
Notes: Levels of significance are *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Two-way clustered standard errors
(state and county border segment) are reported in parentheses. We estimate the model that include
county and county-pair by quarter fixed effects. Other control variables include the county-level poverty
rate, median household income, population, and state minimum wage. The polynomial distributed lag
model restricts the lag coefficients to lie on a cubic function. An eigenvalue condition number above 10
indicates instability of regression coefficients due to multicollinearity.




                                                   33
Figure 1. Contiguous border county-pairs in the U.S. with different Medicaid expansion
status: 2014-2016




                               Panel A. Border sample 1




                               Panel B. Border sample 2




                                          34
Appendix

Table A1. ACA Medicaid Expansion status as of December 31, 2016
                         Medicaid Expansion
 State                                            Notes
                               Decision
 Alabama                     Not Adopted
 Alaska                        Adopted
 Arizona                       Adopted            Section 1115 waiver
 Arkansas                      Adopted            Section 1115 waiver
 California                    Adopted            Prior expansion
 Colorado                      Adopted
 Connecticut                   Adopted            Prior expansion
 Delaware                      Adopted            Prior expansion
 District of Columbia          Adopted            Prior expansion
 Florida                     Not Adopted
 Georgia                     Not Adopted
 Hawaii                        Adopted            Prior expansion
 Idaho                       Not Adopted
 Illinois                      Adopted
                                                  Expansion coverage began
 Indiana                       Adopted
                                                  2/1/2015; section 1115 waiver
                                                  Section 1115 waiver; section
 Iowa                          Adopted
                                                  1115 waiver
 Kansas                      Not Adopted
 Kentucky                      Adopted
                                                  Expansion coverage began
 Louisiana                     Adopted
                                                  7/1/2016
 Maine                       Not Adopted          Prior expansion
 Maryland                      Adopted
 Massachusetts                 Adopted            Prior expansion
                                                  Expansion coverage began
 Michigan                      Adopted
                                                  4/1/2014; section 1115 waiver
 Minnesota                     Adopted            Prior expansion
 Mississippi                 Not Adopted
 Missouri                    Not Adopted
                                                  Expansion coverage began
 Montana                       Adopted
                                                  1/1/2016; section 1115 waiver
 Nebraska                    Not Adopted
 Nevada                        Adopted
                                                  Expansion coverage began
 New Hampshire                 Adopted
                                                  8/15/2014; section 1115 waiver
 New Jersey                    Adopted            Prior expansion
 New Mexico                    Adopted
 New York                      Adopted            Prior expansion

                                        35
 North Carolina                        Not Adopted
 North Dakota                           Adopted
 Ohio                                   Adopted
 Oklahoma                              Not Adopted
 Oregon                                 Adopted
                                                                Expansion coverage began
 Pennsylvania                            Adopted
                                                                1/1/2015
 Rhode Island                           Adopted
 South Carolina                        Not Adopted
 South Dakota                          Not Adopted
 Tennessee                             Not Adopted              Prior expansion
 Texas                                 Not Adopted
 Utah                                  Not Adopted
 Vermont                                Adopted                 Prior expansion
 Virginia                              Not Adopted
 Washington                             Adopted                 Prior expansion
 West Virginia                          Adopted
                                                                Wisconsin covers adults up to
 Wisconsin                             Not Adopted              100% FPL in Medicaid but did
                                                                not adopt the ACA expansion.
 Wyoming                               Not Adopted
Notes: Coverage under the Medicaid expansion became effective January 1, 2014 in all states that have
adopted the Medicaid expansion except for the following: Michigan (4/1/2014), New Hampshire
(8/15/2014), Pennsylvania (1/1/2015), Indiana (2/1/2015), Alaska (9/1/2015), Montana (1/1/2016), and
Louisiana (7/1/2016).




                                                   36
Table A2. Estimated employment effect under alternative samples
                                                            Excluding prior      Excluding large
                                           Baseline
                                                            expansion states     western counties
                                              (1)                  (2)                  (3)
 Medicaid expansion                          0.001               -0.000                0.001
                                           (0.006)              (0.009)              (0.008)
 1st lag of Medicaid expansion            -0.013***            -0.010**            -0.013***
                                           (0.003)              (0.005)              (0.004)
 2nd lag of Medicaid expansion              -0.004               -0.002               -0.004
                                           (0.004)              (0.004)              (0.004)

  N                                         5,040                 3,878                 4,998
  County fixed effects                        X                      X                    X
  County-pair by year fixed effects           X                      X                    X
Notes: Levels of significance are *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Two-way clustered standard errors
(state and county border segment) are reported in parentheses. We estimate the model that include
county and county-pair by year fixed effects. In column 2 we exclude all counties in the states of
California, Connecticut, Maine, and Minnesota. In column 3, we exclude the counties of San Bernardino,
Coconino, Nye, Elko, Mohave, Apache, Lincoln, Sweetwater, Inyo, and Harney, all of which have a
land area greater than 10,000 square miles. Other control variables include county-level poverty rate,
median household income, population, and state minimum wage.




                                                 37
Table A3. Tests of cross-border spillover effects of Medicaid expansion on employment from contiguous county-pair models: States
that adopted expansion on January 1, 2014
                                                                        Baseline (N=3,668)                               Spillover (N=3,668)
                                                                (1)              (2)                (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)
 Medicaid expansion                                           0.013            0.013              0.008            0.011         0.010        0.007
                                                             (0.011)          (0.011)            (0.009)         (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.011)
 1st lag of Medicaid expansion                              -0.011**         -0.011**           -0.012**          -0.005        -0.005        -0.005
                                                             (0.005)          (0.005)            (0.005)         (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.005)
 2nd lag of Medicaid expansion                                -0.001           -0.001             -0.003           0.001         0.002        0.002
                                                             (0.004)          (0.004)            (0.004)         (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)

 County fixed effects                                           X                  X                  X               X              X              X
 Year fixed effects                                             X                  X                                  X              X
 County-pair fixed effects                                                         X                                                 X
 County-pair by year fixed effects                                                                    X                                             X
Notes: Levels of significance are *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Two-way clustered standard errors (state and county border segment) are reported in
parentheses. All models include county, county-pair, and year fixed effects. Other control variables include the county-level poverty rate, median household
income, population, and state minimum wage. The spillover sample excludes the following states in the Mountain and Pacific Time Zones: Arizona,
Colorado, Oregon, Nevada, New Mexico, Washington, and Wyoming.




                                                                            38
