                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            UNLOCKING AMENITIES:
                   ESTIMATING PUBLIC-GOOD COMPLEMENTARITY

                                        David Albouy
                                      Peter Christensen
                                  Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri

                                      Working Paper 25107
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25107


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           September 2018, Revised July 2019




We thank Zillow for sharing housing transactions data (Zillow, 2018). We also thank Daniel
Mcmillen, Dan Bernhardt, Nicolas Bottan and seminar and conference participants at the
American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association Meetings, DePaul University, the
European and North American Urban Economics Association Annual Meetings, Singapore
Management University, the IEB V Workshop on Urban Economics, SUNY Binghamton,
University of Louisville, University of Nevada, University of Wyoming, and University of
Virginia, for helpful comments and feedback. Yifang Zhang provided excellent research
assistance. Data and replication files available at: https://github.com/uiuc-bdeep/Unlocking-
Amenities. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by David Albouy, Peter Christensen, and Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unlocking Amenities: Estimating Public-Good Complementarity
David Albouy, Peter Christensen, and Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri
NBER Working Paper No. 25107
September 2018, Revised July 2019
JEL No. H41,Q51,Q56,R23

                                         ABSTRACT

Public goods may exhibit complementarities that are essential for determining their individual
value. Our results indicate that improving safety near parks can turn them from public bads to
goods. Ignoring complementarities may lead to i) undervaluing the potential value of public
goods; ii) overestimating heterogeneity in preferences; and iii) understating the value of public
goods to minority households. Recent reductions in crime have “unlocked” $5 billion in property
value in Chicago, New York and Philadelphia. Still over half of the potential value of park
proximity, over $10 billion, remains locked in.


David Albouy                                                 Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri
Department of Economics                                      University of Illinois
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign                   Department of Economics
214 David Kinley Hall                                        srmntbr2@illinois.edu
Urbana, IL 61801-3606
and NBER
albouy@illinois.edu

Peter Christensen
Agriculture and Consumer Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
431 Mumford Hall
Urbana, IL 61801
pchrist@illinois.edu




A Data and replication files is available at https://github.com/uiuc-bdeep/Unlocking-Amenities
1     Introduction

Economic theory leans heavily on the idea that goods may be complements in consumption.

While the joint demand for private goods has been studied extensively, little has been said about

the joint demand for public goods. Studying the joint demand for public goods is difficult as

individuals cannot purchase them directly, but only indirectly, such as through housing. To

the best of our knowledge, no study has estimated the joint demand for public goods in a

well-identified framework.1 This raises issues for public investment decisions as their value may

depend critically on complementary relationships.

    In this paper, we study the complementarity between public safety and urban parks in major

U.S. cities. Our hypothesis is intuitive: parks are less valuable when they are dangerous. As

crime rises, the value of parks to nearby residents may disappear, and even become negative.

This idea is not new. In her seminal work, Jacobs (1961) devotes a chapter to the “use of

neighborhood parks,” where she argues that parks are not inherently equal in value. Without

formalizing the complementarity with crime, Jacobs writes:


      Unpopular parks are troubling not only because of the waste and missed opportu-

      nities they imply, but also because of their frequent negative effects... their dangers

      spill over into the areas surrounding, so that streets along such parks become known

      as danger places too and are avoided (Jacobs, 1961, p. 95).2


    The empirical evidence presented in this study supports this hypothesis. Safety “unlocks”

the value of parks. A corollary is that public safety is more valuable near parks. Thus, merely

displacing crime away from parks may have social value. Indeed, reducing crime near parks or

other public capital may be a boon to urban revival.3 Complementarity also implies that it can

be wasteful to equalize some public goods (parks) without equalizing others (safety).

    Paying attention to public good complementarity has important methodological implica-
1
  The closest analyses we know of consider the relationship between amenities and private consumption, Connolly
(2008) and Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014), examine the relationship between weather and time use, and thus
leisure as a good. Cuffe (2017) examines how rainfall influences museum attendance.
2
  Through various examples and anecdotes, Jacobs proposes a kind of mechanism whereby parks that become less
active facilitate the perception of reduced safety as well as the production of crime (which presumably increase
together). Interestingly, Jacobs even suggests that the kind of variation in amenity benefits that she observes
might offer opportunities to the empiricist: “Philadelphia affords almost a controlled experiment on this point,”
and goes on to compare the successful Rittenhouse Square park with the dangerous Washington Square park.
Similar issues are recognized in the urban planning literature (Weiss et al., 2011).
3
  For work on urban revival, see Baum-Snow and Hartley (2017) and Couture and Handbury (2017).


                                                       1
tions for hedonic valuation (Banzhaf and Walsh, 2008), sorting behavior (Kuminoff et al.,

2013), quality-of-life determination (Albouy and Lue, 2015), and environmental distributive

justice (Banzhaf et al., 2018). Our findings highlight two related points. First, complementar-

ities can affect the validity of estimates from hedonic valuation and other revealed preference

methods. Estimates from an unsafe area may not apply to a safe area and vice versa. Sec-

ond, econometricians may attribute willingness-to-pay variation to differences in tastes, when

they may instead be due to differences in endowments. Indeed, economics is known to have a

long-standing ambivalence about explaining phenomena through variation in taste (Stigler and

Becker, 1977). Our evidence suggests that ignoring complementarity could lead the analyst to

infer that minority households, who tend to live in higher-crime areas, value safe parks less than

they do.

    Our empirical analysis uses detailed crime and housing data in Chicago, New York and

Philadelphia from 2001 to 2016. In particular, we use 656,841 housing market transactions

located within 3/8 miles of 1,336 parks. We organize these transactions into “neighborhoods”

surrounding each park and assign each a local crime risk measure based on nearby homicides.

    We employ several strategies to estimate the value of park proximity and, more importantly,

changes in that premium as a function of crime. As a foundation, we employ a neighborhood

spatial differences (NSD) design, comparing areas near parks with areas farther away. This re-

lies on applying 1,336 fixed effects, one for each neighborhood.4 The difference in housing prices

near and far from parks identifies the average “park premium.” A second difference identifies the

complementarity using two sources of variation. In some specifications, the second difference

captures changes in the park premium over time as crime rates fluctuate, controlling for local

time trends. In others, the second difference relies upon spatial variation in the park premium

between areas that are safe or dangerous. We evaluate the sensitivity of these estimates to con-

trols, including neighborhood-by-year fixed effects and socio-economic characteristics interacted

with both park proximity and local crime rates. We then examine instrumental variables (IV)

estimates that use city-level crime reductions to predict property-level changes in crime risk.

This helps remove potentially endogenous variation in crime changes from local neighborhood

dynamics.


4
  This empirical design is similar to research by Espey et al. (2001) and Anderson and West (2006), although
we use multiple cities over long time periods. We show that effects are identified under relatively restrictive
assumptions in a base model that is consistent with prior work.


                                                      2
   Estimates of the park premium for homes within roughly one block of parks remain stable at

around 5 percent in safe areas. This premium falls to zero at approximately double the average

crime rate in our sample, supporting the main hypothesis of complementarity. At higher levels

of crime, there is some evidence of a “park discount,” suggesting that parks may become a public

bad. Tests developed by Oster (2017) provide indirect evidence that both the interaction and

the main effect of parks in our main specifications are robust to omitted variables. Moreover,

the results are quantitatively consistent across the range of specifications, including the IV.

   Our analysis indicates that without a park-crime interaction, an analysis of heterogeneity

in the park premium by neighborhood demographics might suggest that residents of minority

neighborhoods value parks less than non-minorities. When we include the park-crime interaction

term, we find no evidence of differences between the groups.

   Complementarity affects the estimated benefits of parks and their distribution across neigh-

borhoods. In total, our estimates indicate that park proximity alone contributes over $10.5

billion in total value to nearby homeowners across the three cities. However, on average, low-

income neighborhoods receive negative benefits from park proximity. These low income neigh-

borhoods have the most to gain from crime reductions, which could unlock a large amount of

amenity value in local parks. If parks are made safer, even from displacement, the total value of

parks would roughly double. Much of the increase would accrue to low-income neighborhoods.

Since the beginning of our sample period, the amenity value unlocked through reductions in

crime accounts for roughly half of the current value.

   Our estimates likely represent a lower bound on the total benefits of unlocked amenity value

for two reasons. First, the total value of parks is probably much larger than, but strongly

correlated with, the benefits of park proximity. Second, Banzhaf (2018) demonstrates that

estimates such as ours provide a lower bound welfare measure in settings with preference-

based sorting. We find little evidence that resident characteristics change with the park-crime

complementarity, though we cannot rule out changes in unobserved characteristics.

   This paper addresses parallel, but mostly disparate strands of research in public goods

valuation. The first estimates the value of increases (Gamper-Rabindran and Timmins, 2013)

and reductions (Currie et al., 2015, Davis, 2004, Muehlenbachs et al., 2015) in environmental

amenities. Since the value of leisure-producing environmental amenities such as clean air (Chay

and Greenstone, 2005, Currie et al., 2015, Muehlenbachs et al., 2015, Ito and Zhang, 2016),


                                                3
clean water (Keiser and Shapiro, 2017), and climate amenities (Albouy et al., 2016) depends

on the overall quality of outdoor experience in any locale, there is reason to believe that their

value may depend on levels of public safety. Many authors estimate the value of access to

open space — see Brander and Koetse (2011) for a meta-analysis — although their reliance on

cross-sectional variation raises concerns about bias from omitted variables.

    A second strand estimates the value of public safety through housing prices. This literature

dates back to early efforts by Thaler (1978). Recent studies address measurement error and

omitted variables concerns to value the social cost of crime (Gibbons, 2004) as well as extensions

to the value of policing (Chalfin and McCrary, 2017, Di Tella and Schargrodsky, 2004), targeted

public safety and crime prevention programs (Donohue et al., 2013, Draca et al., 2011), and the

relocation of sex offenders (Linden and Rockoff, 2008). The present study focuses on the benefits

of crime reductions that operate through a complement. However, it raises important questions

for further research on the benefits of public safety. The tentative evidence suggests that crime

exhibits diminishing marginal damages in neighborhoods near parks. Taken literally, this hints

that it may be socially beneficial to concentrate crime if the total can be held constant.

    In two articles on the topic, we find contradictory estimates of the relationship between parks

and crime using purely cross-sectional data. Anderson and West (2006) find crime associated

with higher values in Minneapolis, whereas Troy and Grove (2008) find crime associated with

lower values in Baltimore.5 Each of these studies relies on different samples and specifications,

making them difficult to reconcile.6 Besides framing the issue of public good complementarity

more generally, our estimates examine data across multiple cities and use variation across time

and space, allowing for a rich set of time-varying controls and the IV strategy.7

    Section 2 below presents a theory of complementary public goods in a hedonic setting.

Section 3 describes our data. Section 4 examines functional form issues and presents graphical

evidence. Section 5 reports supporting regression evidence for a range of specifications. Section


5
  Anderson and West (2006) estimates this relationship with a sample of 24,000 housing transactions and the
number of “serious crimes,” which includes thefts and assaults. Troy and Grove (2008) uses 16,000 transactions.
They use a measure of the incidence of robbery and rape. The paper states: “Murder was not chosen because
the numbers of these crimes are small,” which is true for a single year. They dismiss the use of assaults asserting
that these are often indoors and related to domestic violence.
6
  Bowes and Ihlanfeldt (2001) finds that crime can affect property values near rail stations, another urban public
good.
7
  This is not the first study to posit the importance of public safety for parks. Anderson and West (2006) and
Troy and Grove (2008) are good examples of empirical research that examines crime and open space. Troy and
Grove (2008) discuss some elements of the complementarity such as a threshold of public safety that is necessary
for positive valuation of urban parks.


                                                        4
6 interprets the estimates vis-a-vis sorting and preference heterogeneity. Section 7 considers

the distribution of gains from park complementarity over time and by neighborhood income.

Section 8 concludes.



2    A Simple Model of Public Good Complements

In principle, complementarity in public goods, e.g., warm weather and a community pool, are

no less important than between private goods, swimming trunks and goggles. An important

difference is that local public goods are bought indirectly through housing. This purchase is

developed in the model below.

    Preferences are represented by a Cobb-Douglas function: the utility of person i in location

j is Uij = Qij y α x1−α , where y is the quantity of the housing good consumed, with price vj , x

is a numeraire good, and α ∈ (0, 1) is a fixed parameter. Qij gives the value of location j to

person i, which is log-linear in interacted amenities:


                            ln Qij = θP + θP H Hj Pj + θH Hj + ln ξj + ij
                                                 
                                                                                                          (1)


where Pj denotes the environmental amenity, Hj denotes the crime level, and ξj other commonly-

valued amenities. The parameter ij is an idiosyncratic taste shock for the neighborhood.

    The parameters θP > 0 and −θH > 0 define the base elasticities of willingness-to-pay for

the environmental amenity and safety (minus crime), respectively. The interaction parameter

θP H describes the complementarity, which we predict to be negative. Alternatively, safety and

parks are complements. These terms may be arranged as θH + θP H Pj Hj + θP Pj to illustrate
                                                                     

how the cost of crime rises when the environmental amenity is higher.8

    Denote our measure of crime, H̃j = Hj + aj , where aj captures measurement error. This

error adds to the unobserved amenity term: ξ˜j = ξj + θH + θP H Pj aj . Taking these shifts
                                                                   

into account, the indirect utility function is given by:


                       ln Uij = −α ln vj + θjP + θP H Hj Pj + θH H̃j + ξ˜j + ij
                                                        


8
  Strictly speaking, the marginal value of one amenity increases with respect to the other even without the
interaction in a Cobb-Douglas formulation. But this is not due to any kind of complementarity. Focusing on
the elasticity of the value makes the complementary relationship more plain. Complementary amenities are also
implied by the canonical Tinbergen model, described in Bartik and Smith (1987) and Ekeland et al. (2004), even
though they have only rarely been estimated.


                                                      5
Solving for log housing price, and letting Vij = ln vij , it is natural to separate out the park-crime

interaction.

                            θjP      θH       θP H              ξ˜j + ij − ln Uij
                       Vj =     Pj +    H̃j +      (Pj × Hj ) +
                             α        α        α                         α
                                                            
                              P       H        PH                 ∗
                          ≡ β Pj + β H̃j + β         Pj × H̃j + ξj + uij                                      (2)


where β k = θk /α, k ∈ {P, H, P H}, ξj∗ = ξ˜j /α, and uij = (ij − ln Uij ) /α. This specification

predicts that β P > 0 and β H < 0. If parks and safety are complementary, then β P H < 0. This

linear model predicts that above a certain level of crime, a park becomes a public bad. If

                                                       βP     θP
                                            H̃j ≥ −        =      ,                                           (3)
                                                      βP H   θP H

then households will pay to live away from the park.9 As shown in Banzhaf (2018) for the case

of individual amenities, hedonic estimates that exploit exogenous changes in the level of one or

both public goods complements may shift an entire hedonic price function and identify a lower

bound on the Hicksian equivalent surplus.



3     Data and Descriptive Statistics

Our data are based on observations of housing transactions that vary in their proximity to

urban parks and in crime incidents reported in the neighborhood. We study Chicago, New

York, and Philadelphia, as they have a large number of parks as well as geo-coded, incident-

level crime reports. For Chicago, these reports cover the period 2001 to 2016 and for New York

and Philadelphia, 2006 to 2016. These constitute the years of our sample.

    The data on transaction prices and structural characteristics come from Zillow (2018). From

these data, we create controls for dwelling characteristics: log distance to the CBD, age of the

dwelling, square footage, number of bedrooms and bathrooms, and dwelling type (i.e. single

and multifamily residences).10

    We match each house with data on the socio-economic composition of residents living in the

9
   The error term does include differences in the preference shock relative to utility. Thus, the framework may be
 used to motivate a logit estimator based on how many people choose to live in an area based on its proximity to
 a park and local safety. Such an approach would require a nuanced understanding of local housing supply. Since
 we find little evidence of sorting or increases in population density, we focus on the hedonic analysis instead.
10
   Dwelling characteristics come from the Assessor’s office and correspond to the most recent property assessment.


                                                        6
Census block and block group from the 2000 and 2010 Censuses, complemented by the 2011-15

American Community Survey (ACS). These include: population density; percentages of White,

Black, and Latino households at the block level; vacant and rented housing units at the block

level; and median age and median income at the block group level. We also match homes to

the total number of housing units in their census block for later benefit calculations.

      Table 1 reports basic descriptive statistics for these variables. In all three cities, the raw

transaction prices of homes within 2/16ths of a mile of a park are higher than those slightly

farther away. The average property-level homicide risk is fairly similar across the cities, rang-

ing from 1.39 in Philadelphia to 1.65 in Chicago. Note that areas with predominantly white

populations are strongly represented in all three cities and throughout the study period. While

the fraction of owner-occupied, multifamily units may appear high, this is not unusual for the

cities in our sample.


3.1     Urban Parks and Neighborhood Definition


We organize the housing transactions into neighborhoods, with each centered on a single park.

Parks are defined in our source (openstreetmap.org) as: “open, green area for recreation, usually

municipal, and are differentiated from other public/private open spaces such as: golf courses,

stadiums, nature reserves (which may not have public access), and marinas.”11 We use all parks

larger than 0.6 acres, providing 1,336 geo-coded urban parks across all three cities.

      Each neighborhood contains the housing transactions within 3/8 miles of its park, aside

from transactions that are nearer to other parks. We then subdivide the transactions into bands
                                                                                               
around the park that are 1/16 of a mile (≈ 100 meters) in width: Pik ≡ I 1/16×k≤djij <1/16×(k+1) ,

where djij is the distance between each house i to the closest neighborhood park j. Each of these

bands corresponds to the width of a typical block. We neatly summarize these bands using the

vector Pi ≡ [Pi1 , Pi2 , ..., Pi6 ].12 A house within a block may have a view. Within two blocks,

the park is still within earshot of loud sounds such as gunfire.

      Figure 1 illustrates our neighborhood definition using a map of transactions within 3/8


11
   See https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:leisure. We subdivide some of the largest parks, such as Central
 Park in New York, Lincoln Park in Chicago and Fairmount Park in Philadelphia, in order to capture the effects
 of crime in particular neighborhoods that they span.
12
   In Chicago, most blocks are 1/16 of a mile in length, although many East-West blocks are 1/8 of a mile. In New
 York, many blocks are approximately 1/2 of a mile north-to-south, and often up to 1/7 of a mile, east-to-west.
 Central Philadelphia blocks are about 1/13 of a mile.


                                                        7
miles of the parks in Chicago. The transactions are colored according to their distance interval,

except that the third through fifth columns are colored uniformly. This reflects the evidence

shown below: houses in Pi3 through Pi5 do not appear to benefit from a park premium, while

those in Pi1 do. Houses in Pi2 seem to benefit weakly, and thus may be taken as secondary

evidence or excluded. Each point refers to a single transaction. The insert shows a close-up

view of the neighborhood around Marquette Park. While not an affluent part of Chicago, the

neighborhood still contains a large number of transactions. In total, our final data-set contains

656,841 transactions. Chicago and New York have almost equal numbers, while Philadelphia

has far fewer.13


3.2     Mapping Crime Risk at the Transaction Level


Our crime measure is based on crime incident reports. These data come from city police de-

partments, provided by their Open Data Portal.14 We use these geo-located reports to calculate

a measure of crime risk at all locations for every city and year in the study period.

      For clarity and comparability over space and time, we focus on homicide risk. Prior research

suggests that property and other types of crime are subject to greater reporting biases. Fur-

thermore, property crime in particular can occur more frequently in neighborhoods with greater

amenities and wealth.15 Hence, we use “crime” and “homicides” interchangeably throughout the

paper.

      Figure 2 illustrates the estimated homicide risk for Chicago. Darker-shaded areas indicate

higher homicide risk. To calculate homicide risk, we estimate the likelihood of a homicide at a

given property based on the crime incident reports. This likelihood is estimated using a bivariate

Gaussian kernel with a bandwidth of 2/8 of a mile on a 1/8 mile city grid, and normalized to
13
   Figure 1 and Appendix Figures A.1 and A.2 illustrate the parks, bin definitions, and housing transactions in
 each of the three cities.
14
   For the City of Chicago the data are extracted from the Chicago Police Department’s CLEAR (Citizen Law
 Enforcement Analysis and Reporting) system and available through the Chicago Data Portal at https://goo.gl/
 D8Vm82 New York City data from the New York City Police Department (NYPD) and available through NYC
 Open Data portal at https://goo.gl/zGp8Z2. Philadelphia crime incidents come from the Philadelphia Police
 Department and are available through Open Data Philly at https://goo.gl/gYR96r.
15
   We analyze the robustness of our estimates to measures that include all crimes and discuss them with our main
 results. Prior research illustrates substantial heterogeneity in the perception and valuation of different types
 of crime and ambiguous effects of property crimes on housing prices. For example, Thaler (1978) finds that
 property crime reduces housing prices, but Gibbons (2004) finds no effect of burglaries. Ihlanfeldt and Mayock
 (2010) discuss the drawbacks of using total crimes as a crime risk measure. Using total crime implicitly assigns
 the same weight to all crimes, putting too much weight on low-value crimes. As an alternative to homicide, we
 use willingness-to-pay estimates from Chalfin and McCrary (2017) to construct a unitary measure of homicide-
 equivalents. Homicide risk appears to provide a better signal of what areas are truly dangerous. These estimates
 are much less precise, though they suggest qualitatively similar findings.


                                                        8
give the probability of a homicide per square mile. We use a three-year rolling window to help

smooth out short-term fluctuations. The narrow bandwidth and grid allow for fine distinctions

in crime rates even within neighborhoods. Taking into account the total number of homicides

in the city, Htc , our measure of homicide risk at property i in neighborhood j in year t is then

given by:

                           (Linear) Homicide Risk : hijt = E(hijt ) = pijt Htc                               (4)

where pijt is the estimated probability of homicide at property i in year t. This yields the

expected number of homicides per square mile in year t at property i, E(hijt ) = hijt .16

     Figure 3 plots trends in homicide rates per square mile for each of the cities during the study

period. All of the three cities have experienced substantial (>30 percent) declines in homicide

rates up to 2015, although Chicago’s rate shot up in 2016. The declines within cities were not

uniform across space. Examining both panels in Figure 2, it is possible to see that while most

areas in the city became safer, some became more dangerous.

     Each transaction is matched to the measure of homicide risk that corresponds to its precise

location and time. Figure 4 plots the ratio of homicide risk within 1/8 of a mile of the park

to that in the rest of the neighborhood, from 1/8 to 3/8 of a mile. Most neighborhoods have

a density of homicide risk of less than 2 per year per square mile. In these neighborhoods, the

ratio is close to one. In more dangerous neighborhoods, crime risk is slightly higher near parks

when looking at the average across the study period.

     Crime risk changes over the period were distributed rather uniformly across space. Homicide

risk did consolidate slightly in the three cities, though not by much. In the base year, we find

that 80 percent of the homicide risk was located in 12.6 percent of the land area. In the last

year of the sample, that fraction fell to 12.5 percent.



4     Visual Evidence and Functional Form

Below we provide visual evidence of the relationship between parks, crime, and transaction

prices. This evidence guides our choices of functional form of measures defined in section 2.

16
 In Table 5, we consider measures that use the average homicide rate for the entire neighborhood around the
park as well as measures that exclude incidents in or within 1/8 of a mile of the park. Note that the incident
data does not measure crimes within parks, but at a street address on the perimeter of the park, usually at the
closest location to the incident. We also try different weighting schemes to construct our homicide risk measure.
Results are robust to alternative weights.


                                                       9
Visually, we examine prices by proximity to park, homicide risk, and their interaction by plotting

estimates from the following regression equation:

                                                 X
                    Vijt = Pi β P + Hijt β H +        Pik Hijt βkP H + Di β D + γj + ζtc + uijt                (5)
                                                  k


For park proximity, we use Pi , the park-distance bins mentioned above, which distinguish

properties that are typically a block apart. We use the estimates from this model to test for

evidence of a decaying park premium in our sample and also to determine whether properties

farther away from parks can be sensibly combined in a single comparison bin.

       For homicide risk, we examine data grouped by bins of homicides, Hijt . However, inter-

actions between distance bins and homicide risk bins are low in power and impractical for

regression tables. This motivates us to consider a continuous measure of homicide risk. We use

a non-linear (square root) transformation of risk for two reasons. First, the data generating

process for crime can be thought as a continuous Poisson process. Least squares regressions

are best suited to Gaussian processes. Brown et al. (2013) shows that if H follows a Poisson
                                                                 √
distribution with mean λ, then 2 times the square root, H̃ = 2 H, is approximated by a

Gaussian distribution. We normalize this by the mean so the coefficients can be interpreted as
                         √ √
semi-elasticities: H̃ = 2 H( H)−1 . Second, households may experience diminishing returns

to safety. Once residents no longer consider their neighborhood safe, they may limit their time

outdoors such that additional reductions in safety do relatively little damage.17

       The model includes a fixed effect for each neighborhood assigned to a park, γj . These fixed

effects form the basis of the NSD method that helps to control for unobserved factors that vary

between neighborhoods. It is based on the idea that properties a few blocks away from each

other are likely to be close substitutes. Including these fixed effects requires a large number

of observations, which fortunately our data provide. The controls also include 3 sets of time

indicators, ζtc , for each city-by-year combination. This takes into account the fact that cities

may exhibit different housing price cycles. Finally, the controls include dwelling characteristics,

Di , which do not vary over time due to our source.

       Figure 5 plots variation in housing prices at different levels of homicide risk, comparing

homes located within 1/16 of a mile of a park, P1 , to properties 2 to 5/16 miles away, PA . The

horizontal axis uses a square root scale. There are two important features to note. First, at the
17
     Albouy et al. (2016) make a similar argument for extreme temperature based on Zivin and Neidell (2014).


                                                         10
lowest risk levels, transaction prices for homes near parks are roughly 5 percentage points higher

than homes farther away from the same park. Second, this park premium disappears at higher

levels of homicide risk, supporting the hypothesis that the value of parks falls with crime. The

fitted lines come relatively close to the markers, illustrating that a square root transformation

fits the data better than other power transformations. As a result, we focus on the transformed

measure, H̃ijt , throughout the remainder of the analysis.18

     Figure 6 plots distance to park along the horizontal axis using the full 6 bins in Pi . The model

interacts these with the transformed measure of homicide risk. The plot illustrates differences

in the park premium in areas with no homicide risk versus areas with high homicide risk (i.e.

9 annual homicides per square mile). With no risk, the model estimates a park premium that

decays with distance to the park. When risk is high, we see evidence of a park discount that also

decays with distance to the park.19 Furthermore, the effects of proximity to a neighborhood

park disappear after the 2nd distance interval, which justifies our choice to collapse the 3rd,

4th, and 5th bins into a single comparison group, PiA . Figure 1 shows PiA in red for Marquette

Park. This is equivalent to constraining 3rd, 4th, and 5th bins to have the same coefficient, or

using P̃i ≡ [Pi1 , Pi2 , PiA , Pi6 ], where PiA = Pi3 + Pi4 + Pi5 . Transactions in the outer bin, Pi6 ,

behave somewhat differently. In some cases, certain transactions in bin Pi6 are assigned to a

separate park, which raises a selection issue. Rather than include it in our comparison sample,

we separately estimate Pi6 as a nuisance parameter in our models.




18
   We examine the fit of several linear and non-linear homicide measures in Appendix Table A.1. Estimates of the
 complementarity are not much different across these different forms. Point estimates in all specifications decline
 rapidly and are not statistically significant after the first interval when the block-level, time-varying controls
 are added. Appendix Figure A.3 compares the fit of the linear vs square root measures, suggesting that the
 linear measure may underestimate prices at low levels of homicide risk. Appendix Table A.2 compares estimates
 using the linear measure of homicide risk. The linear estimates imply a smaller park premium and a somewhat
 smaller percentage point reduction in prices per additional homicide within 1/16th mile of a park. In the Online
 Appendix C we provide results using the simpler linear measure.
19
   The discount is not strongly significant when we estimate individual effects for each distance bin. We provide
 formal tests with greater statistical power in later sections.


                                                        11
5        Regression Analysis of Park-Safety Complementarity

5.1       Identifying the Park Premium and Park-Safety Complementarity


In this section, we specify our hypotheses and identification strategies using a regression equation

that builds on the NSD method introduced in equation (5):


                      Vijt = P̃i β P + H̃ijt β H + P̃i H̃ijt βkP H + Di β D + Xijt β X
                             X
                           +      P̃ki Xijt βkXP + H̃ijt Xijt β XH + γj + γjT × t + ζtc + uijt   (6)
                               k


This equation uses the abbreviated park-distance bins, P̃i , the (square-root) transformation

of homicide risk, H̃ijt , and introduces time-varying socio-economic controls for race, income,

tenure, unemployment, and population density Xijt , as listed in panel C of Table 1. Importantly,

we include interactions between these and the park and homicide variables. In addition, we

control for neighborhood-specific time trends, γjT × t.

       Formally, the empirical design is centered around two hypotheses. The primary hypothesis
                                                                                        PH .
is that parks and safety are complements. This implies that β1P H < 0 and that βkP H > βk+1

In words, the negative park-crime interaction attenuates with distance from the park. The
                                                                                           P .
secondary hypothesis is that safe parks are goods. This means that β1P > 0 and that βkP ≥ βk+1

At zero homicide risk, the park premium for bin k is given by βkP ; with any positive level of

homicide risk, it becomes βkP + βkP H H̃ijt . If the value of parks can become negative at high
                                                 0 , it becomes β P + β P H H̃
enough levels of crime, then at that threshold H̃ijt             1     1      ijt = 0. This is

the threshold above which park access within a neighborhood does not confer a premium. It

is important to note that through the effects of complementarity, park value can be “unlocked”
                       0 . We later provide empirical estimates of “unlocked” value in high-
both above and below H̃ijt

crime and low-crime neighborhoods in our sample. Neither hypothesis requires estimating the

causal effect of crime on property values outside of the interaction.

       In order to obtain unbiased estimates of the park-crime interaction, β P H , the error term

must be linearly orthogonal to the park-crime interaction, conditional on all of the control

variables, the main effects of park and crime, and their interactions with the controls. To state

this precisely with the interaction terms, let L denote the linear projection20 , and omit obvious

20
     This requires a standard linearity in parameters assumption, as in Wooldridge (2010).


                                                         12
subscripts and tildes to write:


                   L (u|P H, P, H, X, P X, HX, W ) = L (u|P, H, X, P X, HX, W )                           (7)


where W = [D, γj , γjT × t, ζtc ] denotes the control variables not interacted with parks or crime.

This condition allows all of the regressors in equation (6) to have biased coefficient estimates,

except for the park-crime interaction. The interactions of the controls with park proximity, and

separately with crime, help to control for other sources of complementarity or interactions that

may influence property prices.21 For example, as X includes household income, the interactions

control for whether parks are less valuable in areas with poorer residents. Since the socio-

economic variables, X, are potentially endogenous in the sense that they could also be outcomes

of changes in crime, it is important to see estimates that exclude as well as include these

variables. We will show that estimates of β P H and β P are not sensitive to their inclusion.

     For estimates of the park premium, a parallel condition applies:


                             L (u|P, H, X, HX, W ) = L (u|H, X, HX, W )                                   (8)


Homicide risk, socio-econoomic characteristics, their interaction, and the other non-park vari-

ables must absorb any additional variation due to unobserved factors that might bias the park

premium estimate. Bias in β P results from unobservables that are correlated with the price

effects of parks and are orthogonal to homicide risk. For example, unobserved property-level

characteristics could result in differences in the price premium. The identification assumption

for β P is likely to be stronger than for β P H , since the set of unobserved characteristics that are

fixed or otherwise orthogonal to crime is broader than those that vary with local changes in

crime.22

     As we substantiate below, the condition for identifying the park premium may be less de-

manding than a similar condition for the direct effect of crime. This could be due to the fact that

parks are distributed more evenly than homicide risk. Visually, this can be seen by comparing

parks shown in Figure 1 and the homicide measure in Chicago seen in Figure 2. As mentioned

earlier, 80 percent of the homicide risk we measure is concentrated on just 13 percent of land.


21
 In practice, the X variables are demeaned so as not to change the estimated coefficient under this condition.
22
 Technically the condition below must hold, but this includes various interactions with the park premium:
L (u|P, H, P H, X, P X, HX, W ) = L (u|H, P H, X, HX, W ).


                                                     13
       The identifying assumption for β P H is violated by confounds that affect the value of park

proximity within a few blocks and simultaneously vary with homicide risk.23 We distinguish

between three types of omitted variables concerns by decomposing the error term in equation

(5) into: uijt = φijt + µijt . Whereas µijt is idiosyncratic and unrelated to the interaction term

after conditioning on the controls, φijt includes unobservables that are correlated with homicide

risk and affect the park premium:



                                               φijt = υjt + σi + χijt
                                                       (1)        (2)   (3)


(1) υjt includes time-varying unobservables between neighborhoods; (2) σi includes time-invariant,

property-level characteristics, within neighborhoods; (3) χijt includes all other time-varying un-

observables that may produce bias. Accordingly, we report estimates from the core NSD model

and then evaluate their robustness to possible biases. We include neighborhood-specific time

trends and neighborhood-by-year fixed effects to help address between-neighborhood differences

(1). We address time-invariant property characteristics (2) using a true repeat sales estimator,

based on a small sample, and a “matching” repeat-sales estimator based on a larger sample.

We address time-varying unobservables that may operate within neighborhoods (3) using the

socio-economic controls and their interaction. We also consider an IV that uses city-level vari-

ation in crime rates, which identifies the complementarity assuming that city-level fluctuations

are exogenous to the differential changes that occur within a tight perimeter around parks.


5.2       Neighborhood Spatial Differences


Table 2 reports estimates from model (6), with successive levels of controls. We report effects

for the closest 0 to 1/16th distance-to-park interval, β1P , as well as the second, 1 to 2/16ths

mile interval, β2P , since the latter also shows some evidence of a park premium. The reference

category in this specification is the 2 to 5/16ths mile distance interval.

       Column 1 reports estimates from a specification that ignores the interaction between park

access and homicide risk, which the remaining columns include. This coefficient on park prox-

imity, β P , refers to a mean effect across all risk levels. All specifications include neighborhood

fixed effects, city-by-year fixed effects, and observable dwelling characteristics. Specification 3


23
     In Appendix B, we derive the conditions that identify the complementarity β P H and β P .


                                                             14
adds time-varying socioeconomic controls, 4 adds neighborhood time trends, and 5 adds the

socio-economic control interactions.

     Column 1 suggests that homes within roughly one block of parks sell for approximately 3

percentage points more than those farther away. When the interaction is included, the premium,

now for safe parks, rises to roughly 5 percentage points. This relates directly to the main result

in the paper, which is seen in the fourth row: the park premium falls with crime, β P H < 0.

Across specifications, the magnitude is 1.2 to 1.3 percentage points for each increase in the

transformed risk measure. With high enough risk, −β P /β P H ≈ 4.1 (standard error= 1.0), the

park premium becomes zero. De-transforming the risk variable, this corresponds to almost 4

homicides per square mile annually. Failure to account for the park-crime complementarity

would underestimate the premium for safe parks by 35 percent. It is also worth noting that the

interaction is negative for the second park bin, albeit smaller and imprecise. While this estimate

must be tempered by its imprecision, it further supports the hypothesis of complementarity.

     The core estimates are largely stable across columns 2 through 5. As alluded to above,

the main park and park-crime interaction effects change far less than the coefficient on crime.

Moving from column 2 to 3, we see that the latter is roughly halved with the addition of socio-

economic controls, while the interaction term hardly changes and the main park effect falls by

one tenth. Neighborhood time trends added in column 4 further reduce the crime estimate, but

slightly increase the park and park-crime estimates. Column 5, which saturates the model with

the socio-economic interactions, hardly moves the estimates any further. While the time-varying

controls could introduce simultaneity since they are potential outcomes of crime changes, we

find that including them does not affect our main results.

     The estimates in Table 2 may still be subject to omitted variables that vary within neighbor-

hoods. For instance, reductions in local crime could coincide with capital improvements made

in nearby parks. To consider the potential effects of omitted variables on our NSD estimates,

we adopt the method developed by Altonji et al. (2005) and Oster (2017).24 In particular,

Oster (2017) introduces the coefficient of proportionality, δ. This statistic captures the effect of

additional control variables on the coefficient of multiple correlation, R2 . If the main estimates

are not sensitive to including observed variables that explain variance in the outcome, then the

logic is that they are unlikely to be sensitive to remaining unobserved variables. δ ≥ 1 indicates

24
 These estimates also rely upon the functional form that we have defined for the amenity value of parks as a
function of distance.


                                                    15
that unobserved variables would need to be stronger confounders than the controls we consider

in order to drive our estimate to zero.

      The tests proposed in Oster (2017) depend on an assumption about the maximum possible

R-squared that could be achieved in a model that accounts for the remaining unobservables,

Rmax . It is unlikely that Rmax = 1 in our model, since our housing price data contain a great

deal of variance that is not related to with the underlying value of neighborhood amenities. Oster

suggests as a rule of thumb using Rmax = 1.3R̃2 , where R̃2 is the R-squared from the model

with a full set of controls.25 This rule may be too demanding given that housing transaction

data may have considerable noise and idiosyncrasies.

      In Table 3, we report δ for a range of values for Rmax using all of the control variables

introduced in columns 2 to 5. We find that the δ values for the park-crime interaction are at

least 8 times higher than the main effect of crime. In other words, the former is only one-eighth

as sensitive to additional controls as the latter. The values of δ that correspond to main effect

of parks are nearly as high as the interaction. In absolute magnitude, the interaction coefficient

meets the condition δ > 1 even for the highest value of Rmax = 1.3, while that for parks

is right at the cusp. Indeed, this criterion is demanding: Oster (2017) finds that 55 percent

of non-experimental findings published in top journals would not meet it. Nevertheless, the

overall robustness of both the main park and park-crime interaction suggests that the spatial

differencing method is quite effective at controlling for unobservables related to parks, if not for

crime (Druckenmiller and Hsiang, 2018).


5.3     Robustness Checks over Space and Time


Table 4 reports estimates with even more flexible controls for neighborhood differences over

time. Column 1 replicates column 5 from above, which includes 1,336 neighborhood-specific

time trends. Column 2 allows for time trends to differ for properties near parks versus farther

away. This can account for differing trends in park premia over local booms and busts. Column

3 introduces neighborhood-by-year fixed effects, controlling flexibly for time-varying differences

between neighborhoods. Neither of these specifications weakens the park-crime interaction.

      The checks in Table 5 use measures of homicide risk averaged across the entire neighborhood

25
 The rule-of-thumb Rmax = 1.3R̃2 is derived form her analysis on 65 results from published papers. The 1.3
cutoff is a value that allows 90 percent of the experimental results examined to ‘survive’, meaning that the
unobservables explain less of the variation in the outcome than the observables.


                                                    16
or over the entire sample period. The final measure excludes crime incidents that occur within

1/8 mile of parks. Not surprisingly, the longer time-average in column 2 produces slightly larger

interaction effects. This could result from smoothing annual variation in homicides.

      With the neighborhood-level measure, the estimates exclude variation in homicide risk across

properties within neighborhoods. The coefficient on the park-crime interaction in column 3 is

smaller than in 1, likely reflecting attenuation from increased measurement error, but is not

significantly different from those reported in Table 2. The measure in column 4 uses only time-

invariant variation in homicide rates between neighborhoods. Thus, it cannot estimate the main

effect of homicides while including neighborhood fixed effects. In contrast, the repeat-sales

estimator below relies exclusively on time variation and therefore cannot estimate the time-

invariant effect of park proximity. The result in column 5 is about as strong as the estimate in

column 3, suggesting that the estimates are not driven by homicides occurring within parks.


5.4     Repeat-Sales Estimators


One concern with the estimates above is that properties in high-crime areas could possess

unobserved characteristics that differ from those farther away. For instance, houses near safe

parks may have larger windows, while those in dangerous areas may not. If so, then the

estimates in Table 2 could be confounded by complementarities between parks and certain

housing characteristics. To address the effects of unobserved fixed property characteristics (σi ),

Table 6 compares the estimate in column 3 from Table 2 with specifications that rely upon

repeat-sales estimation within the NSD framework.

      Column 2 reports estimates from a repeat-sales-as-matching estimator developed by McMillen

(2012). It generates a counterfactual by matching home sales in the first year of the sample

to properties in each subsequent year.26 However, the interaction effect remains significant at

almost the same magnitude, though less precisely estimated.

      Column 3 provides estimates from a standard repeat-sales model that uses a much smaller

sample (about one quarter) of properties that sell more than once during the study period.

These estimates rely completely on time variation in prices, such that the value of park prox-

imity cannot be estimated. In contrast to the estimates from the matched model, the main

26
 Samples for the repeat-sales-as-a-matching estimator and the true repeat sales were constructed using the
McSpatial R package (McMillen, 2013). Park proximity is an observed characteristic and used as a control, but
because the sample is properly balanced, it is not significant. So that coefficient drops out of this model.


                                                     17
estimated effect of homicide risk is closer to zero, possibly due to reduced variation in the sub-

sample. Despite this reduction in variation, the park-crime interaction effect remains precise

and significant.27


5.5     City-Level Crime Instrument


A remaining concern regarding the estimates reported in Tables 2 and 6 is that neighborhood-

level dynamics may cause the park premium to rise as crime falls, for reasons that the controls

do not account for. For instance, nearby public housing demolitions could act as a confounding

variable by lowering local crime while improving the view of park-side properties.28

      To address this, we develop an IV strategy that uses changes in crime at the city-year level

to estimate effects on the park-safety complementarity within neighborhoods. This IV predicts

local crime levels using changes in the crime rate at the city level, allocating those changes in

proportion to the share of crimes observed at the beginning of the sample. It is similar to the

shift-share IV estimator developed by Bradbury et al. (1982) and Bartik (1991) for non-crime

measures, and examined by Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2018) and Borusyak et al. (2018). The

city-year changes that motivate this instrument are seen in Figure 3. Much of the variation

in local homicide risk can be attributed to declines in aggregate homicide rates in these cities.

Indeed, Pope and Pope (2012) argue that much of the variation in city-level homicide in the U.S.

is explained by aggregate shifts occurring across the country rather than by local socio-economic

changes.

      We define the instrument formally by denoting the total annual homicides in a city in year

t as Htc . Altering slightly our previous notation, we define pij0 as the probability of a homicide

in property i in neighborhood j in the base year 0. Thus, the predicted expected number of

homicides at each location i is
                                                IV          c
                                               Hijt = pij0 H−jt                                              (9)

To calculate the base probabilities, we use the first two years of the sample, which excludes

them from the regression analysis.29 To avoid any mechanical upward bias in the instrument,
             c
the measure H−jt omits homicides occurring in the same neighborhood j.
27
   If homeowners expect additional changes in crime, then our estimates may be biased as shown by Bishop and
 Murphy (2015). However, recent crime trends appear to deviate from historical trends in the last few years. This
 makes it difficult to construct a forecast that would credibly match expectations of homebuyers.
28
   See Aliprantis and Hartley (2015) and Diamond and McQuade (2019) for related literature.
29
   We use homicide data for 2001-2002 for Chicago, and 2006-2007 for NYC and Philadelphia as our base period.


                                                       18
     Using two-stage least squares (2SLS), estimate (6), without interactions, treating H̃ijt and

P̃i H̃ijt for k = 1, 2 as endogenous. To do so, we use a three-equation first stage where the

projected homicide risk instrument and its interactions with the park indicators enter as separate

instruments.


        Hijt = P̃i π0P + Hijt
                          iv H          IV P H
                              π0 + P̃i Hijt π0 + Di π0D + Xijt π0X + γj0 + ζt0
                                                                            c
                                                                               + eijt0                   (10a)

        P1 Hijt = P̃i π1P + Hijt
                             iv H          IV P H
                                 π1 + P̃i Hijt π1 + Di π1D + Xijt π1X + γj1 + ζt0
                                                                               c
                                                                                  + eijt1                (10b)

        P2 Hijt = P̃i π2P + Hijt
                             iv H          IV P H
                                 π2 + P̃i Hijt π2 + Di π2D + Xijt π2X + γj2 + ζt2
                                                                               c
                                                                                  + eijt2                 (10c)



Using a three-equation first stage accounts for possible correlations between Ĥijt and P̃k Hijt −
V           V                                            V




P̃k Hijt , or P̃k Hijt and Hijt − Ĥijt , and P̃k Hijt − P̃k Hijt (Angrist and Pischke, 2008).

     In this NSD+IV framework (“Neighborhood Spatial Differencing with Instrumental Vari-

ables”), changes in property-level crime are instrumented by city-level variation while also con-

ditioning on neighborhood fixed effects and time trends. The exclusion restriction in this model
                    IV u |.) = 0, where “|.” denotes conditional on the control variables.30
requires that E(Pi Hijt ijt

By conditioning on neighborhood fixed effects and time trends, the NSD+IV framework miti-

gates concerns about the endogeneity of initial crime shares (Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2018,

Borusyak et al., 2018). In identifying the park-crime complementarity, the IV strategy differs

from other shift-share approaches by relying on the effects of city-level (i.e., market-level) shifts

on within-neighborhood differences.

     Table 7 reports the results of an uninteracted model in column 1 and the interacted model in

columns 2-4.31 Consistent with the trends illustrated in Figure 3, the first stage results of the IV

regression in Table 7 indicate that city-level changes in homicide risk predict local changes quite

well. For every unit increase in annual homicides at the city level, we find a corresponding 0.45

increase at the neighborhood level. Under simplifying assumptions, this implies that roughly

45 percent of local homicide variation is driven by city-wide trends.

     Table 8 provides estimates from five specifications of the NSD+IV model. The NSD+IV

estimates for the safe park premium and the interaction are both similar to corresponding spec-


30
   See Appendix B for a more detailed exposition of the exclusion restriction in the NSD+IV model. The standard
                                                       IV
 relevance condition is also required: E(Pi Hijt , Pi Hijt |.) 6= 0.
31
   Column 1 reports the results of an uninteracted model, in that case there is only one endogenous variable and
 the first stage is reduced to equation (10a).


                                                       19
ifications from the NSD model without instruments in Tables 2 and 4, adding various time

controls. In fact, Wu-Hausman tests fail to reject differences between comparable specifications

of the NSD and IV+NSD models in all five specifications. The IV estimate for the complemen-

tarity is larger and less precise when parks and time trends are interacted. While the identifying

variation in the IV has its limits, overall the estimates are stable in specification 2, 3, and 5. The

park-crime complementarity is slightly larger, while the main effect of (safe) parks is slightly

smaller. Combining the two, the homicide level at which the park premium reaches zero here

at −β P /β P H ≈ 3.7 (s.e.= 0.8), implying roughly 2.3 homicides per square mile.


5.6     Additional Checks and Mechanisms


The exclusion restriction in our NSD+IV model is not directly testable. It would be violated

if the instrument is correlated with changes in other public goods near parks. We examine

the relationships between the instrument and block-level unemployment rates in Table B.1 and

zip-level restaurant establishments in Table B.3. These tests indicate that the instrument is not

correlated with these outcomes.

      The results in Table B.2 indicate that city-level changes in crime do not predict different

effects on within-neighborhood changes in crime near versus far from parks. This finding rein-

forces our interpretation of our IV estimates as capturing the price effects of safety changes near

parks as opposed to changes in relative safety near parks. In Table B.4, we test the robustness

of our IV estimates to lags in the initial shares of homicide risk by omitting the first 5 years

of housing transactions in each city.32 Our estimates become slightly larger, likely as a result

of the sampling restriction, but are not significantly different from the estimates using the full

sample of data. Changes in expenditures on new equipment or community programs could

occur simultaneously with reductions in crime and confound estimates of the complementarity.

Estimates reported in Appendix Table A.4 indicate that estimates for the park premium and

the complementarity are robust to controls for changes in annual public expenditures on parks

across three regions delineated by the Chicago Parks Department.33

      We also implement checks that are related to park use. Most parks are frequented less and

32
   This tests the sensitivity of our estimates to assumptions about the within-neighborhood distribution of initial
 homicide risk.
33
   Data come from publicly available annual budget appropriations documentation for the City of Chicago: https:
 //www.chicagoparkdistrict.com/about-us/departments/budget-and-management. They are available for parks
 in north, central and south regions of the City during the years 2011-2017.


                                                        20
often closed at night, potentially magnifying the effect of the complementarity with daytime

crime. Estimates presented in Appendix Table A.5 show that park-crime interaction when using

daytime crime is slightly stronger in the NSD+IV specification.34 We also examine heterogene-

ity in effects across different sized parks by dividing parks into quartiles of size.35 The estimates

illustrated in Appendix Figure A.4 indicate that effects of the proximity and the complementar-

ity are greater for large parks. In fact, the park premium for small parks is insignificant, albeit

imprecise.36



6      Endowment Heterogeneity, Preferences, and Selection

6.1     Disentangling Complementarities from Taste Heterogeneity


The findings reported above indicate that differences in public good endowments may change

how households value complementary public goods. These endowments are often correlated

with household characteristics. In that case, valuation models could mistake heterogeneity in

the effects of public good endowments for differences in household tastes. Indeed, researchers

have modeled differences in preferences across demographic groups extensively, e.g., Bayer et al.

(2007). In the current setting, researchers could infer that residents in high-crime neighborhoods

have weaker tastes for parks, when lack of safety may better explain this difference.37

      The results presented in Table 9 explore whether the park premium varies by neighborhood

demographic composition. These regressions interact the park premium with share of residents

that are either African American or Latino. We then consider how robust these results are to

including park-crime complementarity. Without the complementarity, the results in column 1

suggest little to no park premium in majority African-American neighborhoods. However, when

the complementarity is included in column 2, the difference becomes statistically insignificant.

34
   Estimates are not different in the regular NSD model.
35
   Presumably, larger parks are more valuable. Thus, both the park premium and the interaction should be
 stronger around larger parks. In Chicago, parks in the fourth quartile (above 75th percentile) have a minimum
 size of 4.83 acres, in New York 4.18 acres, and 10.88 acres in Philadelphia.
36
   We implement two additional robustness tests to evaluate the effects of anomalies in our sample and crime
 variable as a robustness check. Appendix Table A.3 shows that results remain unchanged when we drop 2016 to
 exclude the spike in homicides in Chicago in that year. Appendix Table A.4 reports estimates using the measure
 of homicide equivalent risk that includes all crime types, weighted by existing estimates of WTP from (Chalfin
 and McCrary, 2017). Effects are less precisely estimated in this model and possibly affected by attenuation bias
 from misreporting of minor crimes, though the magnitudes cannot be ruled out using the confidence intervals
 around our main estimates.
37
   Other factors, such as housing market discrimination Christensen and Timmins (2018), can also contribute to
 differences in the hedonic estimates for local amenities such as parks.


                                                       21
A similar pattern emerges for Latino neighborhoods in columns 3 and 4. All interactions are

included in column 5, which replicates the same column in Table 2.

      These results suggest a caution. Heterogeneity that could easily result in inferences about

differences in tastes could alternately stem from complementary endowments.38


6.2     Household Selection and Welfare Effects


Improvements in neighborhood safety may influence house prices not just by offering greater

direct benefits, but also by affecting the composition of the neighborhood. For example, as

safety improves, more affluent households may locate near urban parks. So could households

with stronger tastes for open space.

      Banzhaf (2018) illustrates that if the types of people buying homes change, then hedonic

estimates provide the exact willingness to pay for amenities only under a restrictive set of

assumptions. When private endowments and preferences of buyers are related to changes in

amenities, Banzhaf establishes that hedonic estimates identify a lower bound on the Hicksian

equivalent surplus associated with the amenity improvement.39

      In order to examine changes in neighborhood composition, we examine the socio-economic

characteristics used before as controls. This involves estimating an equation similar to those in

prior sections:


                          Xbjt = P̃i β P + Hbjt β H + P̃i Hbjt β P H + γj + ζtc + ubjt                         (11)


where Xbjt measures the socio-economic characteristic for block (or block group) b, in neigh-

borhood j in year t. The right-hand-side terms are those described in equation (6).40

      Table 10 reports the results of this exercise. As there are eight different characteristics, the

significance of each variable must be adjusted for multiple hypotheses tests. Thus, in addition

38
   Economists have long asserted that researchers should, in principle, not look to differences in tastes to explain
 behavior (Stigler and Becker, 1977, Silberberg and Suen, 2000). Indeed, tastes are difficult to measure, and
 (behaviorist) choice models are not suited for providing testable predictions along taste lines.
39
   We note that despite the fact that illustrations in Banzhaf (2018) make use of a difference-in-difference setup,
 this main result generalizes across a large class of empirical models that satisfy a conditional independence
 assumption. In this class, exogeneous changes in an amenity are identified could be simultaneous with changes
 in buyer characteristics.
40
   Our measures of demographic characteristics are annualized by interpolating the matched census blocks and
 block groups from the 2000, 2010 census, and the 2011-15 ACS. Population and population-by-race are obtained
 at the block level whereas median income and median age at the block group level, which is the finest geography
 that they are available.


                                                        22
to standard single-hypothesis p-values, the table reports p-values that control for rates of false

discovery (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). In this case, the standard NSD estimates suggest

no significant change in local household characteristics. This suggests that most of the benefits

of the park-safety complementarity accrue to households who resemble prior local buyers.

     In the IV specification, two significant park-crime results do emerge. A one-unit decrease in

homicide risk is associated with a 0.7 percentage point increase in the share of White households

living near parks. We observe a similar decrease in the African-American share. Taking into

account the main effect, a one-point decrease in risk raises the percentage of White households

by 10.7 points.41

     Given these magnitudes and the IV estimates from Table 8, we can calculate changes in

willingness-to-pay even in the most extreme case where African American households place zero

value on parks regardless of homicide risk. These calculations indicate that increases in the

white share could account for up to about one eighth of the estimates of the park premium

and the park-safety complementarity.42 We note that this calculation reflects an upper bound

that assumes extreme differences in group-specific valuation, which are not supported by the

empirical evidence reported in the prior section. The estimates in Table 9 do not find evidence

of differences in the premium for safe parks in neighborhoods with greater shares of African

Americans.

     We cannot rule out change in willingness-to-pay that results from unobserved changes in

buyer preferences and therefore interpret our estimates as a lower bound welfare measure.

However, we find that observed changes in neighborhood composition are either statistically

insignificant or economically small.




41
   This estimate conservatively assumes that all changes in the demographic composition recorded by the Cen-
 sus/ACS are homeowners/buyers.
42
   This calculation treats the estimated park premium as a population-weighted average of the valuations of three
 groups: (non-Latino) whites, African Americans, and everyone else: β P = βw       P 0
                                                                                    sw + βbP s0b + 1 − s0w − s0b β P ,
                                                                                                                

 and that other groups (i.e. Asians and Latinos) exhibit the average willingness-to pay. Population shares from
 the Census and reported in Table 1 indicate that sw                    b
                                                       0 = 0.56 and s0 = 0.14. As an extreme example, we let
 African Americans place no value on parks βb = 0 or no value on homicide reductions near parks βbP H = 0. In
                                                P

 this scenario, white households must value parks 25 percent more than the estimated average to balance each
 term. This yields the following calculations for the willingness-to-pay of white buyers for park proximity and the
                            P     s0 +s0                                       s0 +s0
 park-crime interaction: βw    = ws0 b β P = (1.25)(0.048) = 0.06 or βw PH
                                                                             = ws0 b β P H = (1.25)(0.015) = 0.019.
                                     w                                            w
 A 10.7 percent increase in white households would lower the observed willingness-to-pay by a maximum of (-
 0.107)(0.06)=-0.006 for β P or (-0.107)(0.019)=-0.002 for β P H = 0.


                                                         23
7      Valuing Park Proximity with Complementarity

Accounting for complementarity can change estimates of the aggregate benefits of public goods,

and even more dramatically, how those benefits are distributed. We stress that these estimates

only capture the value of park proximity for nearby residents.


7.1     Implications of Complementarities for Valuation and Unlocking Value


To calculate the implied value of park proximity in our 3 cities, we apply the estimates from

columns 5 and 6 of Table 8 to all of the housing units reported in the Census.43 The calculations

take median property values at the census block group level from the 2015 ACS, which provides

a conservative estimate.44 We examine heterogeneity across three income groups. The estimates

in panel A of Table 11 ignore the park-crime complementarity, while those in panel B include

it.

      The results in panel A indicate that the aggregate value of park proximity is just over $9

billion. Most of the value is realized in New York, as it has more, higher-valued homes. The

estimates that account for the complementarity in panel B indicate a value of just under $11

billion. This number is greater because safer neighborhoods have more valuable properties and

because the greater park premium is multiplied by those values.

      The value of parks in high-crime neighborhoods is estimated to be positive when comple-

mentarity is ignored, but negative when complementarity is considered. Thus, the value of

public capital is lower in these areas. This has a distributional implication, since the results in

Table 11 indicate that the same is largely true for low-income neighborhoods.

      Estimates in panel C report the total potential value of park proximity if the homicide

risk near parks was reduced to zero. This does not imply eradication of crime altogether, since

crime reduction near parks could be achieved through targeted safety programs or displacement.

Panel D reports the difference with panel B. If park areas were made safe, formerly high-crime

areas would receive over $2.5 billion in park-proximity value. The net gain, starting from a park

discount almost as large, would be just under $5 billion. In low-income neighborhoods, the gain

43
   Appendix Table A.6 provides separate estimates for each of the cities in our sample. F-tests suggest no difference
 in the estimates across cities.
44
   We calculate the area of the block group that is within 1/16 miles of a park to compute the proportion of
 housing units in each census block group affected by the premium.


                                                         24
would be roughly as large, at just over $5.3 billion.

       Low-crime and high-income neighborhoods would also see large improvements. This results

not only from the higher property values, but also from the estimated functional form, which

implies an increasing return to safety near parks. In total, these calculations suggest that there

is more than $10.5 billion of value in park proximity that could be unlocked. This is roughly

equal to the current realized value. Half of this value is “locked in” high-crime or low-income

neighborhoods.

       To put these numbers in context, the operating and capital expenditures on these parks were

$0.5 billion, $1.7 billion, and $0.1 billion, in Chicago, New York, and Philadelphia, respectively.

Total expenditures were $2.3 billion across the cities.45 Capitalizing these values using a discount

rate of 4 percent (a typical mortgage rate) results in a net present value of $58 billion. The

realized value of simply living within one block of a park, as opposed to four, is about one-sixth

of this value. The potential value is one-third. Thus, a policy that moves all crime just a few

blocks away from parks could be worthwhile if it costs less than an additional sixth of current

park budgets.

       A second implication of the estimates results from the fact that a considerable amount of

park value has already been unlocked through the reductions in crime observed across the period

of our sample. Table 12 reports these values, separating neighborhoods that became safer from

those that became more dangerous. Our results show that about half of current park-proximity

value was unlocked during this period. This occurred primarily in New York and Chicago.



8        Conclusion

This study presents possibly the strongest evidence to date on the complementarity between

two public goods: urban parks and public safety. Across a wide array of neighborhoods, home-

buyers pay more to live near parks when they become safe. This phenomenon is illustrated

by comparing homes within the same neighborhood and is robust across a range of empirical

models that control for potential neighborhood-level confounds.

       Our main findings also imply that while safe parks are public goods, unsafe ones can become

public bads. In fact, lack of safety appears to have locked up much of the value of existing urban

45
     These numbers do not include the opportunity cost of the land for alternative development.


                                                         25
parks. This finding is important for policy makers and environmental justice advocates. Based

on principles of categorical equity, some might endorse providing equal access to open space

in safe and unsafe areas alike. Yet, to those in unsafe areas, such access may provide little

benefit. On the other hand, the present estimates imply that the value of reducing crime varies

substantially, even within local communities. Targeted investments in public safety through park

design, “hot spot policing,”“safe passage” programs, or other methods could unlock considerable

value simply by displacing crime. While on average such displacement appears to be beneficial,

it could risk affecting other public good complementarities that are not examined in this study.

Further research on complementarity and other settings is certainly warranted.

   The results on the main effect of crime independent of park proximity are far less conclusive

and are peripheral to our thesis. However, our findings do point to several directions for further

research. First, the value of other forms of public capital, such as public transit, may be similarly

reduced by crime. Second, the finding that crime exhibits diminishing marginal costs deserves

further attention, as they imply that concentrating crime geographically may be Kaldor-Hicks

efficient. Third, there may be conditions under which parks contribute to or detract from the

production of crime. Unsafe areas may benefit more from additional “eyes on the street” from

residents inside nearby buildings or targeted safety programs (Jacobs, 1961, McMillen et al.,

2019). Open spaces may reduce such protections, particularly at night.




                                                 26
References

Albouy, D., Graf, W., Kellogg, R., and Wolff, H. (2016). Climate amenities, climate change,
  and american quality of life. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
  Economists, 3(1):205–246.

Albouy, D. and Lue, B. (2015). Driving to opportunity: Local rents, wages, commuting, and
  sub-metropolitan quality of life. Journal of Urban Economics, 89:74–92.

Aliprantis, D. and Hartley, D. (2015). Blowing it up and knocking it down: The local and city-
  wide effects of demolishing high concentration public housing on crime. Journal of Urban
  Economics, 88(1):67–18.

Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E., and Taber, C. R. (2005). Selection on observed and unobserved vari-
  ables: Assessing the effectiveness of catholic schools. Journal of political economy, 113(1):151–
  184.

Anderson, S. T. and West, S. E. (2006). Open space, residential property values, and spatial
 context. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 36(6):773–789.

Angrist, J. D. and Pischke, J.-S. (2008). Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist’s com-
 panion. Princeton university press.

Banzhaf, H. S. (2018). Difference-in-differences Hedonics. Working Paper. Mimeo, Georgia
  State.

Banzhaf, H. S. and Walsh, R. P. (2008). Do people vote with their feet? an empirical test of
  tiebout. American Economic Review, 98(3):843–63.

Banzhaf, S., Ma, L., and Timmins, C. (2018). Environmental Justice: The Economics of Race,
  Place and Pollution. Working Paper.

Bartik, T. J. (1991). Who benefits from state and local economic development policies? WE
  Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Bartik, T. J. and Smith, V. K. (1987). Urban amenities and public policy. In Mills, E. S.,
  editor, Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, volume 2, chapter 31, pages 1207–1254.
  Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Baum-Snow, N. and Hartley, D. (2017). Accounting for central neighborhood change. Technical
  report, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Bayer, P., Ferreira, F., and McMillan, R. (2007). A unified framework for measuring preferences
  for schools and neighborhoods. Journal of Political Economy, 115(4):588–638.

Benjamini, Y. and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and
  powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
  (Methodological), 57(1):289–300.

Bishop, K. C. and Murphy, A. D. (2015). Valuing time-varying attributes using the hedonic
  model: When is a dynamic approach necessary? Review of Economics and Statistics, 0(0).

Borusyak, K., Hull, P., and Jaravel, X. (2018). Quasi-experimental shift-share research designs.
  Working Paper 24997, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bowes, D. R. and Ihlanfeldt, K. R. (2001). Identifying the impacts of rail transit stations on
  residential property values. Journal of Urban Economics, 50(1):1–25.

                                                27
Bradbury, K. L., Downs, A., and Small, K. A. (1982). Urban Decline and the Future of American
  Cities. Brookings Institution.
Brander, L. M. and Koetse, M. J. (2011). The value of urban open space: Meta-analyses of
  contingent valuation and hedonic pricing results. Journal of Environmental Management,
  92(10):2763–2773.
Brown, L. D., Greenshtein, E., and Ritov, Y. (2013). The poisson compound decision problem
  revisited. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 108(502):741–749.
Chalfin, A. and McCrary, J. (2017). Are u.s. cities underpoliced? theory and evidence. The
  Review of Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.
Chay, K. Y. and Greenstone, M. (2005). Does air quality matter? evidence from the housing
  market. Journal of political Economy, 113(2):376–424.
Christensen, P. and Timmins, C. (2018). Sorting or Steering: Experimental Evidence on the
  Economic Effects of Housing Discrimination.
Connolly, M. (2008). Here comes the rain again: Weather and the intertemporal substitution
  of leisure. Journal of Labor Economics, 26(1):73–100.
Couture, V. and Handbury, J. (2017). Urban revival in america, 2000 to 2010. Working Paper
  24084, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cuffe, H. E. (2017). Rain and museum attendance: Are daily data fine enough? Journal of
  Cultural Economics, 41:1–29.
Currie, J., Davis, L., Greenstone, M., and Walker, R. (2015). Environmental health risks and
  housing values: Evidence from 1,600 toxic plant openings and closings. American Economic
  Review, 105(2):678–709.
Davis, L. W. (2004). The effect of health risk on housing values: Evidence from a cancer cluster.
  The American Economic Review, 94(5):1693–1704.
Di Tella, R. and Schargrodsky, E. (2004). Do police reduce crime? Estimates using the allocation
  of police forces after a terrorist attack. The American Economic Review, 94(1):115–133.
Diamond, R. and McQuade, T. (2019). Who wants affordable housing in their backyard? an
  equilibrium analysis of low income property development. Journal of Political Economy.
Donohue, J., Ho, D., and Leahy, P. (2013). Do police reduce crime? Empirical Legal Analysis:
 Assessing the Performance of Legal Institutions, page 125.
Draca, M., Machin, S., and Witt, R. (2011). Panic on the streets of London: Police, crime, and
  the july 2005 terror attacks. The American Economic Review, 101(5):2157–2181.
Druckenmiller, H. and Hsiang, S. (2018). Accounting for unobservable heterogeneity in cross
  section using spatial first differences.
Ekeland, I., Heckman, J., and Nesheim, L. (2004). Identification and estimation of hedonic
  models. Journal of Political Economy, 112(S1):1.
Espey, M., Owusu-Edusei, K., et al. (2001). Neighborhood parks and residential property values
  in greenville, south carolina. Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics, 33(3):487–492.
Gamper-Rabindran, S. and Timmins, C. (2013). Does cleanup of hazardous waste sites raise
 housing values? evidence of spatially localized benefits. Journal of Environmental Economics
 and Management, 65(3):345–360.

                                               28
Gibbons, S. (2004). The costs of urban property crime. The Economic Journal, 114(499).

Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., Sorkin, I., and Swift, H. (2018). Bartik instruments: What, when,
 why, and how. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Graff Zivin, J. and Neidell, M. (2014). Temperature and the allocation of time: Implications
  for climate change. Journal of Labor Economics, 32(1):1–26.

Ihlanfeldt, K. and Mayock, T. (2010). Panel data estimates of the effects of different types of
  crime on housing prices. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 40(2-3):161–172.

Ito, K. and Zhang, S. (2016). Willingness to pay for clean air: Evidence from air purifier markets
   in china. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jacobs, J. (1961). The Death and Life of American Cities. Random House, New York.

Keiser, D. A. and Shapiro, J. S. (2017). Consequences of the clean water act and the demand
  for water quality. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kleibergen, F. and Paap, R. (2006). Generalized reduced rank tests using the singular value
  decomposition. Journal of econometrics, 133(1):97–126.

Kuminoff, N. V., Smith, V. K., and Timmins, C. (2013). The New Economics of Equilibrium
 Sorting and Policy Evaluation Using Housing Markets. Journal of Economic Literature,
 51(4):1007–62.

Linden, L. and Rockoff, J. E. (2008). Estimates of the impact of crime risk on property values
  from megan’s laws. American Economic Review, 98(3):1103–1127.

McMillen, D. (2013). McSpatial: Nonparametric spatial data analysis. R package version 2.0.

McMillen, D., Sarmiento-Barbieri, I., and Singh, R. (2019). Do more eyes on the street reduce
 crime? evidence from chicago’s safe passage program. Journal of Urban Economics.

McMillen, D. P. (2012).     Repeat sales as a matching estimator.       Real Estate Economics,
 40(4):745–773.

Muehlenbachs, L., Spiller, E., and Timmins, C. (2015). The housing market impacts of shale
 gas development. The American Economic Review, 105(12):3633–3659.

Oster, E. (2017). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence. Journal
  of Business & Economic Statistics, pages 1–18.

Pope, D. G. and Pope, J. C. (2012). Crime and property values: Evidence from the 1990s crime
  drop. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 42(1):177–188.

Silberberg, E. and Suen, W. (2000). The Sturcture of Economics: A Mathematical Analsysi.
   Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 3 edition.

Stigler, G. and Becker, G. S. (1977). De gustibus non est disputandum. American Economic
  Review, 67(2):76–90.

Thaler, R. (1978). A note on the value of crime control: evidence from the property market.
  Journal of Urban Economics, 5(1):137–145.

Troy, A. and Grove, J. M. (2008). Property values, parks, and crime: A hedonic analysis in
  baltimore, md. Landscape and urban planning, 87(3):233–245.



                                               29
Weiss, C. C., Purciel, M., Bader, M., Quinn, J. W., Lovasi, G., Neckerman, K. M., and Rundle,
 A. G. (2011). Reconsidering access: park facilities and neighborhood disamenities in new
 york city. Journal of Urban Health, 88(2):297–310.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT press.

Zillow (2018). ZTRAX Dataset. https://www.zillow.com/research/ztrax/.

Zivin, J. G. and Neidell, M. (2014). Temperature and the allocation of time: Implications for
  climate change. Journal of Labor Economics, 32(1):1–26.




                                             30
9     Tables and Figures



             Table 1. Descriptive Statistics: Housing Transactions and Characteristics

                                                             Chicago      New York       Philadelphia      Sample

    Panel A: Park characteristics and Homicide Risk
    Number of parks                                             571          645              120           1, 336
    Avg park size, square miles                                 0.02         0.05             0.10           0.04
    Avg neighborhood size, square miles                         0.64         0.74             0.92           0.71

    Avg property level homicide risk                             1.65        1.47             1.39           1.55
                                                                (2.31)      (2.07)           (2.15)         (2.19)
    Avg property level transformed homicide risk                 2.06        1.96             1.76            2.0
             √    p      −1
    (H̃it = 2 Hit    (Hit     )                                 (1.66)      (1.54)           (1.68)         (1.60)

    Panel B: Property Transactions
    within 1/16 mile                                         68,346        74,192           6,000          148,538
    from 1/16 to 2/16 miles                                  73,739         80,760          5,461          159,960
    from 2/16 to 6/16 miles                                  170,463       159,680          18,200         348,343

    Avg price within 1/16 mile, $K                               298          985             334            643
                                                                (205)       (1031)           (213)          (818)
    Avg price 1/16 to 2/16 miles, $K                             302          830             272            568
                                                                (198)        (849)           (170)          (673)
    Avg price 2/16 to 6/16 miles, $K                             278          770             248            502
                                                                (181)        (813)           (165)          (618)

    Log distance to CBD, miles                                   2.2         1.3              1.5            2.0
    Age of structure                                              75          76               70             75
    Square footage                                              1, 457      1, 078           1, 442         1, 403
    Number of bedrooms                                           3.0         1.6              2.8            2.8
    Number of bathrooms                                          1.4         1.4              1.4            1.4

    Single Family Residence, percent                             44           20              51              33
    Multifamily, percent                                         56           80              49              67

    Panel C: Socio-Economic Characteristics
    Residents per square mile, thousands                        40.8         92.1             34.7           65.1

    White, percent                                               52           60              62              56
    African American, percent                                    19            8              18              14
    Latino, percent                                              19           13               6              15

    Median resident age                                         34.9         39.5             36.0           37.2
    Median income, $K                                           68.8         91.6             55.3           79.1

    Vacant, fraction                                            0.09         0.11             0.09           0.10
    Renter, fraction                                            0.35         0.42             0.34           0.38
    Unemployed, fraction                                        0.08         0.07             0.08           0.08

     Notes: Sample includes transactions within 3/8 of a mile of a park in Chicago (2001-2016), New York (2006-2016),
    and Philadelphia (2006-2016) from Zillow (2018). White refers to non-Latino white and African American refers to
    non-Latino African American. Neighborhood refers to the 3/8 miles radius around a park. Standard deviations are
    in parentheses.




                                                           31
 Table 2. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                     Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD) Estimates

                                                                              Dependent variable:
                                                                          ln Housing Transaction Price

Estimator                                                            Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                                         (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
Park within 1/16 mile                                0.0320***       0.0546***       0.0488***      0.0515***      0.0500***
                                                      (0.0106)        (0.0143)        (0.0142)       (0.0139)        (0.0155)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile                                    0.0033          0.0165          0.0128         0.0113          0.0135
                                                      (0.0087)        (0.0117)        (0.0112)       (0.0111)        (0.0109)
Homicide Risk                                        -0.0272***      -0.0233***     -0.0115***      -0.0098***     -0.0091***
                                                      (0.0029)        (0.0030)        (0.0028)       (0.0030)        (0.0034)
Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                                       -0.0116***     -0.0119***      -0.0129***      -0.0132**
                                                                      (0.0042)        (0.0041)       (0.0040)        (0.0057)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk                                   -0.0065*         -0.0057        -0.0050         -0.0056
                                                                      (0.0036)        (0.0037)       (0.0036)        (0.0034)

Neighborhood Fixed Effects                               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
City by Year Fixed Effects                               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
Dwelling characteristics                                 Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
Time-var Socio-economic Controls                                                        Yes            Yes             Yes
Neighborhood Time Trends                                                                               Yes             Yes
Park 1/16 × Time-var Socio-economic Controls                                                                           Yes
Hom. × Time-var Socio-economic Controls                                                                                Yes
R2                                                     0.2668          0.2670         0.2844          0.3020         0.3043
Observations                                           656,841        656,841         656,841        656,841         656,841

 Notes: Sample includes transactions within 3/8 of a mile of a park for Chicago (2001-2016), New York (2006-2016), and
Philadelphia (2006-2016) from Zillow (2018). Dependent variable is ln(Housing Transaction Price), Park within 1/16 mile is
an indicator for sales within 1/16 mi. of a park, Park 1 to 2/16 mile is an indicator for sales between 1/16 mi. and 2/16
mi. of a park, Homicides Risk denotes the yearly number of expected homicides per square mile at the Property level. This
                                                               √ p −1
variable is defined using the following transformation: (H̃ = 2 H     (H     ). The reference category in this specification
includes properties between 2 and 6/16ths miles away. Dwelling characteristics include: log distance to the CBD, age of the
dwelling and its square, square footage, number of bedrooms and bathrooms, and dwelling type (i.e. Single, Multi Family
Residence). Specifications also include indicators for dwellings with missing characteristics. Results are robust to restricting
the sample to dwellings with complete data. Socio-economic controls include the following census block and block group
socio-economic variables linearly interpolated yearly from the 2000 and 2010 Censuses, and the 2011-2015 ACS: population
density, proportion of blacks, proportion of latinos, proportion of vacant housing units and of rented units at the block level;
and median age, median income and unemployment rate at the block group level. Neighborhood is defined using a 3/8 mile
radius around a park. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
 * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                               32
Table 3. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                            Robustness to Omitted Variable Bias


                   Rmax                                1.1R̃2    1.2R̃2     1.3R̃2
                   Park within 1/16 mile               2.9477    1.4782     0.9864

                   Homicide Risk                       0.5157    0.2583     0.1723

                   Park 1/16 × Homicide Risk           4.7035    2.3555     1.5711


                   Notes: This table reports the Oster (2017) proportionality coeffi-
                  cient. Coefficients from Table 2 Column (2) are compared with our
                  full set of controls shown in Column (5). R̃2 corresponds to the
                  R-squared from Table 2 Column (5).




                                                  33
Table 4. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                    Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD) Estimates
                                  Robustness to Trends

                                                                Dependent variable:
                                                            ln Housing Transaction Price

         Estimator                                    Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                                          (1)             (2)             (3)
         Park within 1/16 mile                         0.0515***                       0.0522***
                                                        (0.0139)                        (0.0138)
         Park 1 to 2/16 mile                              0.0113                          0.0097
                                                        (0.0111)                        (0.0112)
         Homicide Risk                                -0.0098***      -0.0079***      -0.0158***
                                                        (0.0030)       (0.0029)         (0.0041)
         Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk               -0.0129***      -0.0144***      -0.0131***
                                                        (0.0040)       (0.0054)         (0.0041)
         Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk             -0.0050        -0.0047          -0.0048
                                                        (0.0036)       (0.0033)         (0.0037)

         Neighborhood Fixed Effects                       Yes             Yes             Yes
         City by Year Fixed Effects                       Yes             Yes             Yes
         Dwelling Characteristics                         Yes             Yes             Yes
         Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                 Yes             Yes             Yes
         Neighborhood Time Trends                         Yes
         Near-Far-Park Time Trends                                        Yes
         Neighborhood by Year Fixed Effects                                               Yes
         Observations                                  656,841         656,841          656,841

          Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, which includes transac-
         tions within 3/8 of a mile of a park for Chicago (2001-2016), New York (2006-2016), and
         Philadelphia (2006-2016) from Zillow (2018). Neighborhood is defined using a 3/8 miles ra-
         dius around a park. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
          * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                     34
                         Table 5. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                                             Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD) Estimates
                           Property versus Neighborhood Level Homicide Risk, Time-Varying and Fixed Averages

                                                                               Dependent variable: ln Housing Transaction Price

                                                                                                                                              Neighborhood
     Homicide Risk Level                                Property               Property           Neighborhood          Neighborhood          Excluding Risk
                                                                                                                                             within 1/16 miles
                                                                                                                                                  of Park

     Estimator                                       Neighborhood           Sample Time           Neighborhood           Sample Time          Neighborhood
                                                   Spatial Differences     Average Crime        Spatial Differences     Average Crime       Spatial Differences
                                                           (1)                  (2)                     (3)                  (4)                    (5)
     Park within 1/16 mile                               0.0488***             0.0590***             0.0472***             0.0630***             0.0473***
                                                          (0.0142)              (0.0174)              (0.0166)              (0.0202)               (0.0167)
     Park within 2/16 mile                                  0.0128               0.0196                 0.0087               0.0212                 0.0090




35
                                                          (0.0112)              (0.0141)              (0.0126)              (0.0152)               (0.0125)
     Homicide Risk                                      -0.0115***            -0.0281***            -0.0137***                                   -0.0145***
                                                          (0.0028)              (0.0078)              (0.0032)                                     (0.0033)
     Park within 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk              -0.0119***            -0.0185***             -0.0087**             -0.0179**              -0.0091**
                                                          (0.0041)              (0.0063)              (0.0044)              (0.0070)               (0.0046)
     Park within 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk                 -0.0057              -0.0095*               -0.0029              -0.0096*                -0.0031
                                                          (0.0037)              (0.0051)              (0.0034)              (0.0055)               (0.0035)

     Neighborhood Fixed Effects                            Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
     City by Year Fixed Effects                            Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
     Dwelling Characteristics                              Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
     Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                      Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
     Observations                                        656,841               656,841                656,841               656,841               656,841

     Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, which includes transactions within 3/8 of a mile of a park for Chicago (2001-2016), New
     York (2006-2016), and Philadelphia (2006-2016) from Zillow (2018). Columns vary in the level of Homicide Risk we use, as described at the top of each column.
     Neighborhood is defined using a 3/8 miles radius around a park. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
     * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.
             Table 6. Price Effects of the Complementarity between
                      Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                         NSD + Repeat Sales Estimates

                                                             Dependent variable:
                                                         ln Housing Transaction Price

Estimator                                       Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                                                 NSD +            NSD +
                                                   NSD          Matching           True
                                                               Repeat Sales     Repeat Sales
                                                   (1)              (2)              (3)

Park within 1/16 mile                          0.0488***
                                                (0.0142)
Park 1 to 2/16 miles                              0.0128
                                                (0.0112)
Homicide Risk                                 -0.0115***        −0.0143∗∗∗      −0.0024∗∗
                                                (0.0028)         (0.0028)        (0.0010)
Park within 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk         -0.0119***         −0.0109∗       −0.0056∗∗∗
                                                (0.0041)         (0.0056)        (0.0019)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk              -0.0057         −0.0050         −0.0015
                                                (0.0037)         (0.0037)        (0.0027)
Neighborhood Fixed Effects                         Yes              Yes             Yes
City by Year Fixed Effects                         Yes              Yes             Yes
Dwelling Characteristics                           Yes              Yes
Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                   Yes              Yes
Observations                                    656,841           543,256         172,399

 Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, which includes transactions
within 3/8 of a mile of a park for Chicago (2001-2016), New York (2006-2016), and Philadelphia
(2006-2016) from Zillow (2018). Neighborhood is defined using a 3/8 miles radius around a park.
Samples for the repeat sales as a matching estimator and the true repeat sales were constructed
using the McSpatial R package (McMillen, 2013). Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood
level are in parentheses.
 * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                              36
 Table 7. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                         First Stage for City-Level Crime Instrument
                            (Omits the First Two Years of Sample)

                                                                               Dependent variable:
                                                   Homicide          Homicide        Park 1/16 ×          Park 1 to 2/16 mile ×
                                                     Risk              Risk         Homicide Risk            Homicide Risk
                                                 No Interaction                             Interaction
                                                       (1)              (2)               (3)                      (4)
Projected Homicide Risk                            0.4506***        0.4514***         -0.0333***               -0.0498***
                                                    (0.0117)         (0.0117)           (0.0053)                 (0.0045)
Park 1/16 × Projected Homicide Risk                                   0.0033           0.6775***                  0.0082
                                                                     (0.0097)           (0.0136)                 (0.0052)
Park 1 to 2/16 × Projected Homicide Risk                              -0.0066           0.0068**                0.6743***
                                                                     (0.0066)           (0.0034)                 (0.0119)

1st Stage F-statistic                               1,461.88          496.85            848.21                  1071.56
Neighborhood Fixed Effects                            Yes               Yes               Yes                     Yes
City by Year Fixed Effects                            Yes               Yes               Yes                     Yes
Dwelling Characteristics                              Yes               Yes               Yes                     Yes
Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                      Yes               Yes               Yes                     Yes
Observations                                        521,945          521,945            521,945                 521,945

 Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, without the first two years of the sample for each city, i.e.
Chicago (2003-2016), New York (2008-2016), and Philadelphia (2008-2016) from Zillow (2018). We use the first two years to
construct the instrument. Kleibergen and Paap (2006) F-statistics is reported at the bottom of the table. Standard errors
clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
 * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                               37
 Table 8. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                                    NSD + IV Estimates
                            (Omits the First Two Years of Sample)

                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                                   ln Housing Transaction Price
Estimator                                          Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                              NSD+IV       NSD+IV        NSD+IV        NSD+IV                 NSD+IV
                                                (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)                   (5)
Park within 1/16 mile                          0.0200**        0.0484***       0.0478***                      0.0496***
                                               (0.0099)         (0.0176)        (0.0174)                       (0.0175)
Park 1 to 2 16 mile                             0.0011           0.0206          0.0170                          0.0165
                                               (0.0079)         (0.0131)        (0.0129)                       (0.0131)
Homicide Risk                                 -0.0302***      -0.0255***      -0.0272***      -0.0203**      -0.0259***
                                               (0.0098)         (0.0094)        (0.0097)       (0.0092)        (0.0099)
Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                                 -0.0150**       -0.0145**       -0.0429*       -0.0148**
                                                                (0.0066)        (0.0066)       (0.0254)        (0.0067)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk                             -0.0099*         -0.0081       -0.0092*         -0.0079
                                                                (0.0054)        (0.0052)       (0.0052)        (0.0054)

Wu-Hausman Test (P-values)                      0.1367           0.2604         0.2399          0.1973          0.5862
Neighborhood Fixed Effects                       Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
City by Year Fixed Effects                       Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
Dwelling Characteristics                         Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                 Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
Neighborhood Time Trends                                                          Yes
Near-Far-Park Time Trends                                                                         Yes
Neighborhood by Year FE                                                                                          Yes
Observations                                   521,945           521,945        521,945        521,945         521,945

 Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, without the first two years of the sample for each city,
i.e. Chicago (2003-2016), New York (2008-2016), and Philadelphia (2008-2016) from Zillow (2018). We use the first two
years to construct the instrument. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
 * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                            38
 Table 9. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                  Disentangling Complementarity from Taste Heterogeneity

                                                                         Dependent variable:
                                                                     ln Housing Transaction Price
Estimator                                                       Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                                   (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)
Park within 1/16 mile                          0.0260***        0.0503***      0.0257**     0.0484***      0.0500***
                                                (0.0101)          (0.0136)     (0.0100)      (0.0133)        (0.0155)
Homicide Risk                                  -0.0129***       -0.0091***    -0.0139***    -0.0104***     -0.0091***
                                                (0.0031)          (0.0031)     (0.0030)      (0.0031)        (0.0034)
Park within 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                           -0.0124***                  -0.0116***      -0.0132**
                                                                  (0.0045)                   (0.0040)        (0.0057)
Prop. Af. American                             -0.2515***       -0.2531***    -0.2872***    -0.2885***     -0.2248***
                                                 (0.0336)         (0.0335)     (0.0301)      (0.0301)        (0.0354)
Prop. Latino                                   -0.2435***       -0.2449***    -0.2716***    -0.2705***     -0.2430***
                                                 (0.0244)         (0.0245)     (0.0273)      (0.0272)        (0.0274)
Park 1/16 × Prop. Af. American                  -0.0448**          -0.0165                                    -0.0109
                                                 (0.0214)         (0.0239)                                   (0.0339)
Homicide Risk × Prop. Af. American              -0.0118**        -0.0133**                                 -0.0284***
                                                 (0.0057)         (0.0057)                                   (0.0077)
Park 1/16 × Prop. Latino                                                      -0.0620*        -0.0493         -0.0111
                                                                              (0.0344)       (0.0333)        (0.0378)
Homicide Risk × Prop. Latino                                                  0.0187**       0.0169**         -0.0059
                                                                              (0.0077)       (0.0076)        (0.0085)

Neighborhood Fixed Effects                         Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
City by Year Fixed Effects                         Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Dwelling Characteristics                           Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                   Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Neighborhood Time Trends                           Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Park × Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                                                                       Yes
Hom. × Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                                                                       Yes
Observations                                     656,834         656,834       656,834       656,834        656,834

Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, which includes transactions within 3/8 of a mile of a
park for Chicago (2001-2016), New York (2006-2016), and Philadelphia (2006-2016) from Zillow (2018). Neighborhood is
defined using a 3/8 miles radius around a park. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
* Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                           39
                             Table 10. Socio-Economic Changes and the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk

     Panel A                                                                                      Dependent variable:
                                                               ln(Population Density)                White, fraction             African American, fraction             Latino, fraction

     Estimator                                                                          Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                                                (1)             (2)                (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)                (8)
                                                               NSD           NSD+IV               NSD            NSD+IV            NSD           NSD+IV            NSD             NSD+IV
     Park within 1/16 mile                                   −0.0531∗∗        −0.0504            0.0055           0.0111           0.0059        −0.0006         −0.0083           −0.0046
                                                              (0.0206)        (0.0241)          (0.0061)         (0.0066)         (0.0044)       (0.0052)        (0.0043)          (0.0048)
                                                              [0.0444]        [0.1642]          [0.4049]         [0.2835]         [0.2287]        [0.9698]       [0.1224]          [0.5851]
     Homicide Risk                                           0.0595∗∗∗       0.1157∗∗∗         −0.0528∗∗∗       −0.0996∗∗∗       0.0377∗∗∗      0.0679∗∗∗       0.0147∗∗∗         0.0318∗∗∗
                                                              (0.0058)        (0.0129)          (0.0040)         (0.0076)         (0.0042)       (0.0090)        (0.0034)          (0.0064)
                                                              [0.0000]        [0.0000]          [0.0000]         [0.0000]         [0.0000]        [0.0000]       [0.0000]          [0.0000]
     Park within 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                     0.0144          0.0167           −0.0012         −0.0073∗∗          0.0023        0.0078∗∗        −0.0022           −0.0030
                                                              (0.0072)        (0.0094)          (0.0021)         (0.0027)         (0.0021)       (0.0028)        (0.0021)          (0.0026)
                                                              [0.3518]        [0.1693]          [0.7322]         [0.0307]         [0.4455]        [0.0307]       [0.4455]          [0.3715]

     Observations                                             364,269         364,269            364,269          364,269         364,269        364,269         364,269           364,269

     Panel B                                                                                    Dependent variable:




40
                                                 ln(Median Income)                    Median Age                    Renter, fraction                 Vacant, fraction                Unmployed, fraction

                                                NSD           NSD+IV           NSD              NSD+IV             NSD           NSD+IV            NSD          NSD+IV               NSD         NSD+IV
     Park within 1/16 mile                     0.0014        −0.0005         1.2943∗∗∗         1.4997∗∗∗          −0.0126         −0.0135        0.0043∗∗         0.0022            0.0017        0.0012
                                              (0.0112)       (0.0131)         (0.2584)          (0.3072)          (0.0077)        (0.0091)       (0.0022)        (0.0027)          (0.0012)      (0.0016)
                                              [0.9011]       [0.9698]         [0.0000]          [0.0000]          [0.1852]        [0.3075]        [0.1224]       [0.5851]          [0.2287]      [0.5851]
     Homicide Risk                           −0.0783∗∗∗     −0.1513∗∗∗      −0.5970∗∗∗         −1.4391∗∗∗        0.0240∗∗∗       0.0488∗∗∗      0.0069∗∗∗       0.0131∗∗∗         0.0089∗∗∗     0.0148∗∗∗
                                              (0.0055)       (0.0112)         (0.0715)          (0.1482)          (0.0028)        (0.0055)       (0.0009)        (0.0017)          (0.0007)      (0.0015)
                                              [0.0000]       [0.0000]         [0.0000]          [0.0000]          [0.0000]        [0.0000]        [0.0000]       [0.0000]          [0.0000]      [0.0000]
     Park within 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk    −0.0006        −0.0045          −0.1249          −0.2910∗∗           0.0038         0.0059∗       −0.0018∗         −0.0003            0.0001        0.0008
                                              (0.0048)       (0.0062)         (0.1039)          (0.1314)          (0.0027)        (0.0035)       (0.0010)        (0.0014)          (0.0007)      (0.0009)
                                              [0.8934]       [0.5259]         [0.4455]          [0.0805]          [0.4455]        [0.1693]        [0.3518]       [0.8248]          [0.8934]      [0.5158]

     Observations                              364,269        364,269         364,269            364,269          364,269         364,269        364,269         364,269           322,368        322,368

     Notes: Sample includes a interpolated yearly series of socio-economic characteristics from the 2000, 2010 Censuses and the 2011-15 ACS at block level. All specifications include
     neighborhood fixed effects and year fixed effects. Neighborhood refers to the 3/8 miles radius around a park. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
     Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) adjusted p-values in brackets.
     Specifications also include controls for park proximity between 1 and 2 16th miles and it’s interaction with Homicide Risk, which we omit for clarity of exposition as these coefficients
     are never statistically significant.
     * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level according to Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) adjusted p-values.
                      Table 11. Amenity Value of Park Proximity
                       and Value “Locked in” by Homicide Risk
                        Millions of Dollars in Year 2016 Values


                     Typical Homicide Risk                    Neighborhood
                     of Park Neighborhood                     Median Income
                     Low     Medium        High          Low      Medium         High       ALL
       Panel A: Park Proximity Value – No Complementarity

 Chicago               932         492       232           335          494        828     1, 656
 New York           3, 950      2, 462       841        1, 374       1, 736     4, 142     7, 253
 Philadelphia          142         166        44            23          121        208        352
 Total              5, 024      3, 120    1, 118        1, 732       2, 351     5, 179     9, 262
  Panel B: Realized Park Proximity Value with Complementarity

 Chicago            1, 874         517     -295            -38          582     1, 552    2, 096
 New York           7, 652      2, 602   -1, 973       -1, 260       2, 387     7, 154    8, 281
 Philadelphia          274         185       -56           -20           85        338       403
 Total              9, 800      3, 304   -2, 324       -1, 318       3, 055     9, 043   10, 780

 Panel C: Potential Park Proximity Value with No Crime in Parks

 Chicago           2, 168       1, 145       541           779       1, 149     1, 926    3, 854
 New York          9, 190       5, 727    1, 958        3, 197       4, 040     9, 638   16, 875
 Philadelphia         331          387       102            55          280        485       820
 Total            11, 689       7, 259    2, 600        4, 030       5, 469    12, 048   21, 548

         Panel D: Park Proximity Value Locked in by Crime

 Chicago               294         628       836           817          567        375    1, 758
 New York           1, 538      3, 126    3, 931        4, 458       1, 653     2, 484    8, 594
 Philadelphia           57         202       158            74          196        147       416
 Total              1, 889      3, 955    4, 925        5, 349       2, 415     3, 005   10, 769

 Notes: Estimates of the value of parks for each city are based on the number of units within 1/16
miles of a park and the median value from the 2011-15 ACS and our estimates from Table 8, column 4.
We calculate the expected number of homicides in a neighborhood by year and classify them as: Low
Homicide Risk: less than one expected homicide by year; Medium Homicide Risk: more than one and
less than three expected homicides per year; High Homicide Risk: more than three expected homicides
per year. We divide neighborhoods based on the median neighborhood income from the 2000 Census
and classify them using city-specific income terciles.




                                                41
      Table 12. Effect of Crime Reductions on
    Amenity Value of the Value of Park Proximity,
       Millions of Dollars in Year 2016 Values


                   Neighborhood’s Change in Homicide Risk
                    Decrease      Increase       Net
                   ∆H < −0.01 ∆H > 0.01

 Chicago                1, 224            -282             941
 New York               5, 442            -840            4, 602
 Philadelphia            177              -159              18
 Total                  6, 843           -1, 282          5, 561

 Notes: Estimates of value of parks for each city are based on the
number of units within 1/16 miles of a park and the median value and
our estimates, as described in Table 11. Using the expected number of
neighborhood homicides, we calculate yearly percent changes using a
linear regression by neighborhood. We classify neighborhoods as having
experienced a decrease if the average yearly reduction in homicide risk
was below 1%. We classify them as having experienced an increase if
the neighborhood homicide risk above 1% . All others are classified as
having no change.




                                  42
10      Figures




                               Figure 1. Housing Transactions around Parks:
                                     Neighborhood Distance Intervals




Notes: The following figure shows transactions within 3/8 miles of the nearest park in Chicago. The zoom in figure
represents the ‘neighborhood’ around Marquette Park. It contains all of the transactions (4,623) within three-eights of a
mile that are not closer to another a park. Colors correspond to different distance intervals or ‘bands’ around the park.




                                                           43
                              Figure 2. Homicide Risk Heat Map for Chicago
                                         (3-Year Moving Average)




Notes: Shades represent levels of homicide risk, which we measure as the expected number of homicides per square mile.
Estimates are based geolocated crime data for years 2001-2003 and 2013-2015. We use a bivariate Gaussian kernel with a
bandwidth of 1/4 of a mile on a 1/8 mile city grid to estimate the likelihood per square mile of a homicide in each grid.
We then calculate the expected number of homicides using the total number of city homicides.




                                                           44
                       Figure 3. Annual Homicide Rate per Square Mile by City




Notes: Homicide rate is defined as the number of homicides per square mile for Chicago (2001-2016), New York (2006-2016),
and Philadelphia (2006-2016)




                                                           45
                                Figure 4. Homicide Risk by Neighborhood:
                                 Relative Risk Near Parks vs Overall Risk




Notes: The vertical axis denotes the ratio between the average homicide risk per square mile within 1/8 mile of a park
and the rest of the neighborhood (2-3/8 of a mile). The horizontal axis measures the average yearly homicide risk in the
neighborhood (within 3/8 of a mile). Ratios are computed using averages across the study period.




                                                           46
                              Figure 5. Transaction Prices by Homicide Risk:
                                 Near Parks Versus Comparison Properties




Notes: Figure plots estimates
                           P of transaction prices at different homicide rates using:
Vijt = Pi β P + Hijt β H + k Pik Hijt βkP H + Di β D + γj + ζtc + uijt , where Vijt , is the sales price of house i in
neighborhood j, city c, year t. Pik are indicators for distance to park, where the excluded category is 2 to 5/16 of a mile.
Hijt are indicators for different levels of homicide risk around property i. Di are dwelling characteristics which are
described in panel B of Table 1. γj are neighborhood fixed effects, and ζtc are city-year interaction indicators. Round
markers plot estimates for the comparison group of properties from parks between 2 to 5/16 miles, the excluded category,
hence β H . The triangle markers plot estimates for near parks, β H + β1P + β1P H . Bars denote 90% confidence intervals.




                                                            47
                               Figure 6. Transaction Prices by Distance to Park




Notes: Figure plots estimates
                           P of prices by distance from parks, using:
Vijt = Pi β P + H̃ijt β H + k Pik H̃ijt βkP H + γj + ζtc + uijt , where Vijt , is the sales price of house i in neighborhood j, city
c, year t. Pik are indicators for distance to park at intervals of 1/16 of a mile (roughly one block) and H̃ijt is the square
root of homicide risk per square mile around property i. γj are neighborhood fixed effects, and ζtc are city-year interaction
indicators. Square markers for no homicide risk illustrate βkP , while diamond markers for high homicide risk illustrate
      √
βkP + 9βkP H . Bars denote 90% confidence intervals.




                                                                48
49
         Table A.1. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:                                       A
                              Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD) Estimates
                        Robustness to Homicide Risk Functional Form Transformations

                                                                         Dependent variable:
                                                                     ln Housing Transaction Price
     Transformation                                                      Powers                                       Linear
                                                             −1               −1               −1
                                                  H 1/2 H 1/2        H 2/3 H 2/3        H 3/4 H 3/4
                                                        (1)                (2)                (3)             (4)                (5)
     Park within 1/16 mile                          0.0488***          0.0446***         0.0427***         0.0379***       0.0469***
                                                     (0.0142)           (0.0132)          (0.0129)          (0.0121)         (0.0129)
                                                      [3.4456]           [3.3746]          [3.3189]          [3.1308]         [3.6354]
     Park 1 to 2/16 miles                              0.0128             0.0115            0.0109            0.0092           0.0092
                                                      [1.1429]           [1.0883]          [1.0571]          [0.9487]         [0.8896]
                                                     (0.0112)           (0.0105)          (0.0103)          (0.0097)         (0.0103)
     Homicide Risk                                  -0.0115***         -0.0088***        -0.0077***       -0.0066***        -0.0078**
                                                     (0.0028)           (0.0021)          (0.0019)          (0.0017)         (0.0034)
                                                     [-4.1470]          [-4.0884]         [-4.0531]         [-3.9196]        [-2.3097]
     Homicide Risk Squared                                                                                                     0.0001
                                                                                                                             (0.0002)
                                                                                                                              [0.3903]




50
     Park 1/16 × Homicide Risk                      -0.0119***         -0.0097***        -0.0087***       -0.0078***       -0.0200***
                                                                                                                                         Appendix: Tables and Figures




                                                     (0.0041)           (0.0032)          (0.0029)         (0.0028)          (0.0055)
                                                     [-2.8844]          [-3.0005]         [-3.0025]        [-2.8265]         [-3.6110]
     Park 1 to 2/16 × Homicide Risk                   -0.0057           -0.0051*          -0.0047*         -0.0050*           -0.0050
                                                     (0.0037)           (0.0030)          (0.0027)         (0.0027)          (0.0053)
                                                     [-1.5607]          [-1.6800]         [-1.7338]        [-1.8604]         [-0.9370]
     Park 1/16 × Homicide Risk Squared                                                                                     0.0013***
                                                                                                                             (0.0004)
                                                                                                                              [3.0363]
     Park 1 to 2/16 × Homicide Risk Squared                                                                                   -0.0000
                                                                                                                             (0.0005)
                                                                                                                             [-0.0032]
     Neighborhood Fixed Effects                         Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
     City by Year Fixed Effects                         Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
     Dwelling Characteristics                           Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
     Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                   Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
     Observations                                     656,841           656,841            656,841          656,841            656,841

      Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, which includes transactions within 3/8 of a mile of a park for
     Chicago (2001-2016), New York (2006-2016), and Philadelphia (2006-2016) from Zillow (2018). Neighborhood is defined using a
     3/8 miles radius around a park. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
      * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level. t-statistics in brackets
Table A.2. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                     Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD) Estimates

                                                                    Dependent variable: ln Housing Transaction Price
Homicide Risk Measure                                          Transformed                                              Linear
                                                                    √   −1
                                                                √
                                                           (H̃=2   H        (H   )

                                                  No               Neigh.            + Time-           No               Neigh.          + Time-
                                                Interac.           Fixed             Varying         Interac.           Fixed           Varying
                                                                   Effects           Controls                           Effects         Controls
                                                   (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)               (5)               (6)
Park within 1/16 mile                         0.0368***         0.0731***            0.0653***       0.0374***       0.0626***         0.0531***
                                               (0.0122)           (0.0170)             (0.0166)       (0.0122)        (0.0147)           (0.0142)
Park 1 to 2/16 miles                             0.0123          0.0348**             0.0292**         0.0124         0.0297**          0.0243**
                                               (0.0099)           (0.0141)             (0.0134)       (0.0099)        (0.0121)           (0.0115)
Park 2 to 3/16 miles                            0.0179*          0.0311**             0.0252**        0.0179*         0.0286**          0.0234**
                                               (0.0096)           (0.0133)             (0.0127)       (0.0096)        (0.0118)           (0.0112)
Park 4 to 5/16 miles                             0.0125            0.0174               0.0184         0.0125          0.0155             0.0172
                                               (0.0122)           (0.0132)             (0.0126)       (0.0122)        (0.0138)           (0.0133)
Park 5 to 6/16 miles                             0.0099            0.0182               0.0217         0.0102          0.0160             0.0186
                                               (0.0122)           (0.0158)             (0.0149)       (0.0122)        (0.0145)           (0.0139)
Homicide Risk                                 -0.0153***        -0.0202***            -0.0087**     -0.0092***       -0.0113***          -0.0038*
                                               (0.0027)           (0.0037)             (0.0035)       (0.0016)        (0.0024)           (0.0023)
Park 1/16 × Homicide Risk                                       -0.0147***           -0.0147***                      -0.0115***        -0.0106***
                                                                  (0.0050)             (0.0049)                       (0.0033)           (0.0032)
Park 1 to 2/16 × Homicide Risk                                   -0.0095**            -0.0085**                      -0.0090***         -0.0078**
                                                                  (0.0043)             (0.0043)                       (0.0030)           (0.0030)
Park 2 to 3/16 × Homicide Risk                                     -0.0047              -0.0037                       -0.0045*            -0.0037
                                                                  (0.0039)             (0.0040)                       (0.0027)           (0.0027)
Park 4 to 5/16 × Homicide Risk                                     -0.0035              -0.0029                        -0.0033            -0.0030
                                                                  (0.0038)             (0.0038)                       (0.0023)           (0.0024)
Park 5 to 6/16 × Homicide Risk                                     -0.0046              -0.0060                        -0.0043           -0.0055*
                                                                  (0.0045)             (0.0043)                       (0.0030)           (0.0028)

Neighborhood Fixed Effects                        Yes               Yes                 Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes
City by Year Fixed Effects                        Yes               Yes                 Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes
Dwelling Characteristics                          Yes               Yes                 Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes
Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                  Yes                                   Yes             Yes                                Yes
Observations                                    656,841            656,841            656,841        656,841           656,841           656,841
 Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, which includes transactions within 3/8 of a mile of a park for Chicago (2001-2016),
New York (2006-2016), and Philadelphia (2006-2016) from Zillow (2018). The reference category in this specifications are properties sold between
3 and 4 16ths of a mile away. Neighborhood is defined using a 3/8 miles radius around a park. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level
are in parentheses.
 * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                                       51
Table A.3. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                                   NSD + IV Estimates
                (Omits the First Two Years of Sample and Last Year (2016))

                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                                             ln Housing Transaction Price
          Estimator                                    Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                                         NSD                NSD+IV
                                                          (1)                   (2)
          Park within 1/16 mile                         0.0461***               0.0486***
                                                         (0.0150)                (0.0180)
          Park 1 to 2 16 mile                              0.0096                 0.0203
                                                         (0.0111)                (0.0132)
          Homicide Risk                                -0.0149***               -0.0231**
                                                         (0.0032)                (0.0091)
          Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk               -0.0128***               -0.0148**
                                                         (0.0046)                (0.0066)
          Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk             -0.0042                -0.0099*
                                                         (0.0035)                (0.0054)

          Neighborhood Fixed Effects                       Yes                      Yes
          City by Year Fixed Effects                       Yes                      Yes
          Dwelling Characteristics                         Yes                      Yes
          Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                 Yes                      Yes
          Observations                                   491,710                  491,710

           Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, without the first two
          years of the sample for each city, i.e. Chicago (2003-2016), New York (2008-2016), and
          Philadelphia (2008-2016) from Zillow (2018). We use the first two years to construct the
          instrument. We drop 2016 to isolate the spike in homicides in Chicago in that year. Standard
          errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
           * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                      52
Table A.4. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and
                          Homicide Equivalent Risk:
                             NSD + IV Estimates
                   (Omits the First Two Years of Sample)

                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                                             ln Housing Transaction Price
Estimator                                             Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                                        NSD                NSD+IV
                                                         (1)                   (2)

Park within 1/16 mile                                  0.0330***                  0.0307**
                                                        (0.0127)                  (0.0139)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile                                      0.0126                   0.0168*
                                                        (0.0094)                  (0.0101)
Homicide Equiv. Risk                                  -0.0111***                -0.0138***
                                                        (0.0021)                  (0.0039)
Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Equiv. Risk                  -0.0049**                   -0.0044
                                                        (0.0025)                  (0.0032)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Equiv. Risk              -0.0042*                 -0.0058**
                                                        (0.0024)                  (0.0029)

Neighborhood Fixed Effects                                Yes                      Yes
City by Year Fixed Effects                                Yes                      Yes
Dwelling Characteristics                                  Yes                      Yes
Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                          Yes                      Yes
Observations                                            521,945                  521,945

 Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, without the first two years of the
sample for each city, i.e. Chicago (2003-2016), New York (2008-2016), and Philadelphia (2008-2016)
from Zillow (2018). We use the first two years to construct the instrument. The specifications are the
same as in Table 8. Homicide Risk is replaced by Homicide Equivalent Risk, which is constructed
using willingness-to-pay estimates from Chalfin and McCrary (2017) to construct a unitary measure
of homicide-equivalent crimes. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
 * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                 53
   Table A.5. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity
                         and Daytime Homicide Risk:
                             NSD + IV Estimates
                    (Omits the First Two Years of Sample)

                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                                             ln Housing Transaction Price
Estimator                                              Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                                         NSD                NSD+IV
                                                          (1)                   (2)
Park within 1/16 mile                                   0.0462***               0.0571***
                                                         (0.0140)                (0.0177)
Park 1 to 2 16 mile                                        0.0101                 0.0215
                                                         (0.0100)                (0.0131)
Homicide Risk Daytime                                  -0.0088***              -0.0365***
                                                         (0.0022)                (0.0103)
Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk Daytime                 -0.0120***              -0.0195***
                                                         (0.0036)                (0.0070)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk Daytime               -0.0040                -0.0103*
                                                         (0.0029)                (0.0057)

Neighborhood Fixed Effects                                 Yes                     Yes
City by Year Fixed Effects                                 Yes                     Yes
Dwelling Characteristics                                   Yes                     Yes
Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                           Yes                     Yes
Observations                                            521,945                  521,945

 Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, without the first two years of the
sample for each city, i.e. Chicago (2003-2016), New York (2008-2016), and Philadelphia (2008-2016)
from Zillow (2018). We use the first two years to construct the instrument. Homicide Risk is replaced
by Daytime Homicide Risk where we exclude homicides that took place at night time (8pm to 8am).
Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
 * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                 54
Table A.6. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                                    NSD + IV Estimates
                                    Heterogeneity by City
                            (Omits the First Two Years of Sample)

                                                                   Dependent variable:
                                                              ln Housing Transaction Price
     Estimator                                         Park-Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                                            NSD                    NSD+IV
                                                             (1)                     (2)
     Park 1/16 mile × Chicago                              0.0329                     0.0337
                                                         (0.0218)                   (0.0257)
     Park 1/16 mile × NYC                              0.0610***                    0.0644**
                                                         (0.0205)                   (0.0270)
     Park 1/16 mile × Philadelphia                         0.0679                   0.1133**
                                                         (0.0447)                   (0.0533)
     Homicide Risk × Chicago                           -0.0132***                    -0.0086
                                                         (0.0039)                   (0.0098)
     Homicide Risk × NYC                                -0.0111**                  -0.0365**
                                                         (0.0056)                   (0.0164)
     Homicide Risk × Philadelphia                      -0.0536***                 -0.1105***
                                                         (0.0142)                   (0.0419)
     Park 1/16 × Homicide Risk × Chicago                -0.0146**                   -0.0145*
                                                         (0.0063)                   (0.0085)
     Park 1/16 × Homicide Risk × NYC                     -0.0129*                    -0.0169
                                                         (0.0072)                   (0.0117)
     Park 1/16 × Homicide Risk × Philadelphia             -0.0239                  -0.0619**
                                                         (0.0186)                   (0.0285)
      P-value F-test equality of coefficients
     Park within 1/16 mile                                   0.580                   0.368
     Homicide Risk                                          0.0171                   0.0262
     Park within 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                  0.859                    0.281
     Park-Neighborhood Fixed Effects                         Yes                      Yes
     City by Year Fixed Effects                              Yes                      Yes
     Dwelling Characteristics                                Yes                      Yes
     Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                        Yes                      Yes
     Observations                                        521,945                    521,945

      Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, without the first two years of the
     sample for each city, i.e. Chicago (2003-2016), New York (2008-2016), and Philadelphia (2008-2016) from
     Zillow (2018). We use the first two years to construct the instrument. Standard errors clustered at the
     neighborhood level are in parentheses.
      * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                       55
              Figure A.1. Housing Transactions within 3/8 miles of the nearest Park,
                                           New York




Notes: Points represent transactions within 3/8 miles of the nearest Park. Different shades denote proximity to the park.




                                                           56
              Figure A.2. Housing Transactions within 3/8 miles of the nearest Park,
                                          Philadelphia




Notes: Points represent transactions within 3/8 miles of the nearest Park. Different shades denote proximity to the park.




                                                           57
                                      Figure A.3. Prices and Homicide Risk




                                                                                   √   √
                                   (a) Transformed Homicide Risk H̃ = 2             H/( H))




                                                 (b) Linear Homicide Risk

Notes: Figure shows how price varies by distance and Homicide Risk. Solid dots represent coefficients from this equation:
Vijt = β H Hijt + γj + ζtc + uijt , where Vijt , the sales price of house i in neighborhood j, city c, year t. Hijt are indicators
for different levels of homicide risk around property i. γj is the park-neighborhood fixed effect that controls for the fixed
unobservables shared within a neighborhood. ζtc is a fixed effect for transaction city and year to control for city specific
trends. uijt is an error term. Bars denote 95% confidence intervals. Dashed line and the equation show the fitted line on
the coefficients.




                                                               58
                     Figure A.4. Park Premia by Area of Park and Homicide Risk,
                              Neighborhood Spatial Difference Estimates




Notes: Figure shows how park proximity premium varies by quartile of the area of the park. Solid markers represent
coefficients from equatinon (6) interacted with indicators for the park area quartile in which the property is closest to. No
Homicide Risk illustrates βkP which is the proximity premium for properties with 0 homicides. High Homicide Risk
                          ∗ where H ∗ = 9, i.e., the park proximity premium for properties with nine expected homicides
illustrates βkP + βkP H H̃ijt       ijt
per square mile. Bars denote 90% confidence intervals.




                                                            59
B         Appendix: Identification in the NSD and NSD + IV Frame-
          works

As discussed in Section 5.5, the identification of estimates presented in Table 2 is threatened
if changes in the price effects of parks are correlated with unobservables. We formalize the
discussion in this section by examining the effect of different possible types of omitted variables
and examine the primary identification assumptions in each of our models. For simplicity, we
begin with a simplified version of equation (5):

                             Vijt = Pi β P + Hijt β H + Pi Hijt β P H + γj + ζtc + uijt                (B.1)

    where Vijt is the sales price of house i in neighborhood j, city c, year t. Pi denotes properties
within 1/16 miles of a park and Hijt is our homicide risk measure. Pi Hijt measures homicide
risk near parks. γj is the neighborhood fixed effect and ζtc is a fixed effect for transaction city
and year, uijt is an error term.


B.1        Identifying β P H Using Neighborhood Differences

We consider an augmented version of the model above following Wooldridge (2010) notation
that includes omitted variables correlated only with park proximity and not with homicides
(qijt ), those that are correlated only with homicide risk and not with parks (νijt ), and those
that are correlated only with the interaction (φijt ). Projectecting the error term uijt that include
omitted variables into the observables


                               L(uijt |P, H, P H) = η P Pi + η H Hijt + η P H Pi Hijt                  (B.2)
                                                    | {z } | {z } | {z }
                                                       qitj      νijt          φijt


where the η l for l = P, H, P H measure the relationship between the unboservables and the
observables that they affect. Plugging these into equation (B.1):


            Vijt = Pi (β P + η P ) + Hijt (β H + η H ) + Pi Hijt (β P H + η P H ) + γj + ζtc + µ̃ijt   (B.3)

where the error term, µ̃ijt , has mean zero and is uncorrelated with each regressor.46 If the
exclusion restriction stated in equation (7) is valid, then η P H = 0 and β P H is identified.
   Using a potential outcomes formulation, we can also see that if assumption (7) doesn’t hold,
then the interaction term (β P H ) contains an unobserved variable that is not differenced out:
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                          Y00 , if Pi = 0, Hijt = 0
                                         
                                         Y , if P = 1, H = 0
                                            10       i       ijt
                            E(Vijt |.) =                                                    (B.4)
                                         
                                         
                                          Y0h , if Pi = 0, Hijt = h
                                         
                                         Y , if P = 1, H = h
                                            1h       i       ijt

We note that Hij can be a fully continuous treatment.



46
     Note: the constants get absorbed in the γj .


                                                         60
                 Y00 = γj + ζtc                                                                 (B.5a)
                 Y10 = γj + ζtc + β P + η P                                                    (B.5b)
                 Y0h = γj +   ζtc   +β   H        H
                                             ·h+η ·h                                            (B.5c)
                 Y1h = γj +   ζtc   + β P + β H · h + β P H · h + ηP + ηH · h + ηP H · h       (B.5d)



                          β P H · h = (Y1h − Y0h ) − (Y10 − Y00 ) − η P H · h                    (B.6)


B.2    Threats to Identification in the NSD Model

In the paper we, examine three types of omitted variables that could be included in φijt and
would violate the identifying assumption in our NSD model: (1) time-varying unobservables
between neighborhoods may differentially affect price near parks (υjt ), (2) unobserved property
characteristics may result in price differences near parks, even within neighborhoods (σi ), (3)
time-varying unobservables within neighborhoods may affect price near parks versus farther
away (χijt ).

                                             φijt = υjt + σi + χijt                              (B.7)
                                                    (1)        (2)   (3)

As discussed throughout Section 5, the assumption that these terms are zero may be too re-
strictive in our setting. We relax them and address possible violations in a variety of ways. We
address (1) υjt in Table 2 by adding neighborhood specific time trends and even more flexibly
in Table 4 with park-neighborhood by year fixed effects. We address (2) σi in Table 6 using
repeat-sales estimates in the NSD design. We address (3) χijt in Table 2 by adding time-varying
socio-economic controls that are interacted with our park indicator and with homicides. We
alternately relax (3) in Table 4 by introducing controls for separate neighborhood-specific trends
within 1/16th mile vs 2-16ths mile from a park.


B.3    Identifying β P H Using IV + NSD

We go on to more comprehensively address (3) (χijt ) with an instrumental variables strategy.
This IV assumes that city-level shocks to homicide rates will affect local homicide risk but are
not correlated with within-neighborhood differences in price changes near parks. The second
stage of the IV strategy then takes the form:
                                                               V



                       Vijt = β P Pi + β H Ĥijt + β P H Pi Hijt
                                                      V



                           + Pi qijt + Ĥijt νijt + Pi Hijt · φijt + γj + ζtc + uijt             (B.8)

In order to identify the complementarity coefficient β P H , the instrument (Hijtiv ) needs only to be

orthogonal to φijt . In other words, the exclusion restriction of this model requires that city-level
shocks to the homicide rate affect within-neighborhood changes in housing price through effects
on local homicide risk and not through other channels. If this is true, then Cov(Ĥijt , φijt ) =
0. Importantly, identification of the complementarity (β P H ) in B.8 does not require that the
instrument separately identifies the direct effect of crime on prices (β H ). To illustrate this point,
we assume that the effect of homicides on prices are not identified by the IV: Cov(Ĥijt , νijt ) 6= 0.
If this is the case, then νijt will be differenced out as illustrated in equations (B.5) and (B.6).


                                                          61
B.4       Validity of the Instrumental Variables Strategy

Although the exclusion restriction cannot be tested directly, we provide a number of indirect
tests. In particular, we test whether the instrument is correlated with changes in:

     i other public goods near parks

     ii homicide incidence near parks

 iii bar and restaurant establishments

We then examine robustness of estimates to:

 iv possible endogeneity of initial risk within neighborhood

     v controls for zone-specific park expenditures

       For (i) and (ii), we estimate the following equation:

                         Tbjt = τ P P̃i + τ H Hbjt
                                               IV
                                                   + τ P H P̃i Hbjt
                                                                IV
                                                                    + γj + ζtc + ubjt                   (B.9)

where Tbjt measures the unemployment rate for block group b, in neighborhood j in year t.
HltIV is the instrument: the projected number of homicides in year t in block b, as described in
equation (9). γj are park-neighborhood fixed effects and ζjc are city-year effects.47




47
 Our measures of demographic characteristics are annualized by interpolating the matched census blocks and
block groups from the 2000, 2010 census, and the 2011-15 ACS. Population and population-by-race are obtained
at the block level whereas median income and median age at the block group level, which is the finest geography
that they are available.


                                                      62
Table B.1. Effects on Unemployment of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and
                                    Homicide Risk:
                                 NSD + IV Estimates
                         (Omits the First Two Years of Sample)

                                                              Dependent variable:
                                                              Unemployment Rate
         Estimator                                Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD) + IV
                                                    (1)                      (2)
         Park within 1/16 mile                     0.0010                  0.0005
                                                  (0.0024)                (0.0025)
         Park 1 to 2 16 mile                       0.0009                  0.0010
                                                  (0.0017)                (0.0017)
         Homicide Risk                             0.0020                  0.0021
                                                  (0.0014)                (0.0014)
         Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk            0.0002                  0.0003
                                                  (0.0010)                (0.0010)
         Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk       0.0007                  0.0007
                                                  (0.0007)                (0.0007)
         Neighborhood Fixed Effects                 Yes                      Yes
         City by Year Fixed Effects                 Yes                      Yes
         Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls           Yes                      Yes
         Neighborhood by Year FE                                             Yes
         Observations                             521,945                  521,945

          Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, without the first two
         years of the sample for each city, i.e. Chicago (2003-2016), New York (2008-2016), and
         Philadelphia (2008-2016) from Zillow (2018). Number or restauratns come from the Census
         Zip Codes Business Patterns. We use the first two years to construct the instrument.
         Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
          * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                   63
While limited, this test provides some evidence that the instrument does not predict changes in
local labor market activity that could reflect changes in public goods provision or other amenity
changes.
    Next, we examine if the instruments predicts the relative incidence of homicides near parks
using a similar specification. This helps to separate possible quantity effects (amount of crime)
from price effects (value per crime), the focus of our hypothesis. To do so, we estimate the
following equation:


        Hijt = P̃i ϑP + ϑH Ht−jc + P̃i Ht−jc ϑP H + Di ϑD + Xijt ϑX + γj + ζtc + uijt                   (B.10)

where Hijt is homicide is the property level homicide risk and Htc is the number of homicides
in city c, remaining controls are those described for equation (6). Table B.2 reports results
from two different specifications, the one described in equation B.10 and a more restrictive
specification where we include neighborhood by year fixed effects. These tests indicate that
shocks to homicides at the city level predict homicides at the property level, but there is no
evidence of differential effects on the incidence of homicides near parks relative to our comparison
zones. This evidence suggests that changes in the city level homicide rate affect the prices of
homes near parks through the differential value of crime reduction near parks rather than
through differential effects on homicide risk near parks.

                      Table B.2. Differential effects of City Level Homicides
                                       on Local Homicides

                                                                           Dependent variable:
                                                                              Homicide Risk
                                                                              (1)            (2)
                Park within 1/16 mile                                       0.0186         0.0270
                                                                           (0.1087)       (0.1074)
                Park 1 to 2/16 miles                                       −0.0212        −0.0135
                                                                           (0.0793)       (0.0784)
                City Level Homicides (Ht−jc )                             0.0028∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.0002)
                Park 1/16 × City Level Homicides (Ht−jc )                  −0.0004        −0.0004
                                                                           (0.0002)       (0.0002)
                Park 1 to 2/16 × City Level Homicides (Ht−jc )             −0.0001        −0.0001
                                                                           (0.0002)       (0.0002)
                Neighborhood Fixed Effects                                   Yes
                City by Year Fixed Effects                                   Yes
                Neighborhood by Year FE                                                     Yes
                Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                             Yes            Yes
                Observations                                               521,945        521,945

                 Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, without the
                first two years of the sample for each city, i.e. Chicago (2003-2016), New York
                (2008-2016), and Philadelphia (2008-2016) from Zillow (2018). We use the first
                two years to construct the instrument. City Level Homicides (Ht−jc ) are the city
                level homicides that exclude the specific neighborhood homicides. Standard errors
                clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
                 * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.


Next, we examine relationship between homicide risk and bars and restaurants using data at the
5-digit zip level, normalized by area. The aggregation of publicly available data at the 5-digit
zip code reduces our ability to examine within-neighborhood differences. All estimates suggest
a smaller number of establishments near parks, which may reflect the smaller area within the

                                                        64
0 to 1/16th distance bin. We find no evidence of changes in the number of neighborhood-
level restaurants near parks as a function of changes in homicide risk. In panel B, we report
estimates for the sample of zips that are smaller than at least one associated park, which provide
the strongest possible test by measuring changes at a more dis-aggregate level with variation
within neighborhoods. The evidence is consistent with that provided in panel A.




                                               65
 Table B.3. Effects on Restaurants of the Complementarity between
     Park Proximity and Homicide Risk: NSD + IV Estimates
               (Omits the First Two Years of Sample)

                                                        Dependent variable:
                                                     Restaurants per Zip sq mile
Estimator                                    Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                               (1)                      (2)
Park within 1/16 mile                     -17.3606*** *              -18.2753***
                                             (4.9534)                  (4.8835)
Park 1 to 2 16 mile                           -0.6533                   -1.9367
                                             (3.5816)                  (3.5127)
Homicide Risk                                 -1.6579                   -2.1265
                                             (1.1034)                  (1.7661)
Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                 1.7744                  2.3291*
                                             (1.3152)                  (1.4092)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk           0.3121                     1.0793
                                             (1.2183)                  (1.3003)

Estimator                                 Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD) + IV

Park within 1/16 mile                      -17.6509***               -17.5658***
                                             (6.1130)                  (6.0064)
Park 1 to 2 16 mile                           -0.6700                   -1.6085
                                             (4.4120)                  (4.4458)
Homicide Risk                                 -2.0803                   -0.8826
                                             (4.7391)                  (5.1063)
Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                 1.8989                    2.0393
                                             (2.3880)                  (2.4829)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk           0.3093                     0.9425
                                             (2.1513)                  (2.3033)

Wu-Hausman Test (P-values)                   0.9993                    0.9875
Observations                                 521,945                   521,945
                                                       Restricted Sample
Estimator                                    Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                               (1)                      (2)
Park within 1/16 mile                      -29.9445***               -30.5305***
                                             (8.0875)                  (7.7622)
Park 1 to 2 16 mile                           -1.7516                   -2.7216
                                             (6.4029)                  (6.1542)
Homicide Risk                                 -2.9713                   -3.8246
                                             (1.8926)                  (2.7253)
Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                 3.2888                    3.7983
                                             (2.3838)                  (2.4562)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk           1.2585                     1.9259
                                             (2.4262)                  (2.4815)

Estimator                                 Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD) + IV

Park within 1/16 mile                      -59.3339***               -59.3082***
                                            (19.7256)                 (19.8768)
Park 1 to 2 16 mile                           -8.4042                  -10.8307
                                            (16.3984)                 (16.5655)
Homicide Risk                                -19.4648                  -18.7444
                                            (14.6213)                 (15.6716)
Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                 7.1162                   7.1797
                                             (9.2428)                  (9.6769)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk           -2.1504                   -0.6513
                                             (7.6918)                  (8.3160)

Wu-Hausman Test (P-values)                   0.6527                    0.7436
Observations                                 521,945                   521,945
Neighborhood Fixed Effects                     Yes                       Yes
City by Year Fixed Effects                     Yes                       Yes
Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls               Yes                       Yes
Neighborhood by Year FE                                                  Yes

 Notes: Explanatory variables are the same as described in Tables 2 and 8. The number
of restaurants comes from Census Zip Codes Business Patterns: https://www.census.gov/
data/developers/data-sets/cbp-nonemp-zbp/zbp-api.html. In the Restricted Sample panel
data are restricted to zip codes that are smaller
                                              66 than at least 1 associated park and merged
with property-level data. We use the first two years of data to construct the instrument.
Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses. * Significant at
10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.
We then test the robustness of our results using a lagged version of our IV + NSD model. The
instrument is constructed using the same initial shares, but 1st stage estimates are generated
using a truncated dataset that drops the first 5 years of the sample. This lagged version of the
IV tests the robustness of our results to the possible endogeneity of initial shares of homicide
risk within neighborhoods. We note that endogeneity in the distribution of initial homicide risk
between neighborhoods is addressed using flexible neighborhood-level fixed effects in the IV +
NSD model. The results reported in Table B.4 indicate that our estimates are robust to the
lagged version of the IV.

                Table B.4. Housing Prices, Park Proximity, and Homicide Risk:
                             Lagged City-Level Crime Instrument
                            (Omits the First Five Years of Sample)

                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                                              ln Housing Transaction Price
            Estimator                                   Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                                          NSD                NSD+IV
                                                           (1)                   (2)
            Park within 1/16 mile                        0.0359***               0.0397**
                                                          (0.0130)               (0.0157)
            Park 1 to 2 16 mile                             0.0043                0.0110
                                                          (0.0098)               (0.0110)
            Homicide Risk                               -0.0086***               -0.0175*
                                                          (0.0027)               (0.0090)
            Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk              -0.0129***              -0.0173***
                                                          (0.0037)               (0.0066)
            Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk            -0.0035               -0.0094*
                                                          (0.0029)               (0.0048)
            Neighborhood Fixed Effects                      Yes                    Yes
            City by Year Fixed Effects                      Yes                    Yes
            Dwelling Characteristics                        Yes                    Yes
            Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                Yes                    Yes
            Observations                                 328,968                 328,968

             Notes: Sample and variables are the same as described in Table 2, without the first five
            years of the sample for each city, i.e. Chicago (2006-2016), New York (2011-2016), and
            Philadelphia (2011-2016) from Zillow (2018). We use the first two years to construct the
            instrument. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
             * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.


    Finally, we test the robustness of our estimates to changes in park-specific expenditures
across three zones in Chicago. If improvements in park equipment, facilities, programming or
management occur simultaneously with crime reductions, then they could confound estimates
of the complementarity. City budget appropriations data are available for the northern, central,
and southern zones of Chicago for the years 2011-2017. As a result, this test involves a small
subset of the total transactions in the study (N=21,752). While less precise, base estimates
of the park premium and the complementarity reported in columns 1 and 3 are consistent
with the main findings of the paper. Column 2 adds controls for concurrent zone-specific park
expenditures. A comparison of column 1 to column 2 indicates that estimates are not sensitive
to this control. Column 3 adds (1 year) lagged expenditures. A comparison of column 3 to
column 4 indicates that estimates are similarly robust to controls for lagged expenditures.




                                                       67
Table B.5. Housing Prices, Park Proximity, and Homicide Risk: Park Expenditures

                                                                Dependent variable:
                                                            ln Housing Transaction Price
                                                    (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)
Estimator                                             Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                                        Chicago                    Chicago
                                                       2011-2016                  2012-2016

Park within 1/16 mile                            0.0418∗∗       0.0416∗∗       0.0398∗∗       0.0400∗∗
                                                 (0.0176)       (0.0177)       (0.0179)       (0.0179)
Park 1 to 2 16 mile                               0.0022         0.0022        −0.0020        −0.0020
                                                 (0.0166)       (0.0166)       (0.0188)       (0.0188)
Homicide Risk                                    −0.0025        −0.0026        −0.0074        −0.0070
                                                 (0.0067)       (0.0067)       (0.0072)       (0.0071)
Park within 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk           −0.0146∗∗      −0.0145∗∗       −0.0134∗       −0.0135∗
                                                 (0.0074)       (0.0074)       (0.0079)       (0.0079)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk              −0.0003        −0.0002        −0.0000         0.0001
                                                 (0.0064)       (0.0064)       (0.0073)       (0.0072)

Estimator                                         Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD) + IV


Park within 1/16 mile                            0.0567∗        0.0580∗∗       0.0638∗∗       0.0656∗∗
                                                 (0.0293)       (0.0293)       (0.0294)       (0.0293)
Park 1 to 2 16 mile                              −0.0090        −0.0088        −0.0075        −0.0065
                                                 (0.0276)       (0.0276)       (0.0308)       (0.0306)
Homicide Risk                                    −0.0364        −0.0390        −0.0454        −0.0449
                                                 (0.0541)       (0.0547)       (0.0587)       (0.0588)
Park within 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk            −0.0257        −0.0267        −0.0312∗       −0.0322∗
                                                 (0.0181)       (0.0183)       (0.0189)       (0.0189)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk               0.0054         0.0052         0.0019         0.0014
                                                 (0.0176)       (0.0176)       (0.0199)       (0.0198)
Neighborhood Fixed Effects                         Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
Year Fixed Effects                                 Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
Dwelling Characteristics                           Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                   Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
Total Concurrent Expenditures                      No              Yes            No             No
Total Lagged Expenditures                          No              No             No             Yes
Observations                                      21,752         21,752          16,831        16,831

 Notes: Sample and variables are same as described in Tables 2 and 8. The sample is matched to expenditure
data for Chicago (2011-2016). Expenditure data were acquired and digitized using publicly available
annual budget appropriations documentation for the city of Chicago: https://www.chicagoparkdistrict.
com/about-us/departments/budget-and-management. They are available for parks in north, central and
south regions of the City during the years 2011-2016. Standard errors clustered at the census tract level
are in parentheses.
 * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                   68
          Figure B.1. Park Proximity Premium, Homicide Risk and Initial Crime Shares




                                   (a) Mean Homicide Risk and Initial Shares




                                       (b) Park Premium and Initial Shares

Note: Panel a plots estimates of mean annual homicide risk by quartile of initial homicide risk using the first four years
(2001-2005) and the last four years (2010-2014) of the data panel in Chicago. Panel b plots estimates of the housing price
premium (within 1/16th mile) using the same Chicago data. Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood level.




                                                           69
C     Online Appendix: Robustness to Functional Form

Based on the visual evidence on the relationship between parks, crime, and transaction prices
provided in section 4, we use the nonlinear as our primary measure of homicide risk in tests
presented throughout the paper. In this Online Appendix C we reproduce our main tables with
two panels, it the top panel we present our nonlinear, transformed measure of homicide risk
          p     p         −1
(H̃ijt = 2 Hijt      (Hijt     ). In the bottom we present the more simple linear measure. Our
results are robust to the choice of the functional form.

Table C.1. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                     Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD) Estimates

                                                                          Dependent variable:
                                                                      ln Housing Transaction Price

                                                  (1)               (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)
                                                √     √ −1
 Panel A: Transformed Homicide Risk (H̃=2         H     H    )

Park within 1/16 mile                         0.0320***          0.0546***      0.0488***    0.0515***    0.0500***
                                               (0.0106)           (0.0143)       (0.0142)     (0.0139)      (0.0155)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile                             0.0033             0.0165         0.0128       0.0113        0.0135
                                               (0.0087)           (0.0117)       (0.0112)     (0.0111)      (0.0109)
Homicide Risk                                 -0.0272***         -0.0233***    -0.0115***    -0.0098***   -0.0091***
                                               (0.0029)           (0.0030)       (0.0028)     (0.0030)      (0.0034)
Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                                   -0.0116***    -0.0119***    -0.0129***    -0.0132**
                                                                  (0.0042)       (0.0041)     (0.0040)      (0.0057)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk                               -0.0065*        -0.0057      -0.0050       -0.0056
                                                                  (0.0036)       (0.0037)     (0.0036)      (0.0034)

 Panel B: Linear Homicide Risk
Park within 1/16 mile                         0.0331***          0.0457***      0.0379***    0.0395***    0.0357***
                                               (0.0107)            (0.0124)      (0.0121)     (0.0120)      (0.0116)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile                             0.0036              0.0129        0.0092       0.0070        0.0085
                                               (0.0087)            (0.0101)      (0.0097)     (0.0096)      (0.0094)
Homicide Risk                                 -0.0173***         -0.0143***    -0.0066***    -0.0065***   -0.0073***
                                               (0.0017)            (0.0018)      (0.0017)     (0.0019)      (0.0026)
Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                                   -0.0086***    -0.0078***    -0.0086***    -0.0077**
                                                                   (0.0029)      (0.0028)     (0.0026)      (0.0035)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk                               -0.0060**      -0.0050*      -0.0036      -0.0041*
                                                                   (0.0026)      (0.0027)     (0.0025)      (0.0024)

Neighborhood Fixed Effects                       Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
City by Year Fixed Effects                       Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
Dwelling Characteristics                         Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                                                  Yes           Yes          Yes
Neighborhood Time Trends                                                                        Yes          Yes
Park × Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                                                                      Yes
Hom. × Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                                                                      Yes
Observations                                    656,841           656,841       656,841       656,841    656,841
                                                                                                    √    √ −1
Notes: The top panel reproduces Table 2, where we use the non linear homicide risk measure (H̃ = 2 H        H     ).
Bottom panel shows results using the non-transformed linear Homicide Risk Measure. Standard errors clustered at the
neighborhood level are in parentheses.
* Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                          70
Table C.2. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                             Robustness to Omitted Variable Bias


                                                        1.1R2       1.2R2         1.3R2
                                                                              √ √ −1
                  Panel A: Transformed Homicide Risk (H̃=2                     H  H    )
                  Park within 1/16 mile  2.9477 1.4782                            0.9864

                  Homicide Risk                         0.5157     0.2583         0.1723

                  Park 1/16 × Homicide Risk             4.7035     2.3555         1.5711

                  Panel B: Linear Homicide Risk
                  Park within 1/16 mile    2.3628                  1.1847         0.7905

                  Homicide Risk                         0.5453     0.2731         0.1822

                  Park 1/16 × Homicide Risk             1.9342     0.9683         0.6458


                  Notes: The top panel reproduces Table 3, where we report Oster (2017)
                 proportionality coefficient using our non linear homicide risk measure (H̃ =
                  √ √ −1
                 2 H     H      ). Bottom panel shows results using the non-transformed
                 linear Homicide Risk Measure. Coefficients from Table C.1 Column (2) are
                 compared with our full set of controls shown in Column (5). R̃2 corresponds
                 to the R-squared from Table C.1 Column (5).
                  * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1%
                 level.




                                                      71
            Table C.3. Price Effects of the Complementarity between
                      Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                        NSD + Repeat Sales Estimates

                                                            Dependent variable:
                                                        ln Housing Transaction Price

Estimator                                      Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                                                NSD +            NSD +
                                                  NSD          Matching           True
                                                              Repeat Sales     Repeat Sales
                                                  (1)              (2)             (3)
                                                   √ √ −1
 Panel A: Transformed Homicide Risk           (H̃=2 H H     )

Park within 1/16 mile                         0.0488***
                                               (0.0142)
Park 1 to 2/16 miles                             0.0128
                                               (0.0112)
Homicide Risk                                -0.0115***        −0.0143∗∗∗      −0.0024∗∗
                                               (0.0028)         (0.0028)        (0.0010)
Park within 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk        -0.0119***         −0.0109∗       −0.0056∗∗∗
                                               (0.0041)         (0.0056)        (0.0019)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk             -0.0057         −0.0050         −0.0015
                                               (0.0037)         (0.0037)        (0.0027)

 Panel B: Linear Homicide Risk
Park within 1/16 mile                         0.0379***         0.0246∗
                                               (0.0121)         (0.0130)
Park 1 to 2/16 miles                            0.0092           0.0004
                                               (0.0097)         (0.0090)
Homicide Risk                                -0.0066***        −0.0077∗∗∗      −0.0023∗∗∗
                                               (0.0017)         (0.0017)        (0.0008)
Park within 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk        -0.0078***        −0.0106∗∗∗      −0.0034∗∗
                                               (0.0028)         (0.0039)        (0.0016)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk            -0.0050*         −0.0044        −0.0019∗∗∗
                                               (0.0027)         (0.0029)        (0.0006)

Neighborhood Fixed Effects                        Yes              Yes             Yes
City by Year Fixed Effects                        Yes              Yes             Yes
Dwelling Characteristics                          Yes              Yes
Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                  Yes              Yes
Observations                                   656,841           543,256         172,399

 Notes: The top panel reproduces Table 6, where we use the non linear homicide risk measure
         √ √ −1
(H̃ = 2 H        H    ). Bottom panel shows results using the non-transformed linear Homicide
Risk Measure. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
 * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                             72
Table C.4. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                         First Stage for City-Level Crime Instrument
                            (Omits the First Two Years of Sample)

                                                                        Dependent variable:
                                                 Homicide        Homicide     Park 1/16 ×            Park 1 to 2/16 mile ×
                                                   Risk            Risk      Homicide Risk              Homicide Risk
                                              No Interaction                           Interaction
                                                    (1)             (2)              (3)                      (4)
                                                 √ √ −1
 Panel A: Transformed Homicide Risk         (H̃=2 H H     )
Projected Homicide Risk                          0.4506***       0.4514***       -0.0333***               -0.0498***
                                                  (0.0117)        (0.0117)         (0.0053)                 (0.0045)
Park 1/16 × Projected Homicide Risk                                0.0033         0.6775***                  0.0082
                                                                  (0.0097)         (0.0136)                 (0.0052)
Park 1 to 2/16 × Projected Homicide Risk                           -0.0066         0.0068**                0.6743***
                                                                  (0.0066)         (0.0034)                 (0.0119)

1st Stage F-statistic                            1,461.88          496.85          848.21                  1071.56
 Panel B: Linear Homicide Risk
Projected Homicide Risk                          0.5087***       0.5138***       -0.0260***               -0.0439***
                                                  (0.0119)        (0.0122)         (0.0045)                 (0.0049)
Park 1/16 × Projected Homicide Risk                                -0.0092        0.6816***                  0.0101
                                                                  (0.0115)         (0.0156)                 (0.0066)
Park 1 to 2/16 × Projected Homicide Risk                         -0.1876**        0.0102**                 0.6708***
                                                                  (0.0092)         (0.0037)                 (0.0136)

1st Stage F-statistic                            1,802.89          609.03          634.11                   803.83
Neighborhood Fixed Effects                          Yes             Yes              Yes                     Yes
City by Year Fixed Effects                          Yes             Yes              Yes                     Yes
Dwelling Characteristics                            Yes             Yes              Yes                     Yes
Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                    Yes             Yes              Yes                     Yes
Observations                                      521,945         521,945          521,945                521,945
                                                                                                     √ √ −1
 Notes: The top panel reproduces Table 7, where we use the non linear homicide risk measure (H̃ = 2 H     H      ). Bottom
panel shows results using the non-transformed linear Homicide Risk Measure. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood
level are in parentheses.
 * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                            73
Table C.5. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                                   NSD + IV Estimates

                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                                   ln Housing Transaction Price
Estimator                                                   Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                           NSD+IV            NSD+IV       NSD+IV         NSD+IV            NSD+IV
                                             (1)                (2)         (3)             (4)              (5)
                                                      √   √ −1
 Panel A: Transformed Homicide Risk (H̃=2 H                 H    )
Park within 1/16 mile            0.0200**                    0.0484***      0.0478***                       0.0496***
                                  (0.0099)                    (0.0176)       (0.0174)                        (0.0175)
Park 1 to 2 16 mile                0.0011                      0.0206         0.0170                           0.0165
                                  (0.0079)                    (0.0131)       (0.0129)                        (0.0131)
Homicide Risk                   -0.0302***                  -0.0255***     -0.0272***     -0.0203**        -0.0259***
                                  (0.0098)                    (0.0094)       (0.0097)      (0.0092)          (0.0099)
Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                               -0.0150**      -0.0145**      -0.0429*         -0.0148**
                                                              (0.0066)       (0.0066)      (0.0254)          (0.0067)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk                           -0.0099*        -0.0081      -0.0092*           -0.0079
                                                              (0.0054)       (0.0052)      (0.0052)          (0.0054)

Wu-Hausman Test (P-values)                   0.1367             0.2604       0.2399         0.1973          0.5862
 Panel B: Linear Homicide Risk
Park within 1/16 mile                      0.0215**          0.0358***      0.0364***                      0.0381***
                                           (0.0101)           (0.0137)       (0.0136)                       (0.0137)
Park 1 to 2 16 mile                         0.0015             0.0127         0.0107                         0.0104
                                           (0.0079)           (0.0100)       (0.0099)                       (0.0100)
Homicide Risk                             -0.0165***        -0.0135***     -0.0146***     -0.0141***       -0.0139**
                                           (0.0051)           (0.0048)       (0.0054)       (0.0053)        (0.0058)
Park 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                               -0.0107**      -0.0109**        -0.0158       -0.0112**
                                                              (0.0047)       (0.0047)       (0.0135)        (0.0049)
Park 1 to 2/16 mile × Homicide Risk                          -0.0079**       -0.0064*      -0.0072**        -0.0063*
                                                              (0.0037)       (0.0036)       (0.0036)        (0.0038)
Wu-Hausman Test (P-values)                   0.2091            0.2189         0.2127         0.1764          0.4255
Neighborhood Fixed Effects                    Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes
City by Year Fixed Effects                    Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes
Dwelling Characteristics                      Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes
Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls              Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes
Neighborhood Time Trends                                                       Yes
Near-Far-Park Time Trends                                                                    Yes
Neighborhood by Year FE                                                                                       Yes
Observations                                521,945             521,945      521,945       521,945          521,945
                                                                                                       √√ −1
Notes: The top panel reproduces Table 8, where we use the non linear homicide risk measure (H̃ = 2 H        H     ).
Bottom panel shows results using the non-transformed linear Homicide Risk Measure. Standard errors clustered at the
neighborhood level are in parentheses.
* Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                           74
Table C.6. Price Effects of the Complementarity between Park Proximity and Homicide Risk:
                  Disentangling Complementarity from Taste Heterogeneity

                                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                                                ln Housing Transaction Price
    Estimator                                                          Neighborhood Spatial Differences (NSD)
                                                   (1)                    (2)               (3)                (4)      (5)
                                               √    √       −1
     Panel A: Transformed Homicide Risk (H̃=2 H          H         )

    Park within 1/16 mile                      0.0260***                0.0503***        0.0257**        0.0484***    0.0500***
                                                (0.0101)                 (0.0136)        (0.0100)         (0.0133)     (0.0155)
    Homicide Risk                             -0.0129***               -0.0091***       -0.0139***      -0.0104***   -0.0091***
                                                (0.0031)                 (0.0031)        (0.0030)         (0.0031)     (0.0034)
    Park within 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                              -0.0124***                       -0.0116***    -0.0132**
                                                                         (0.0045)                         (0.0040)     (0.0057)
    Prop. Af. American                        -0.2515***               -0.2531***       -0.2872***      -0.2885***   -0.2248***
                                                (0.0336)                 (0.0335)        (0.0301)         (0.0301)     (0.0354)
    Prop. Latino                              -0.2435***               -0.2449***       -0.2716***      -0.2705***   -0.2430***
                                                (0.0244)                 (0.0245)        (0.0273)         (0.0272)     (0.0274)
    Park 1/16 × Prop. Af. American             -0.0448**                  -0.0165                                       -0.0109
                                                (0.0214)                 (0.0239)                                      (0.0339)
    Homicide Risk × Prop. Af. American         -0.0118**                -0.0133**                                    -0.0284***
                                                (0.0057)                 (0.0057)                                      (0.0077)
    Park 1/16 × Prop. Latino                                                             -0.0620*         -0.0493       -0.0111
                                                                                         (0.0344)        (0.0333)      (0.0378)
    Homicide Risk × Prop. Latino                                                         0.0187**        0.0169**       -0.0059
                                                                                         (0.0077)        (0.0076)      (0.0085)

     Panel B: Linear Homicide Risk
    Park within 1/16 mile                      0.0265***                0.0381***        0.0261***       0.0375***    0.0357***
                                                (0.0101)                 (0.0114)         (0.0100)        (0.0115)     (0.0116)
    Homicide Risk                             -0.0081***               -0.0059***       -0.0091***      -0.0071***   -0.0073***
                                                (0.0022)                 (0.0022)         (0.0019)        (0.0019)     (0.0026)
    Park within 1/16 mile × Homicide Risk                              -0.0078***                       -0.0078***    -0.0077**
                                                                         (0.0028)                         (0.0026)     (0.0035)
    Prop. Af. American                        -0.2692***               -0.2693***       -0.2872***      -0.2876***   -0.2475***
                                                (0.0351)                 (0.0349)        (0.0300)         (0.0300)     (0.0362)
    Prop. Latino                              -0.2445***               -0.2455***       -0.2776***      -0.2772***   -0.2503***
                                                (0.0245)                 (0.0245)        (0.0278)         (0.0277)     (0.0279)
    Park 1/16 × Prop. Af. American             -0.0456**                  -0.0215                                       -0.0180
                                                (0.0214)                 (0.0229)                                      (0.0327)
    Homicide Risk × Prop. Af. American           -0.0061                  -0.0077                                     -0.0191**
                                                (0.0066)                 (0.0066)                                      (0.0083)
    Park 1/16 × Prop. Latino                                                              -0.0629*        -0.0532       -0.0168
                                                                                          (0.0344)       (0.0335)      (0.0381)
    Homicide Risk × Prop. Latino                                                         0.0203***       0.0192**       -0.0020
                                                                                          (0.0077)       (0.0077)      (0.0089)

    Neighborhood Fixed Effects                     Yes                    Yes               Yes            Yes          Yes
    City by Year Fixed Effects                     Yes                    Yes               Yes            Yes          Yes
    Dwelling Characteristics                       Yes                    Yes               Yes            Yes          Yes
    Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls               Yes                    Yes               Yes            Yes          Yes
    Neighborhood Time Trends                       Yes                    Yes               Yes            Yes          Yes
    Park × Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                                                                             Yes
    Hom. × Time-Var Socio-Economic Controls                                                                             Yes
    Observations                               656,834                  656,834           656,834        656,834      656,834

    Notes: The top panel reproduces Table 9, where we use the non linear homicide risk measure (H̃ =
     √ √ −1
    2 H      H     ). Bottom panel shows results using the non-transformed linear Homicide Risk Measure.
    Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood level are in parentheses.
    * Significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                              75
