                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ROBOTS, TRADE, AND LUDDISM:
  A SUFFICIENT STATISTIC APPROACH TO OPTIMAL TECHNOLOGY REGULATION

                                       Arnaud Costinot
                                        Iván Werning

                                     Working Paper 25103
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25103


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




We thank Pol Antràs, Matt Grant, Marc Melitz, Andrés Rodriguez-Clare, Uwe Thuemmel and
seminar and conference participants at Berkeley, MIT, Harvard, BFI, Copenhagen, Oslo,
Princeton, NBER, and BU for helpful comments. Masao Fukui, Mary Gong and Martina Uccioli
provided excellent research assistance. Finally, we thank HAL for its unrelenting
discouragement. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Arnaud Costinot and Iván Werning. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Robots, Trade, and Luddism: A Sufficient Statistic Approach to Optimal Technology Regulation
Arnaud Costinot and Iván Werning
NBER Working Paper No. 25103
September 2018
JEL No. F11,F13,H0,H2,H21

                                          ABSTRACT

Technological change, from the advent of robots to expanded trade opportunities, tends to create
winners and losers. How should government policy respond? And how should the overall welfare
impact of technological change on society be valued? We provide a general theory of optimal
technology regulation in a second best world, with rich heterogeneity across households, linear
taxes on the subset of firms affected by technological change, and a nonlinear tax on labor
income. Our first results consist of three optimal tax formulas, with minimal structural
assumptions, involving sufficient statistics that can be implemented using evidence on the
distributional impact of new technologies, such as robots and trade. Our second result is a
comparative static exercise illustrating that while distributional concerns create a rationale for
non-zero taxes on robots and trade, the magnitude of these taxes may decrease as the process of
automation and globalization deepens and inequality increases. Our final result shows that,
despite limited tax instruments, technological progress is always welcome and valued in the same
way as in a first best world.


Arnaud Costinot
Department of Economics, E52-534
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02142
and NBER
costinot@mit.edu

Iván Werning
Department of Economics, E52-536
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
iwerning@mit.edu
1    Introduction
Robots and artificial intelligence technologies are on the rise. So are imports from China
and other developing countries. These changes create opportunities for some workers,
destroy opportunities for others, and generate significant distributional consequences, as
documented in the recent empirical work of Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013) and Ace-
moglu and Restrepo (2017b) for the United States.
    Should any policy response be in place? Should we become more luddites as ma-
chines become more efficient or more protectionist as trade opportunities expand? And,
ultimately, how should we value the overall welfare impact of technological progress on
society? The goal of this paper is to provide a general second-best framework to help
address these and other related questions.
    Answers to these questions necessarily depend on the range of available policy in-
struments. At one extreme, if lump-sum transfers are available, as in the Second Welfare
Theorem, or if linear taxes are available on all goods and factors, as in Diamond and
Mirrlees (1971a,b) and Dixit and Norman (1980), then distribution can be done without
distorting production. In such cases, production efficiency implies the optimality of zero
taxes on robots and free trade. At another extreme, in the absence of any policy instru-
ment, whenever technological progress creates at least one loser, a welfare criterion must
be consulted and the status quo may be preferred.
    Here, we focus on a more realistic intermediate situation where tax instruments are
available, but are more limited than those ensuring production efficiency. We consider
two sets of technologies, which we refer to as old and new. For instance, firms using
the new technology may be producers of robots or traders that export some goods in
exchange for others. Since we are interested in the optimal regulation of the new tech-
nology, we do not impose any restriction on the taxation of firms using that technology,
e.g. taxes on robots or trade. In contrast, we restrict the set of taxes that can be imposed
on households’ labor supply to a non-linear income tax, as in Mirrlees (1971). In the eco-
nomic environment that we consider, the after-tax wage structure can be influenced by
tax policy, but not completely controlled, which creates a meaningful trade-off between
redistribution and efficiency.
    Our first set of results characterizes the structure of optimal taxes on new technology
firms. In a two-type environment, Naito (1999) has proven that governments seeking to
redistribute income from high- to low-skill workers may have incentives to depart from
production efficiency. Doing so manipulates relative wages, which cannot be taxed di-
rectly, and relaxes incentive compatibility constraints. Our general analysis goes beyond


                                             1
this qualitative insight by allowing for rich heterogeneity across households and deriving
optimal tax formulas expressed in terms of sufficient statistics that are, at least in princi-
ple, empirically measurable.
    Specifically, we provide three novel optimal tax formulas. Each formula provides dif-
ferent insights and involves its own set of sufficient statistics, but they all give a central
role to the impact on the wage distribution. Although the response of wages to robots
or trade is of obvious empirical interest for descriptive reasons, our formulas show how
it also provides a sufficient statistic for optimal policy design. Given knowledge of this
statistic, the specific structure of the economy leading to a change in wages can be left in
the background. For example, it is not necessary to take a stand on how robots and work-
ers may be combined to perform different tasks, or on how production processes may get
fragmented across countries. While these features may be critical in shaping the impact
of new technologies on wages, all that is needed according to our formulas is knowledge
of this impact, not how it comes about.
    We illustrate the usefulness of our approach by exploring the magnitude of optimal
taxes on robots and trade. We focus on the third of our formulas, which can be imple-
mented without taking a stand on preferences for redistribution, since it does not involve
social welfare weights. Using the reduced-form evidence of Acemoglu and Restrepo
(2017b) on the impact of robots in the United States, we find efficient taxes on robots
ranging from 1% to 3.7%. In contrast, the evidence of Chetverikov, Larsen and Palmer
(2016) on the impact of Chinese imports on U.S. inequality points towards much smaller
efficient tariffs, between 0.03% to 0.11%. While the estimated impact of robots and Chi-
nese imports on wages is of similar magnitude, robots account for a much smaller share
of the U.S. economy. According to our third formula, this calls for a much larger tax on
robots than trade.
    Our second result is a comparative static exercise that asks: as progress in Artificial
Intelligence and other areas makes for cheaper and better robots, should we tax them
more? Or in a trade context, does hyper-globalization call for hyper-protection? We do
so by constructing a simple economy in which the government has Rawlsian preferences
and cheaper machines, either robots or imported machines from China, increase in in-
equality. In spite of both the government’s extreme preference for redistribution and the
negative impact of technological progress on inequality, we show that improvements in
new technologies are associated with lower taxes on firms using those technologies. Thus,
as the process of automation and globalization deepens, more inequality may best be met
with lower Luddism and less protectionism.
    Our final result focuses on the welfare impact of new technologies under the assump-


                                              2
tion that constrained, but optimal policies are in place. We offer a novel envelope result
that generalizes the evaluation of productivity shocks in first-best environments, as in
Solow (1957) and Hulten (1978), to distorted economies. Because of restrictions on the set
of available tax instruments, marginal rates of substitution may not be equalized across
agents and marginal rates of transformation may not be equalized between new and old
technology firms. Yet, “Immiserizing Growth,” as in Bhagwati (1958), never arises. Pro-
vided that governments are free to tax new technology firms, the welfare impact of tech-
nological progress can be measured in the exact same way as in first best environments,
despite not being first best.
    A direct implication of our envelope result is that even if new technologies tend to
have a disproportionate effect on the wages of less skilled workers, and one cares about
redistribution, this does not create any new rationale for taxes and subsidies on innova-
tion, that is, no reason to distort technology adoption by firms.


Related Literature
Our paper makes three distinct contributions to the existing literature. The first one is a
general characterization of the structure of optimal taxes in environments with restricted
factor income taxation. In so doing, we fill a gap between the general analysis of Diamond
and Mirrlees (1971a,b) and Dixit and Norman (1980), which assumes that linear taxes on
all factors are available, and specific examples, typically with two goods and two factors,
in which only income taxation is available, as in the original work of Naito (1999), and
subsequent work by Guesnerie (1998), Spector (2001), Naito (2006), and Jacobs (2015).1 On
the broad spectrum of restrictions on available policy instruments, one can also view our
analysis as an intermediate step between the work of Diamond and Mirrlees (1971a,b) and
Dixit and Norman (1980) and the trade policy literature where it is common to assume
that the only instruments available for redistribution are trade taxes. In fact, one of our
three formulas is a strict generalization of the formulas reviewed by Helpman (1997),
including Grossman and Helpman’s (1994) tariff formula.
    Our second contribution is to offer a more specific application of our general formulas
to the taxation of robots and trade. In recent work, Guerreiro, Rebelo and Teles (2017)
and Thuemmel (2018) have studied a model with both heterogeneous workers as well as
   1 In the first three papers, like in Dixit and Norman (1980), the new technology is international trade.
In another related trade application, Feenstra and Lewis (1994) study an environment where governments
cannot subject different worker types to different taxes, but can offer subsidies to workers moving from one
industry to another in response to trade. They provide conditions under which such a trade adjustment
assistance program are sufficient to guarantee Pareto gains from trade, as in Dixit and Norman (1980).


                                                     3
robots. Assuming factor-specific taxes are unavailable, they find a non-zero tax on robots
to be generally optimal, in line with Naito (1999). Although we share the same rationale
for finding nonzero taxes on robots, based on Naito (1999), our main goal is not to sign
the tax on robots, nor to explore a particular production structure, but instead to offer
tax formulas highlighting key sufficient statistics needed to determine the level of taxes,
with fewer structural assumptions. In this way, our formulas provide a foundation for
empirical work as well as the basis for novel comparative static results. In another recent
contribution, Hosseini and Shourideh (2018) analyze a multi-country Ricardian model
of trade with input-output linkages and imperfect mobility of workers across sectors.
Although sector-specific taxes on labor are not explicitly allowed, these missing taxes can
be perfectly mimicked by the available tax instruments. By implication, their economy
provides an alternative implementation but fits Diamond and Mirrlees (1971b,a) and Dixit
and Norman (1980, 1986), where households face a complete set of linear taxes, including
sector-specific taxes on labor. Production efficiency and free trade then follow, just as they
did in Diamond and Mirrlees (1971a,b).2
    Our third contribution is a new perspective on the welfare impact of technological
progress in the presence of distortions. In a first best world, the impact of small pro-
ductivity shocks can be evaluated, absent any restriction on preferences and technology,
using a simple envelope argument as in Solow (1957) and Hulten (1978). With distortions,
evaluating the welfare impact of productivity shocks, in general, requires additional in-
formation about whether such shocks aggravate or alleviate underlying distortions. In
an environment with markups, for instance, this boils down to whether employment is
reallocated towards goods with higher or lower markups, as in Baeqee and Farhi (2017).
If the aggravation of distortions is large enough, technological progress may even lower
welfare, as discussed by Bhagwati (1971). Here, we follow a different approach. Our
analysis builds on the idea that while economies may be distorted and tax instruments
may be limited, the government may still have access to policy instruments to regulate
the new technology. If so, we show that the envelope results of Solow (1957) and Hulten
(1978) still hold, with direct implications for the taxation of innovation and the valuation
of new technologies.




   2A separate line of work, e.g. Itskhoki (2008), Antras, de Gortari and Itskhoki (2017) and Tsyvinski and
Werquin (2018), studies technological changes such as trade or robots, without considering taxes on these
new technologies, but instead focusing on how the income tax schedule may respond to these changes.


                                                    4
2    Environment
We consider an economy with an arbitrary number of goods and a continuum of hetero-
geneous households supplying labor. Households have the same preferences, but differ
in their skills. We allow this heterogeneity to be multi-dimensional, unlike the classical
one-dimensional Mirrleesian model. For instance, a household may be more productive
at some tasks, but less productive at others, as in a Roy model. Households sell their
labor in competitive labor markets and pay nonlinear taxes on their earnings to the gov-
ernment. Production is carried out by competitive firms. The government may linearly
taxes transactions between firms and households as well as the transactions that take
place between firms, inducing production inefficiency. This is the focus of our analysis.


2.1 Preferences
All households have identical and weakly separable preferences between goods and la-
bor. The utility of household θ is given by

                                    U (θ ) = u(C (θ ), n(θ )),
                                        C (θ ) = v(c(θ )),

where C (θ ) is the sub-utility that household θ derives from consuming goods, n(θ ) is her
labor supply, c(θ ) ≡ {ci (θ )} is her vector of good consumption, and u and v are quasi-
concave and strictly increasing utility functions.


2.2 Technology
Households are distinguished by their skill θ ∈ Θ ⊆ R n with distribution F. Each skill
type θ provides a distinct labor input for use in production. We assume that, for at least
one of the elements of θ = (θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θn ), higher values are associated with higher pro-
ductivity (thus, commanding higher wages).
   We divide technologies into two types, which we refer to as old and new, each associ-
ated with a distinct production set. In our applications, the old technology is how most
production takes place, while the new technology captures either trade with the rest of
the world or the production of machines, like robots. The dichotomy between old and
new technologies is what allows us to consider the taxation of transactions between firm,
robots or trade in our applications, and the resulting aggregate production inefficiency.



                                                5
Without such taxation we could consolidate technology into a single aggregate produc-
tion set.


Old Technology. Let y ≡ {yi } denote the vector of total net output by old technology
firms and let n ≡ {n(θ )} denote the schedule of their total labor demand. Positive values
for yi represent output, while negative yi represent inputs. The production set associated
with the old technology corresponds to all production plans (y, n) such that

                                       G (y, n) ≤ 0,

where G is some convex and homogeneous function of (y, n). Homogeneity of G implies
constant returns to scale.
   Except for constant returns to scale, we impose no restriction on the old technology.
This allows for arbitrary production networks and global supply chains. For instance, old
technology firms may be able to produce a final good by executing a continuum of tasks,
with each task chosen to be performed by either workers or robots, as in Acemoglu and
Restrepo (2017a), or by domestic or foreign workers, as in Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg
(2008). In such environments, the production possibility frontier G can be derived from a
subproblem that solves the optimal assignment of workers and other inputs to tasks. The
commodity vector y then consists of the final good produced and the intermediate goods
demanded, i.e., the robots or foreign labor services supplied by new technology firms,
but omits tasks as they become subsumed in the definition of G. Appendix B.1 provides
the formal mapping between production functions that explicitly model tasks and our
general production possibility frontier G.


New Technology. Let y∗ ≡ {yi∗ } denote the vector of total net output by new tech-
nology firms. The production set associated with the new technology corresponds to all
production plans y∗ such that
                                    G ∗ (y∗ ; φ) ≤ 0,

where G ∗ is some convex and homogeneous function of y∗ and φ > 0 is a productivity
parameter. We assume that G ∗ is decreasing in φ so that an increase in φ corresponds to
an improvement in the new technology.
   Unlike the old technology, the new technology does not employ labor directly. This
assumption fits well our applications to robots and trade. In the first case, new technol-
ogy firms may be robot-producers that transform a composite of all other goods in the
economy, call it gross output, into robots. This is the standard way to model capital accu-


                                            6
mulation in a neoclassical growth model.3 In the second case, new technology firms may
be traders who export and import goods,

                                          G ∗ (y∗ ; φ) = p̄(φ) · y∗ ,

where p̄(φ) ≡ { p̄i (φ)} denotes the vector of world prices, and · denotes the inner product
of two vectors. An increase in φ corresponds to a positive terms-of-trade shock that may
be due to a change in transportation costs or productivity in the rest of the world.
    Abstracting from labor in the new technology is convenient, as it implies that wages
are determined by the old technology. New technology has an effect on wages, through its
effect on the structure of production within the old technology, but not directly through
employment. For a fixed value of φ, this restriction is without loss of generality since
the new technology sector can always be defined as the last stage of production where
taxation is imposed, as described in Appendix B.2. For comparative static exercises, the
omission of labor from G ∗ implicitly restricts attention to changes in φ that are labor-
neutral in the sense that that they do not induce changes in wages for given prices faced
by the old technology firms.


Resource Constraint. For all goods, the demand by households is equal to the supply
by old and new technology firms,
                                         ˆ
                                             c(θ )dF (θ ) = y + y∗ .


2.3 Prices and Taxes
Factors. Let w ≡ {w(θ )} denote the schedule of wages faced by firms. Because of in-
come taxation, a household with ability θ and labor earnings w(θ )n(θ ) retains

                                       w(θ )n(θ ) − T (w(θ )n(θ )),

where T (w(θ )n(θ )) denotes its total tax payment. Crucially, the income tax schedule T is
the same for all households. This rules out agent-specific lump-sum transfers, in contrast
to the Second Welfare Theorem, as well as factor-specific linear taxes, in contrast to the
analysis of Diamond and Mirrlees (1971a,b) and Dixit and Norman (1980).
   3 Due   to constant returns to scale, profits are zero for the owners of new technology firms. In our
framework, one can capture windfall gains of initial owners by introducing endowments of robots. This
leads to issues similar to those found in the literature on capital taxation, with the optimum possibly calling
for expropriatory levels of taxation of such initial wealth.


                                                      7
Goods. Let p∗ ≡ { pi∗ } denote the vector of good prices faced by new technology firms.
Because of ad-valorem taxes t∗ ≡ {ti∗ }, these prices may differ from the vector of good
prices p ≡ { pi } faced by old technology firms and households,

                                      pi = (1 + ti∗ ) pi∗ , for all i.

Production inefficiency arises if t∗ 6= 0 because of the wedge created between the two
technologies. In the robot context the tax in question might be a tax on robots produced
by the new technology and employed in the old technology. In a trade context, an import
tariff or an export subsidy on good i corresponds to ti∗ > 0, whereas an import subsidy or
an export tax corresponds to ti∗ < 0. Since demand and supply only depend on relative
prices, we can normalize prices and taxes such that p1 = p1∗ = 1 and t1∗ = 0. We maintain
this normalization throughout.4


3     Equilibrium, Social Welfare, and Government Problem
We now define the equilibrium for this economy, introduce our general social welfare
criterion, and describe the government problem.


3.1 Equilibrium
An equilibrium consists of an allocation, c ≡ {c(θ )}, n ≡ {n(θ )}, C ≡ {C (θ )}, y ≡ {yi },
and y∗ ≡ {yi∗ }, prices and wages, p ≡ { pi }, p∗ ≡ { pi∗ }, and w ≡ {w(θ )}, as well as
an income tax schedule, T, and taxes on new technology firms, t∗ ≡ {ti∗ }, such that: (i )
households maximize their utility, (ii ) firms maximize profits, (iii ) markets clear, and (iv)
prices satisfy the non-arbitrage condition, as described in Appendix C.
   The equilibrium determination of wages is central to our analysis. As shown in Ap-
pendix C, profit maximization by old technology firms implies a wage schedule

                                               w( p, n; θ )

that depends on prices p and labor n. By affecting the labor demand of old technology
firms, changes in p affect wages. Given the limited ability of the government to tax dif-
ferent factors differently, this creates a pecuniary motive for taxing goods. This is the key

    4 Section
            4.3 discusses the generalization of our results to environments where ad-valorem taxes on
old technology firms, t ≡ {ti }, are also available. In such case, the government may also create a wedge
between the prices p ≡ { pi } faced by old technology firms and those faced by consumers, q ≡ {qi }.


                                                     8
mechanism at play in our optimal tax formulas.


3.2 Social Welfare
We consider a general social welfare criterion that depends on the distribution of indi-
vidual well-beings, not the particular well-being of certain agents. Any consumption
and labor supply schedule (c, n) ≡ {c(θ ), n(θ )} is associated with a utility schedule
U ≡ {U (θ )}. This, in turn, induces a cumulative distribution over utilities, summa-
rized by the utility level Ū (z) associated with each quantile z ∈ [0, 1]. The social welfare
objective is assumed to be a strictly increasing function W of this induced distribution,

                                                W (Ū ).

When θ is one dimensional and higher-θ households achieve higher utility, as in the
standard Mirrleesian setup, this nests the special case of a weighted utilitarian objective.
When θ is multidimensional, our assumption about W only restricts Pareto weights to be
the same for all households θ earning the same wage, since they obtain the same utility.


3.3 Government Problem
The government problem is to select a competitive equilibrium with taxes that maximizes
social welfare. A compact statement of the government problem is as follows:

                                             max                   W (Ū )
                                 (c,n,y,y∗ ,p,p∗ ,w,T,t∗ ,Ū )∈Ω


subject to
                                          G ∗ (y∗ ; φ) ≤ 0,

where the feasible set Ω imposes all equilibrium conditions except the resource constraint
associated with the new technology, G ∗ (y∗ ; φ) ≤ 0, as also described in Appendix C.


4    Optimal Technology Regulation
Our first set of results characterizes the structure of taxes on new technology firms. Specif-
ically, we provide optimal tax formulas expressed in terms of sufficient statistics and us-
ing minimal structural assumptions.



                                                    9
4.1 The Trade-off Between Efficiency and Redistribution
Our tax formulas are derived by starting from an initial equilibrium with taxes (t∗ , T ) and
engineering marginal changes δt∗ in the taxes on the new technology firms, potentially
accompanied by changes in the nonlinear tax schedule δT, such that all the equilibrium
conditions are met except G ∗ (y∗ ; φ) ≤ 0. These marginal tax changes, in turn, induce
equilibrium marginal adjustments in prices δp, wages δw, quantities δy∗ , labor δn, and,
ultimately, social welfare. Our three formulas differ in whether the nonlinear tax is ad-
justed and how it is adjusted.
    We start with an intermediate result that encompasses all cases, providing a condition
that the marginal tax changes δt∗ and δT as well as the marginal adjustments δp, δw, δy∗
and δn must satisfy so that welfare is not improved by the variation. For any household
at the quantile z ∈ [0, 1] of both the utility and wage distribution, let w̄(z), n̄(z), x̄ (z), and
c̄(z) denote the common wage, labor supply, earnings, and consumption vector, respec-
tively, and let τ (z) ≡ T ′ ( x̄ (z)) denote the marginal income tax rate. Using the previous
notation, our first optimal tax result can be stated as follows.

Lemma 1. Optimal taxes satisfy
                    ˆ
    ∗          ∗
  ( p − p) · δy −       τ (z)w̄(z)δn̄(z) dz
                                ˆ
                             = [λ̄(z) − 1][(1 − τ (z))n̄(z) δw̄(z) − c̄(z) · δp − δT (z)] dz, (1)

where λ̄(z) measures the social marginal benefit of allocating income to households at quantile z,
as described in Appendix D.1.

    Lemma 1 captures the trade-off between efficiency and redistribution. It states that for
a marginal change in taxes not to improve welfare, its marginal costs in terms of efficiency
should be equal to its marginal benefit in terms of redistribution.
    Efficiency considerations are reflected in two fiscal externalities on the left-hand side
of equation (1). The first term represents the change in revenues from the linear tax t∗ ,
also equal to the marginal increase in the deadweight burden or “Harberger triangle”;
the second term captures the change in revenue from the non-linear income tax schedule.
These changes in revenue are not internalized by private agents and thus represent a
change in efficiency.
    Distributional considerations are represented by the right-hand side. It evaluates the
change in utility in monetary terms directly perceived by a household, weighted by
λ̄(z) − 1. By an envelope argument, the marginal change in real income for z is given

                                                10
by (1 − τ (z))n̄(z) δw̄(z) − c̄(z) · δp − δT (z). The first two terms, (1 − τ (z))n̄(z) δw̄(z) −
δT (z), capture the change in income, due to both the change in before-tax income as well
as the change in the tax schedule. The term −c̄(z) · δp adjusts this change in income by a
household-specific measure of inflation.
    It is also important to note that all variables and adjustments in equation (1) are ex-
pressed in terms of the percentile z, not the underlying skills θ. This implies that one can
collapse heterogeneity and proceed as if there were of a single dimension of heterogene-
ity. For empirical purposes, this aspect is crucial. It implies that researchers can focus
measurement on the wage distribution, as is often done in practice, without modeling
underlying rich sources of heterogeneity.


4.2    Three Tax Formulas
We now explore three feasible tax variations, each leading to a novel optimal tax formula.
All variations lead to changes in y∗ in any desired direction, but differ with respect to the
nonlinear labor income tax schedule. In particular, we consider variations with

   i. no change in income taxes, δT = 0;

  ii. no change in (the distribution of) labor supply, δn̄ = 0;

  iii. no change in (the distribution of) utility, δU = 0.

To obtain a formula for the tax on good i in each of these cases, we focus on a marginal
changes with δyi∗ 6= 0 and δy∗j = 0 for j 6= i. For notational convenience, all formulas are
expressed in terms of the price gap pi − pi∗ between old and new technology firms.


No change in income taxes. Our first variation leaves the labor income tax schedule
unchanged. Hence, the last term in equation (1) vanishes. In addition, the change in
labor supply simply equals the change in wage times an uncompensated elasticity of
labor supply.

Formula 1 (δT = 0). Optimal taxes satisfy

                                  δw̄(z)                                          δw̄(z)
                  ˆ                                                                           
                                                     δp
       pi∗                                                             u
                                                              
pi −         =−        (λ̄(z)− 1)        |    − c̄(z) ∗ |δT =0 + τ (z)ε (z)n̄(z)          |      dz,
                                   δyi∗ δT =0        δyi                            δyi∗ δT =0

where εu (z) is an uncompensated elasticity of labor supply.




                                                   11
   Our first formula stresses the need to combine the changes in wages—evaluating
both their direct distributional impact and their indirect incentive effects on fiscal rev-
enues—with the changes in prices faced by consumers. It offers a strict generalization of
the tax formulas found in the political economy of trade literature, as reviewed in Help-
man (1997). Compared to that earlier literature, we allow for endogenous labor supply,
nonlinear income taxation, as well as general preferences and technology. In the special
case with inelastic labor supply and without labor income taxation, our formula becomes

                                                       δw̄(z)                     δp
                                        ˆ
                           pi∗
                                                                                                
                    pi −         = − (λ̄(z)− 1)               | δT = 0 − c̄ ( z )      | δT = 0   dz.
                                                        δyi∗                      δyi∗

If one further assumes quasi-linear preferences and a specific-factor model, with a discrete
                                        δw̄( j)
number of factors and z levels, so that δy∗ = 0 for j 6= i, one obtains
                                                       i


                                                                   δw̄(i )
                                            pi − pi∗ = −(λ̄(i )− 1) ∗ ,
                                                                    δyi

which corresponds to the tariff formula derived by Helpman (1997) for various political-
economy models, including the lobbying model of Grossman and Helpman (1994).5


No change in (the distribution of) labor supply. Our second variation engineers a
change in the income tax schedule that keeps the distribution of labor supply unchanged.
Because there is a continuum of ways to do this we also maintain resource feasibility. In
the canonical Mirrleesian case, where θ is one dimensional, this variation ensures that la-
bor supply is unchanged for each household. When θ is multidimensional, there are not
enough instruments to ensure this, but still enough instruments to keep the distribution
unchanged.

Formula 2 (δn = 0). Optimal taxes satisfy

                                                                            δω (z)
                                        ˆ
                       pi −   pi∗   =       ψ̄(z)(1 − τ (z))w̄(z)n̄(z)             |   dz,
                                                                             δyi∗ δn=0

where ω (z) = w̄′ (z)/w̄(z) and the coefficient ψ̄(z) depends only on household preferences and
social weights, not technology, as described in Appendix D.2. When household preferences are
                                                              ´z             ´
quasilinear, it simplifies to ψ̄(z) = Λ̄(z) − z with Λ̄(z) ≡ ( 0 λ̄(z̃)dz̃)/( λ̄(z̃)dz̃).
   5 Of   course, different political-economy models—direct democracy (Mayer, 1984), political support
function (Hillman, 1982), tariff formation function (Findlay and Wellisz, 1982), electoral competition (Magee
et al., 1989), and influence-driven contributions (Grossman and Helpman, 1994)—lead to different social
weights, λ̄(i ). Our analysis here is agnostic about those.


                                                           12
    Formula 2 only features one distributional term on the right-hand side. Because the
distribution of labor is unchanged, the labor fiscal externality is not present. Although
the expression is simple, who wins and who loses is no longer mechanical, as it now
incorporates the adjustment in the income tax schedule required to keep the distribution
of labor supply unchanged.
    One interesting difference between Formula 1 and Formula 2 is the complete absence
of the adjustment in real income due to price changes. Intuitively, when the income tax
schedule is modified to keep labor unchanged, it must offset these price changes. After all,
labor supply decisions depend on real income, the tradeoff between n and the attainable
aggregate consumption C. Note also that the elasticity of labor supply does not enter
Formula 2; again, this is due to the fact that the distribution of labor is kept unchanged.
    Compared to Formula 1, only changes in relative wages, as captured by δω appear,
weighted by distributional concerns summarized in ψ̄(z). Note that it is the change in
the growth rate ω (z) = w′ (z)/w(z) rather than the level w(z) immediately implies that a
zero tax is optimal if the proportional impact on wages is uniform across z. This reflects
the fact that only relative wages matter for incentives. To see this more formally, consider
the incentive compatibility constraints that hold at any equilibrium

                                                                          w̄(z′ )
                                   u(C̄ (z), n̄(z)) ≥ u(C̄ (z′ ), n̄(z′ ) w̄(z) ),

where C̄ (z) is the indirect utility from consumption, given income w̄(z)n̄(z) − T (w̄(z)n̄(z))
                                                                   w̄(z′ )
and prices p. In Formula 2, ω (z) is the local counterpart to w̄(z) . It captures the fact that
a household of type z that earns the same amount as one of type z′ must work n̂(z, z′ )
where w̄(z)n̂(z, z′ ) = w̄(z′ )n̄(z′ ). Hence, changes in relative wages may tighten or loosen
incentive compatibility constraints, not changes in the overall wage level.


No change in (the distribution of) utility. Our third variation engineers a change in the
income tax schedule to keep the distribution of utility unchanged.

Formula 3 (δU = 0). Optimal taxes satisfy

                                                           ε(z)     1 δω (z)
                                   ˆ
                  pi −   pi∗   =       τ (z)w̄(z)n̄(z)                       |     dz,
                                                         ε(z) + 1 ω (z) δyi∗ δU =0

where ε(z) is a consumption-compensated elasticity of labor supply.

   Unlike our two previous formulas, Formula 3 does not require any information on
the welfare weights λ̄(z). This is because, by construction, the distribution of utility is


                                                         13
unaffected by our variation; thus, social welfare is unaffected. As a result, distributional
considerations vanish and only efficiency considerations remain, captured by the labor
fiscal externality. Remarkably, tedious calculations relegated in Appendix D.2 show that
the fiscal externality takes a very simple form, with the change in labor given by

                                             ε(z)     1
                                δn̄(z) =                  δω (z).
                                           ε(z) + 1 ω (z)

For purposes of implementation, the fact that welfare weights do not enter Formula 3
must be welcomed. It opens up the possibility of a purely empirical evaluation, without
any subjective choice over the social welfare objective. Our formula effectively rules out a
first-order dominant improvement in the distribution of utilities. Our general strategy is
reminiscent of the one used by Dixit and Norman (1986) to show the existence of Pareto
gains from trade by constructing commodity taxes such that all households are kept at the
same utility level under free trade, while simultaneously increasing the fiscal revenues of
the government. Here, we show that unless Formula 3 holds, one can also construct
changes in taxes that increase fiscal revenues, while holding utility fixed at all quantiles
of the wage distribution.
    The existence of a nonlinear income tax schedule T plays a crucial role, as evidenced
by the presence of the marginal tax rates τ (z) in the formula. Everything else being equal,
higher marginal taxes τ (z) potentiate fiscal externalities and demand larger ti∗ . To take an
extreme case, if marginal taxes were zero, τ (z), then the formula immediately implies ti∗ =
0. This should come as no surprise: the First Welfare Theorem holds in our environment,
so the absence of taxation leads to a Pareto optimum that cannot be improved upon.


4.3   Discussion
Limited Factor Taxation and Wage Manipulation. Despite their differences, all three
formulas give center stage to the change in the wage schedule, as either captured by the
change in the wage level w, as in Formula 1, or wage growth ω, as in Formulas 2 and 3.
Our formulas make clear that changes in the wage schedule, which may be of empirical
interest for descriptive reasons, is actually a sufficient statistic for optimal policy design.
Given knowledge of this statistic, the underlying structure of the economy leading to the
change in wages can be left in the background.
    Unlike in Diamond and Mirrlees (1971a,b) and Dixit and Norman (1980), the govern-
ment here cannot achieve its distributional objectives by taxing workers of different types
at different rates. To achieve the same objectives, it is now forced to manipulate wages


                                               14
before taxes, which it can do by influencing, through taxes t∗ , the prices p that firms face,
and, in turn, their demand for workers of different types, as in Naito (1999).


Taxes on Old and New Technology Firms. Our three formulas have assumed that only
taxes on new technology firms were available. What if taxes on old technology firms
were available as well? In a trade context, this would mean the possibility of imposing
production taxes rather than import tariffs or export taxes. We now describe how our
results extend to environments with ad-valorem taxes on old technology firms t ≡ {ti }.
    If taxes on both old and new technology firms are available, the government can create
wedges between the prices faced by old technology firms, p ≡ { pi }, the prices faced by
new technology firms, p∗ ≡ { pi∗ }, and the prices faced by consumers, q ≡ {qi }, with
qi = (1 + ti ) pi and qi = (1 + ti∗ ) pi . In such environments, the trade-off between efficiency
and redistribution described in Lemma 1 generalizes to
                                       ˆ
     ∗                 ∗
  ( p − q) · δc − ( p − p) · δy − τ (z)w̄(z)δn̄(z) dz
                              ˆ
                           = [λ̄(z) − 1][(1 − τ (z))n̄(z) δw̄(z) − c̄(z) · δq − δT (z)] dz. (2)

Compared to equation (1), the first term on the left-hand side is now split into two, reflect-
ing the fact the fiscal externality associated with changes in consumption and output are
now different. In addition, the price deflator on the right-hand side is now given c̄(z) · δq,
reflecting the fact that consumer prices are now given by q rather than p.
    Using the standard Atkinson and Stiglitz’s (1976) logic, one can show that for a feasible
variation not to improve welfare, q and p∗ should be equalized. That is, there should be
no taxes on new technology firms. One can view the fact that the government would only
tax old technology firms as an expression of the Targeting Principle. Since wages depend
on the labor demand of those firms, redistribution through wage manipulation is best
achieved by taxing them, without introducing any additional consumption distortion.6
    Given the equality between q and p∗ , one can use the same steps as in Section 4.2 to go
from equation (2) to each of our formulas. The only difference between our old formulas
and the new ones is that the differentials on the right-hand side should now be taken
with respect to δy rather than δy∗ , reflecting again the fact that only the output of old
    6 Mayer and Riezman (1987) establish a similar result in a trade context with inelastic factor supply and
no income taxation. If both producer and consumer taxes are available, they show that only the former
should be used. This result, however, requires preferences to be homothetic, as discussed in Mayer and
Riezman (1989). Our result does not require this restriction. This reflects the fact that we have access to non-
linear income taxation and that preferences are weakly separable. Hence, absent the wage manipulation
motive, there is no rationale for commodity taxation, as in Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976).


                                                      15
technology firms is being distorted, not the consumption of households.7


Full versus Partial Optimality. All our formulas must coincide and hold at an optimum,
for any given welfare function. Away from an optimum, each formula instead highlights
an alternative way to increase welfare through a different marginal change in taxes. In this
way, our formulas do not require the income tax schedule T to be optimized conditional
on the taxes on new technology firms t∗ .
    Absent full optimality, however, a given formula may fail to detect welfare-improving
changes in t∗ . To see this more clearly, consider again the extreme case where τ (z) =
0. In this situation, Formula 3 leads to ti∗ = 0. But suppose that the government has
Rawlsian preferences, so that the absence of labor income taxation is undesirable. In
this case, the government enjoys many ways of improving welfare. It could change the
nonlinear tax schedule only, or it could also change the linear tax t∗ , along the lines of
Formula 1, or change both using Formula 2. In this case, these two formulas may detect
an improvement, even if Formula 3 does not.
    Although there is no reason for our three formulas to coincide in general, the fact that
they do coincide at an optimum can be used to provide an alternative perspective on the
absence of social weights in Formula 3. At an optimum, this absence can be thought of as
reflecting a revealed preference on the part of the government. Intuitively, the underlying
social preferences for the utility of different groups of households, as measured by λ̄(z),
get revealed by the marginal tax rate τ (z) after controlling for the distortionary cost of
redistribution, as measured by the labor supply elasticity ε(z).8


A Pigouvian Interpretation. Interestingly, all three formulas provide a direct expres-
sion for the tax rate. This differs from the optimal linear tax literature (e.g. Diamond and
Mirrlees, 1971b), which usually derives a system of simultaneous equations, with the en-
tire set of tax rates on the left hand side. Although we could have stated our formulas in
such forms—with the matrix of derivatives of y∗ with respect to p on the left-hand side
and the vector of derivatives of w̄(z) with respect to p on the right-hand side—our final
expression is more akin to the Pigouvian tax literature, which provides an explicit expres-
sion for the tax on each good in terms of its externality. Indeed, we favor a Pigouvian
interpretation of our three formulas, as correcting for distributional and fiscal externali-

    7 The counterpart of Formula 1 provides a strict generalization—to an environment with endogenous

labor supply, nonlinear income taxation, as well as general preferences and technology—of the optimal
production taxes in Dixit (1996).
    8 This is the idea behind Werning’s (2007) test of whether an income tax schedule is Pareto optimal.

Namely, it is if the inferred Pareto weights are all positive.


                                                  16
ties: if an extra unit of yi∗ is increased, then this has an impact on the wage schedule that,
in turn, affects distribution and social welfare, as well the resources in the hands of the
government; the tax asks agents to pay for these marginal effects.


4.4 Quantitative Examples
We now illustrate through two examples, robots and trade, how our theoretical results can
be combined with existing reduced-form evidence to provide estimates of optimal taxes.
We restrict attention to Formula 3, which allows us to dispense with any assumption on
welfare weights. According to this formula, the ad-valorem tax t∗m on either robots or
imports must satisfy

                                           w(z)n(z) ǫ(z) δ ln ω (z)
                               ˆ
                     t∗m   =       τ (z)                              |     dz.            (3)
                                            p∗m y∗m ǫ(z) + 1 δ ln y∗m δU =0

Robot Example. To measure the efficient tax on robots in the United States using equa-
tion (3), the key input is the elasticity of relative wages with respect to the number of
         δ ln ω (z)
robots, δ ln y∗ |δU =0 . To recover that elasticity, the ideal experiment would engineer a
                m
marginal change in taxes that increase the number of robots in the entire United States by
one unit, while holding utility fixed, and record the differential changes in wages between
consecutive quantiles of the income distribution. As a proxy for such an ideal experiment,
we propose to use the empirical estimates from Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017b). Using a
difference-in-difference strategy, the previous authors have estimated the effect of indus-
trial robots, defined as “an automatically controlled, reprogrammable, and multipurpose
[machine]” on different quantiles of the wage distribution between 1990 and 2007 across
US commuting zones. We interpret their estimates as the semi-elasticity of wages with
                               δ ln w(z)
respect to robots, η AR (z) ≃ δy∗m |δU =0 , where y∗m is expressed as number of robots per
thousand workers. These estimates are reported in Figure 1a.
    Under the previous interpretation, the elasticity that we are interested in is given by

                               δ ln ω (z)           y∗m
                                          |    =           × ∆η AR (z),
                                δ ln y∗m δU =0   ∆ ln w(z)

where ∆ ln w(z) and ∆η AR (z) denote changes between consecutive deciles of the wage
distribution. In the United States in 2007, the number of robots per thousand workers
                                                                             δ ln ω (z)
is slightly greater than one, y∗m ≃ 1.2. This leads to an average elasticity δ ln y∗ across
                                                                                    m
deciles around 0.5.
    Given estimates of the previous elasticities, the only additional information required


                                                     17
       (a) Robots (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2017b)          (b) Chinese Imports (Chetverikov, Larsen and Palmer, 2016)


                                            d ln w(z)
Figure 1: Semi-Elasticity of wages,            dym      × 100, acrossquantiles of US wage distribution.


to evaluate the optimal tax on robots given by equation (3) is: (i ) total spending on robots,
p∗m y∗m , which we obtain Graetz and Michaels (2018); (ii ) labor earnings, w(z)n(z), which
we compute from the World Wealth and Income Database; (iii ) marginal income tax rates,
τ (z), which we compute from Guner, Kaygusuz and Ventura (2014); and (iv) labor supply
elasticities, ǫ(z), which we obtain Chetty (2012).
    For a labor supply elasticity of ǫ = 0.1, in the low range of the micro-estimates re-
viewed in Chetty (2012), equation (3) leads to an optimal tax on robots equal to t∗m = 1%.
For higher labor supply elasticities of ǫ = 0.3 or ǫ = 0.5, the previous tax goes up to
t∗m = 2.7% and t∗m = 3.7%, respectively.


Trade Example. Our second example focuses on Chinese imports. Again, we propose to
use estimates obtained from a difference-in-difference strategy as a proxy for the elasticity
                             δ ln ω (z)
that we are interested in, δ ln y∗ |δU =0 . Using the same empirical strategy as in Autor,
                                    m
Dorn and Hanson (2013), Chetverikov, Larsen and Palmer (2016) have estimated the effect
on log wages of a $1,000 increase in Chinese imports per worker at different percentiles
of the wage distribution, as described in Figure 1b. Following the same approach as in
the case of robots, we can transform the previous semi-elasticities into elasticities using
y∗m ≃ 2.2 as the value of Chinese imports, in thousands of US dollars, per worker for the
United States in 2007.
    Interestingly, the average value of the relative wage elasticity, ddlnlnyω∗ , is of the same or-
                                                                              m
der of magnitude as the one implied by the estimates of Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017b),
around 0.5. Compared to the robot example, however, the ratio of total labor earnings to
total Chinese imports in 2007 is only 26.4, an order of magnitude smaller than the ratio to


                                                         18
total spending on robots, around 245.9 This leads to an optimal tax on Chinese imports
that is much smaller than the tax on robots: t∗m = 0.03% for ǫ = 0.1, 0.08% for ǫ = 0.3, and
0.11% for ǫ = 0.5.


5     Comparative Statics
Our second result focuses on comparative static issues. By way of a simple example,
we propose to tackle the following question: If improvements in new technologies raise
inequality, should taxes on firms using these technologies be raised further as well?


5.1 A Simple Economy
Consider a special case of the environment presented in Section 3. There is one final good,
indexed by f , and one intermediate good, indexed by m, which could be either robots that
are produced domestically or machines that are imported from abroad. Households have
quasi-linear preferences,
                                                  (n(θ ))1+1/ǫ
                                U (θ ) = C (θ ) −              ,                        (4)
                                                    1 + 1/ǫ
with C (θ ) the consumption of the unique final good, which we use as our numeraire, p f =
p∗f = 1, and ǫ the constant labor supply elasticity. Skill heterogeneity is one-dimensional,
θ ∈ [θ, θ̄ ].
    Old technology firms produce the final good, y f ≥ 0, using workers, n ≡ {n(θ )}, and
machines, ym ≤ 0, as an input. Their production set is given by
                                              ˆ                                    ˆ
        G (y f , ym , n) = y − max {              g(ỹm (θ ), n(θ ); θ )dF (θ )|       ỹm (θ )dF (θ ) ≤ −ym },   (5)
                                 {ỹm (θ )}


with g(ỹm (θ ), n(θ ); θ ) a Cobb-Douglas production function,

                                                                 ỹm (θ ) β(θ ) n(θ ) 1− β(θ )
                    g(ỹm (θ ), n(θ ); θ ) = exp(α(θ )) · (              ) (             )     ,                  (6)
                                                                  β(θ )        1 − β(θ )

where ỹm (θ ) represents the number of machines combined with workers of type θ to
                                  α ln(1−θ )                 β ln(1−θ )
produce the final good, α(θ ) ≡ β ln(1−θ )−1 , and β(θ ) ≡ β ln(1−θ )−1 , with α, β > 0. New
technology firms produce machines, y∗m ≥ 0, using the final good, y∗f ≤ 0,

                                          G ∗ (y∗f , y∗m ; φ) = φy∗f + y∗m ,                                      (7)

    9 Graetz   and Michaels (2018) estimate the share of robots in total capital services to be around 0.64%.


                                                            19
where φ measures the productivity of machine producers.
  Let pm and p∗m denote the price of robots faced by old and new technology firms. Profit
maximization by new technology firms implies

                                          p∗m = 1/φ,

whereas profit maximization by old technology firms implies

                                w( pm ; θ ) = (1 − θ )−1/γ( pm ) ,

with γ( pm ) ≡ 1/(α − β ln pm ). Under the restriction that γ( pm ) > 0, which we maintain
throughout, wages are increasing in θ and Pareto distributed with shape parameter equal
to γ( pm ) and lower bound equal to 1. By construction, more skilled workers tend to
use machines relatively more, since β(θ ) is increasing in θ. So an increase in the price of
machines tends to lower their wages relatively more, which decreases inequality,

                        d ln ω (θ )    d ln γ( pm )
                                    =−              = − βγ( pm ) < 0.
                         d ln pm         d ln pm

Here, because of additive separability in production, machines directly affect inequality
by affecting the relative marginal products of workers of different skills, but not indirectly
through further changes in their relative labor supply, as in Stiglitz (1982).


5.2 Technological Progress, Greater Inequality, and Lower Taxes
In the spirit of keeping this example as simple as possible, we propose to study how t∗m
varies with φ in the case of a government with extreme preferences for redistribution.
Namely, we assume that the government has Rawlsian preferences, which corresponds
to the weighted utilitarian objective of Section 3.2, with the distribution of Pareto weights
Λ being a Dirac at θ.
    For comparative static purposes, a limitation of our three formulas is that they involve
the entire schedule of marginal income tax rates. These are themselves endogenous ob-
jects that will respond to changes in φ. In Appendix E, we demonstrate how to solve for
τ (θ ) and obtain the following formula for the optimal Rawlsian tax,

                                          ǫ d ln ω ∗
                               t∗m       ǫ+1 d ln y∗m τ       1 − sm
                                   ∗
                                     =                               ,                     (8)
                             1 + tm    1 − ǫ+ǫ 1 ddlnlnyω∗ τ ∗ sm
                                                       m




                                               20
where the elasticity of relative wages,          d ln ω
                                                 d ln y∗m   ≡ − βγ( pm ) ∂ ln |∂yln pm
                                                                                 m ( pm ,n )|
                                                                                              , is now constant
across agents; τ ∗ ≡ ǫ+1+ǫ+ 1
                          ǫγ( pm )
                                   corresponds to the optimal marginal tax rate that would
be imposed in the absence of a tax on machines, as in Diamond (1998), Saez (2001), and
                                               p y∗m
Scheuer and Werning (2017); and sm ≡ ´ x(θ )dFm(θ )+ p y∗
                                                          measures the share of machines in
                                                                m m
gross output. After expressing the three previous statistics, ddlnlnyω∗ , τ ∗ , and sm , as functions
                                                                      m
of t∗m and φ, we can apply the Implicit Function Theorem to determine the monotonicity
of the optimal tax, as we do in Appendix E. This leads to the following proposition.

Proposition 1. In a simple economy where equations (4)-(7) hold, the optimal Rawlsian tax t∗m is
decreasing with the productivity φ of new technology firms.

   By construction, more machines always increase inequality in this simple economy,
d ln ω
      > 0. So one should always tax new technology firms. For comparative static pur-
d ln y∗m
poses, however, the relevant question is whether this effect gets exacerbated as the new
                                               ∂ d ln ω
technology improves. Here, one can check that ∂φ d ln y∗ < 0 both because relative wages
                                                                      m
                                                                            ∂ d ln ω
are becoming less responsive to the price of machines,                     ∂φ | d ln y∗m | <   0, and because the
                                                               ∂        ∂ ln pm
demand for machines is becoming more elastic,                 ∂φ | ∂ ln |ym ( pm ,n)| | < 0,
                                                                          due to the increase
in the labor supply of high-skilled workers whose demand for machines is more elastic.
One can also check that these two effects dominate the increase in the marginal tax rate,
∂τ ∗
 ∂φ > 0, in response to greater inequality. For a given share of machines sm , this im-
plies that the total fiscal externality associated with new machines decreases. Since the
share of machines increase with improvements in the new technology, ∂s∂φm > 0, the fiscal
externality per machine a fortiori decreases and so does the tax on machines.
     As this simple example illustrates, cheaper robots may lead to a higher share of robots
in the economy, more inequality, but a lower optimal tax on robots. Likewise, more im-
ports and more inequality, in spite of the government having extreme distributional con-
cerns and imports causing inequality, may be optimally met with less trade protection.
This does not occur because redistribution is becoming more costly as the economy gets
more open.10 Here, the elasticity of labor supply is fixed and the marginal tax rate τ ∗
increases with φ. This also does not occur because redistribution through income taxa-
tion is becoming more attractive. Everything else being equal, an increase in τ ∗ raises the
tax on imports. Rather the decrease in the tax on imports captures a standard Pigouvian
intuition: as φ increases, the total fiscal externality associated with imports increases, but
the marginal impact does not, leading to a lower value for the optimal tax.

   10 This is the point emphasized by Itskhoki (2008) and Antras, de Gortari and Itskhoki (2017) in an econ-
omy where entrepreneurs can decide whether to export or not. This makes labor supply decisions more
elastic in an open economy, which may reduce redistribution at the optimum.


                                                     21
6      The Valuation of Technological Change
Our final result focuses on the welfare impact of new technologies under the assumption
that constrained, but optimal policies are in place. In the presence of distortions, it is well-
known that technological progress may lower welfare. This is what Edgeworth (1884)
and Bhagwati (1958) refer to as “Economic Damnification” and “Immesirizing Growth”.
Since we have established that governments may want to depart from production effi-
ciency in order to achieve their distributional objectives, one might expect the previous
phenomenon to arise here as well. We now demonstrate that this is not the case.


6.1         An Envelope Result
Let V (φ) denote the value function associated with the government problem. As shown
in Appendix F.1, it is also equal to the value function of the relaxed problem,

                               V (φ) =                 max                     W (Ū )
                                         (c,N,n,y,y∗ ,p,p∗ ,w,T,t∗ ,Ū )∈Ω R


subject to
                                              G ∗ (y∗ ; φ) ≤ 0,

with Ω R ⊂ Ω requiring utility maximization by households, profit maximization by old
technology firms, and market clearing, but not profit maximization by new technology
firms. Crucially, this implies that Ω R is independent of φ.
    Now consider a small productivity shock from φ to φ + dφ. The Envelope Theorem
immediately implies
                                        dV        ∂G ∗
                                             = −γ      ,                           (9)
                                        dφ         ∂φ
with γ > 0 the Lagrange multiplier associated with the constraint G ∗ (y∗ ; φ) ≤ 0.11
    This envelope condition can be thought of as a generalized version of Hulten’s (1978)
Theorem. In spite of the economy not being first-best, the welfare impact of technological
progress can be measured in the exact same way as in first-best environments. This leads
to our next proposition.

Proposition 2. Technological change increases social welfare, dV/dφ > 0, if and only if it ex-
pands the production possibility of new technology firms, that is, if and only if ∂G ∗ /∂φ < 0.
    11 In
       general, the Lagrange multiplier γ could be equal to zero if preferences were satiated or if the gov-
ernment was unable, or unwilling due to distributional concerns, to transfer extra income to households.
The assumption that u, v, and W are strictly increasing rules out the first issue. Appendix F.2 shows that
the availability of non-linear income taxation makes the second issue irrelevant as well.


                                                       22
    The critical assumption here is not that there are no distortions or, equivalently, that
our planner has enough tax instruments to target any underlying distortion. In fact, the
planning problem described above would also hold in an environment with externalities
and other market imperfections, such as price and wage rigidities leading to labor market
distortions. Proposition 2 instead follows from the assumption that, in spite of distortions
and restrictions on the set of available instruments, our planner still has a tax instruments
t∗ to control the new technology firms, which is where technological change occurs.
    In the case of international trade, for which G ∗ (y∗ ; φ) = ∑i=1 p̄i (φ)yi∗ , equation (9)
implies that a country gains from a terms-of-trade shock if and only if it raises the value
of its net exports, evaluated at the initial quantities,

                                        ∑ p̄i′ (φ)(−yi∗ ) ≥ 0.
                                        i =1

Intuitively, whenever world prices p̄(φ) fluctuate, the government has the option to main-
tain domestic prices p unchanged by adjusting the (specific) tax on each good i by − p̄i′ (φ).
The sole impact of this adjustment is to change tax revenues by − ∑i=1 p̄i′ (φ)yi∗ . Although
this may not be the optimal response, the possibility of such a response is sufficient to
evaluate the welfare impact of a terms-of-trade shock at the margin.12


6.2 Regulation of Innovation (Not!)
Our envelope result has direct implications for the regulation of innovation. To see this,
suppose that there exists a set of feasible new technologies, Φ, that can be restricted by
the government. The profit maximization problem of new technology firms is given by

                             y∗ , φ ∈ max { p∗ · ỹ∗ | G ∗ (ỹ∗ ; φ̃) ≤ 0},
                                      ỹ∗ ,φ̃∈Φ̄


where Φ̄ ⊂ Φ is the set of technologies allowed by the government. The government’s
problem, in turn, takes the general form,

                                               max                   W (c, n)
                               (c,n,y,y∗ ,p,p∗ ,w,T,t∗ ,Ū )∈Ω,φ∈Φ


subject to
                                            G ∗ (y∗ ; φ) ≤ 0.

  12 Theprevious observation does not depend on whether the country is a small open economy or not.
The same result holds when international prices depend on y∗ .


                                                     23
By equation (9), the optimal technology φ∗ simply satisfies

                                      ∂G ∗ (y∗ ; φ∗ )
                                                      = 0.
                                            ∂φ

Provided that taxes of new technology firms, t∗ , have been set such that they find it op-
timal to produce y∗ , conditional on φ∗ , they will also find it optimal to choose φ∗ , if
allowed to do so. It follows that the government does not need to affect the direction of
innovation, in spite of its potential distributional implications. More generally, there may
be externalities across firms that directly call for subsidizing, or taxing, innovation. In
such environments, the implication of our envelope result is that distributional concerns
do not add a new motive for taxing, or subsidizing, innovation.


7 Conclusion
Our paper has focused on two broad questions. First, how should government policy
respond to technological change? Second, how should we valuate the overall welfare
impact of technological change?
    Our answer to the first question is that in second best environments—where income
taxation is available, but taxes on specific factors are not—there is a general case for taxing
new technology firms, with each of our three formulas offering a precise answer to what
optimal taxes on new technology firms should be as a function of a few sufficient statistics.
Perhaps surprisingly, we have also provided an example showing that more robots or
more trade may go hand in hand with more inequality and lower taxes, despite robots
or trade being responsible for the rise in inequality, and governments having extreme
preferences for redistribution.
    Our answer to the second question is that in such second best environments, tech-
nological change can still be evaluated using a simple envelope argument. The critical
assumption behind this result is not the absence of any distortion, like in a first best envi-
ronment, but rather that the government has enough instruments to control the behavior
of new technology firms, which are the only ones directly subject to technological change.
This offers a new perspective on technological change that stands in sharp contrast with
the existing results of a large literature concerned with distortions and welfare. It implies,
in particular, that innovation should not be distorted because of distributional concerns.
    More broadly, our envelope result suggests that provided that governments have
access to a full set of trade policy instruments, the general law of comparative advan-
tage (Deardorff, 1980) may remain valid in economies subject to imperfect competition,

                                              24
political-economy forces, and various distortions; the only rationale for trade agreements
in all these economies may remain to correct terms-of-trade externalities (Bagwell and
Staiger, 1999, 2001, 2012a,b); and that in spite of distributional concerns and various labor
market imperfections, the welfare gains from trade may still be given by the integral be-
low the import demand curve (Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare, 2018). We leave a formal
analysis of these matters for future research.




                                             25
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo, “The Race Between Machine and Man: Impli-
 cations of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares and Employment,” NBER Work. Pap.
 22252, 2017.

  and    , “Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Local Labor Markets,” mimeo MIT, 2017.

Antras, Pol, Alonso de Gortari, and Oleg Itskhoki, “Globalization, Inequality and Wel-
 fare,” Journal of International Economics, 2017, 108, 387–412.

Atkinson, A.B. and J.E. Stiglitz, “The Design of Tax Structure: Direct versus Indirect
  Taxation,” Journal of Public Economics, 1976, 6, 55–75.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. Hanson, “The China syndrom: Local labor market effects of
 import competition in the United States,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103, 2121–
 2168.

Baeqee, David and Emmanuel Farhi, “Productivity and Misallocation in General Equi-
  librium,” mimeo Harvard University, 2017.

Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger, “An Economic Theory of GATT,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 1999, 89 (1), 215–248.

   and , “Domestic Policies, National Sovereignty, and International Economic Institu-
  tions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (2), 519–562.

   and , “The Economics of Trade Agreements in the Linear Cournot Delocation
  Model,” Journal of International Economics, 2012, 88 (1), 32–46.

   and , “Profit Shifting and Trade Agreements in Imperfectly Competitive Markets,”
  International Economic Review, 2012, 53 (4), 1067–1104.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N., “Immesirizing Growth: A Geometrical Note,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 1958, 25.

  , The Generalized Theory of Distortions and Welfare, Vol. Trade, Balance of Payments, and
  Growth: Papers in International Economics in Honor of Charles P. Kindleberger, Ams-
  terdam: North-Holland, 1971.

Chetty, Raj, “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro
 and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply,” Econometrica, 2012, 80 (3), 969–1018.

                                            26
Chetverikov, Denis, Bradley Larsen, and Christopher John Palmer, “IV Quantile Re-
 gression for Group-Level Treatments, with an Application to the Effects of Trade on the
 Distribution of Wage,” Econometrica, 2016, 84 (2), 809–833.

Costinot, Arnaud and Andres Rodríguez-Clare, “The US Gains from Trade: Valuation
 Using the Demand for Foreign Factor Services,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2018,
 32 (2), 3–24.

Deardorff, Alan V., “The General Validity of the Law of Comparative Advantage,” Jour-
 nal of Political Economy, 1980, 88 (55), 941–957.

Diamond, Peter A., “Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped Pattern of
 Optimal Marginal Tax Rates,” American Economic Review, 1998, 88 (1), 83–95.

   and James A. Mirrlees, “Optimal Taxation and Public Production I: Production Effi-
  ciency,” American Economic Review, 1971, 61 (1), 8–27.

   and , “Optimal Taxation and Public Production II: Tax Rules,” American Economic
  Review, 1971, 61 (3), 261–278.

Dixit, Avinash and Victor Norman, “Gains from Trade without Lump-Sum Compensa-
 tion,” Journal of Intermational Economics, 1986, 21, 111–122.

Dixit, Avinash K., “Special-Interest Lobbying and Endogenous Commodity Taxation,”
 Eastern Economic Journal, 1996, 22 (4), 375–388.

  and Victor Norman, Theory of International Trade, Cambridge University Press, 1980.

Edgeworth, F.Y., “The theory of international values,” Economic Journal, 1884, 4, 35–50.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Tracy R. Lewis, “Trade adjustment assistance and Pareto gains
  from trade,” Journal of International Economics, 1994, 36, 201–222.

Findlay, Ronald and Stanislaw Wellisz, Endogenous tariffs, the political economy of trade
  restrictions, and welfare Import Competition and Response, Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press, 1982.

Graetz, Georg and Guy Michaels, “Robots at Work,” mimeo LSE, 2018.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, “Protection for Sale,” American Economic
 Review, 1994, 84 (4), 833–850.



                                            27
   and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 1978–1997.

Guerreiro, Joao, Sergio Rebelo, and Pedro Teles, “Should Robots Be Taxed?,” mimeo
 Northwestern University, 2017.

Guesnerie, Roger, “Peut-on toujours redistribuer les gains a la specialisation et a
 l’echange? Un retour en pointille sur Ricardo et Heckscher-Ohlin,” Revue Economique,
 1998, 49 (3), 555–579.

Guner, Nezih, Remzi Kaygusuz, and Gustavo Ventura, “Income Taxation of U.S. House-
 holds: Facts and Parametric Estimates,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2014, 17 (4), 559–
 581.

Helpman, Elhanan, Politics and Trade Policy Advances in Economics and Econometrics:
 Theory and Applications, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Hillman, Arye L., “Declining Industries and Political-Support Protectionist Motives,”
 American Economic Review, 1982, 72 (1180-1187).

Hosseini, Roozbeh and Ali Shourideh, “Inequality, Redistribution, and Optimal Trade
 Policy: A Public Finance,” mimeo Carnegie Mellon University, 2018.

Hulten, Charles R., “Growth Accounting with Intermediate Inputs,” The Review of Eco-
 nomic Studies, 1978, 45 (3), 511–518.

Itskhoki, Oleg, “Optimal Redistribution in an Open Economy,” mimeo Princeton Univer-
   sity, 2008.

Jacobs, Bas, “Optimal Inefficient Production,” mimeo Erasmus University, 2015.

Magee, Stephen P., William A. Brock, and Leslie Young, Black Hole Tariffs and Endogenous
 Policy Formation, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1989.

Mayer, Wolfgang, “Endogenous Tariff Formation,” American Economic Review, 1984, 74,
 970–985.

  and Raymond G. Riezman, “Endogenous Choice of Trade Policy Instruments,” Journal
  of Intermational Economics, 1987, 23, 377–381.

  and , “Tariff Formation in a Multidimensional Voting Model,” Economics and Politics,
  1989, 61-79.

                                           28
Mirrlees, J.A., “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation,” Review of
 Economic Studies, 1971, 38 (2), 175–208.

Naito, Hisairo, “Re-examination of uniform commodity taxes under non-linear income
 tax system and its implications for production efficiency,” Journal of Public Economics,
 1999, 1 (2), 65–88.

  , “Redistribution, production inefficiency and decentralized efficiency,” International
  Tax Public Finance, 2006, 13, 625–640.

Saez, Emmanuel, “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 2001, 68 (1), 205–229.

Scheuer, Florion and Ivan Werning, “The Taxation of Superstars,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2017, 132, 211–270.

Solow, Robert, “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,” The Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 1957, 39 (3), 312–320.

Spector, David, “Is it possible to redistribute the gains from trade using income taxa-
  tion?,” Journal of International Economics, 2001, 55, 441–460.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., “Self-selection and Pareto efficient taxation,” Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics, 1982, 17 (2), 213–240.

Thuemmel, Uwe, “Optimal Taxation of Robots,” mimeo University of Zurich, 2018.

Tsyvinski, Aleh and Nicolas Werquin, “Generalized Compensation Principle,” mimeo
  Yale University, 2018.

Werning, Ivan, “Pareto Efficient Income Taxation,” mimeo MIT, 2007.




                                            29
A      Notation
Consider a function h : R n → R m such that

                                 h( x1 , ..., xn ) = (h1 ( x1 , ..., xn ), ..., hm ( x1 , ..., xn )).

Throughout our appendix, we use the following notation

                                              ∂h( x1 , ..., xn )
                     h xi ( x1 , ..., xn ) ≡                        for all i = 1, ..., n,
                                                      ∂xi
                                              ∂h j ( x1 , ..., xn )
                    h j,xi ( x1 , ..., xn ) ≡                        for all i = 1, ..., n and j = 1, ..., m,
                                                      ∂xi

Whenever there is no risk of confusion, we also drop arguments from functions so that, for in-
stance, h implicitly stands for h( x1 , ..., xn ).



B      Section 2
B.1 Tasks in Old Technology
Our environment nests economies in which a final good is produced using a continuum of tasks.
To see this formally, consider an economy that produces a final good f using a continuum of tasks
indexed by j,
                                                      y f = g f ({y( j)}),

with y( j) ≥ 0 the output of task j and g f a constant returns to scale production function. Each task,
in turn, is produced using domestic workers and robots, as in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a), or
domestic and foreign workers, as in Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008),

                                         y( j) = g j (ym ( j), {n(θ, j)}), for all j,

with ym ( j) ≥ 0 the number of robots or foreign workers used to perform task j, n(θ, j) ≥ 0 the
number of domestic workers, and g j a constant return to scale production function. The produc-
tion possibility frontier is then given by

                                     G (y f , ym , n) =           max               g f ({y( j)})
                                                           {y( j),ym ( j),n(θ,j)}




                                                                 30
subject to

                                  y( j) ≤ g j (ym ( j), {n(θ, j)}), for all j,
                                          ˆ
                                  n(θ ) ≥ n(θ, j)dj, for all θ,
                                          ˆ
                                  −ym ≥ ym ( j)dj,

with y f ≥ 0 the output of the final good and ym ≤ 0 the total amount of robots or foreign workers
demanded by old technology firms.


B.2 Labor in New Technology
In Section 2, we have argued that it is without loss of generality to assume the new technology G ∗
does not employing labor. Here, we provide the formal argument.
    Suppose that the production sets associated with the old and new technology are such that

                                                  Ĝ (ŷ, n̂) ≤ 0,
                                              Ĝ ∗ (ŷ∗ , n̂∗ ) ≤ 0.

First, define                                         !           #
                                                            ŷ
                                                y=
                                                           ŷ∗

Next, define G so that the set of (y, n) satisfying G (y, n) ≤ 0 coincides with the set of (y, n) for
which there exists n̂ and n̂∗ such that

                                                  Ĝ (ŷ, n̂) ≤ 0,
                                              Ĝ ∗ (ŷ∗ , n̂∗ ) ≤ 0,
                                                   n̂ + n̂∗ = n.

Last, define G ∗ such that G ∗ (y∗ ) ≤ 0 is satisfied if and only if
                                                       !          #
                                                            ŷ
                                               y∗ =
                                                            ŷ∗

is such that ŷ ≤ −ŷ∗ .




                                                       31
C Section 3
C.1     Competitive Equilibrium with Taxes
We provide a formal definition of a competitive equilibrium with taxes.


Demand. Households maximize utility taking prices p and the income tax schedule T as given.
Since preferences are weakly separable, the demand of any household θ is given by the two-step
problem
                  c(θ ) ∈ argmaxc̃(θ ) {v(c̃(θ ))| p · c̃(θ ) ≤ w(θ )n(θ ) − T (w(θ )n(θ ))},         (C.1)

                    n(θ ) ∈ argmaxñ(θ ) {u(C ( p, w(θ )ñ(θ ) − T (w(θ )ñ(θ ))), ñ(θ ))},          (C.2)

with C ( p, R(θ )) ≡ maxc̃(θ ) {v(c̃(θ ))| p · c̃(θ ) ≤ R(θ )} the indirect utility function of an household
with after-tax earnings R(θ ) ≡ w(θ )n(θ ) − T (w(θ )n(θ )).


Supply. Firms maximize profits taking prices p and p∗ as given,
                                                      ˆ
                      y, n ∈ argmaxỹ,ñ { p · ỹ −       w(θ )ñ(θ )dF (θ ) | G (ỹ, ñ) ≤ 0},       (C.3)

                                 y∗ ∈ argmaxỹ∗ { p∗ · ỹ∗ | G ∗ (ỹ∗ ; φ) ≤ 0}.                      (C.4)


Market Clearing.        Demand equals supply for all goods,
                                   ˆ
                                       ci (θ )dF (θ ) = yi + yi∗        for all i.                    (C.5)


Linear Taxation. Prices satisfy

                                        pi = (1 + ti∗ ) pi∗        for all i.                         (C.6)


Equilibrium. A competitive equilibrium with taxes ( T, t∗ ) is an allocation c ≡ {c(θ )}, n ≡
{n(θ )}, y ≡ {yi }, y∗ ≡ {yi∗ }, prices and wages p ≡ { pi }, p∗ ≡ { pi∗ }, and w ≡ {w(θ )}, such that:

    i. households maximize their utility, condition (C.1) and (C.2);

   ii. firms maximize their profits, conditions (C.3) and (C.4);

  iii. good markets clear, condition (C.5);

  iv. prices satisfy the non-arbitrage condition (C.6).




                                                          32
C.2      Wage Schedule
Let y( p, n) denote the supply of old technology firms, that is the solution to

                                        maxỹ { p · ỹ | G (ỹ, n) ≤ 0}.

The first-order conditions of (C.3) imply a wage schedule w( p, n) ≡ {w( p, n; θ )} such that

                          w(θ ) = − Gn(θ ) (y( p, n), n)/Gy1 (y( p, n), n) for all θ.


C.3      Government Problem
For any vector of consumption and labor supply, c ≡ {c(θ )} and n ≡ {n(θ )}, the utility of quantile
z ∈ [0, 1] is given by                 ˆ
                                                                      dF (θ ) = z.                         (C.7)
                                           u(v(c(θ )),n(θ ))≤Ū (z)

For any y∗ , construct p∗ such that

                                   pi∗ = Gy∗∗ (y∗ ; φ)/Gy∗∗ (y∗ ; φ) for all i.                            (C.8)
                                               i                 1



Define the feasible set

      Ω = {(c, n, y, y∗ , p, p∗ , w, T, t∗ , Ū ) such that equations (C.1)-(C.3) and (C.5)-(C.8) hold}.

The problem of selecting a competitive equilibrium with taxes that maximizes social welfare can
then be expressed as
                                                      max                 W (Ū )
                                        (c,n,y,y∗ ,p,p∗ ,w,T,t∗ ,Ū )∈Ω

subject to
                                                   G ∗ (y∗ ; φ) ≤ 0.



D Section 4
D.1 Lemma 1
Preliminaries. The next lemma will be used to reduce the dimensionality from θ to the per-
centile z in our optimality conditions.

Lemma 2. Suppose θ ∈ Θ ⊆ R n , ǫ ∈ R and the function w(θ, ǫ) is a.e. differentiable and increasing in
θn , define                                               ˆ
                                        Z (W, ǫ) =                        dF (θ )
                                                              w(θ,ǫ)≤W


                                                            33
and let w̄(z, ǫ) denote the inverse of Z with respect to W. Then

                                      w̄ǫ (z, ǫ) = E [wǫ (θ, ǫ) | w(θ, ǫ) = w̄(z, ǫ)].

Proof. Denote the inverse of W = w(θ, ǫ) for θn as θ̂ (θ−n , W, ǫ). Then
                                                     ˆ
                                     Z (W, ǫ) =          F (θ̂ (θ−n , W, ǫ) | θ−n ) dF (θ−n ).                            (D.1)


Since w(θ−n , θ̂ (θ−n , W, ǫ), ǫ) = W it follows that

                                                                                1
                                      θ̂W (θ−n , W, ǫ) =
                                                                 wθn (θ−n , θ̂ (θ−n , W, ǫ), ǫ)

                                                                  wǫ (θ−n , θ̂ (θ−n , W, ǫ), ǫ)
                                     θ̂ǫ (θ−n , W, 0) = −
                                                                  wθn (θ−n , θ̂ (θ−n , W, ǫ), ǫ)
Since w̄( Z (W, ǫ), ǫ) = W it follows that

                                                                                   1
                   w̄ǫ (z, ǫ) = −w̄z (z, ǫ) Zǫ (w̄(z, ǫ), ǫ) = −                              Zǫ (w̄(z, ǫ), ǫ)
                                                                             ZW (w̄(z, ǫ), ǫ)

Using these expressions and differentiating (D.1) gives

                                     1
  w̄ǫ (z, ǫ) = ´
                     f (θ̂ (θ−n ,w̄(z,ǫ),ǫ)|θ−n )
                   wθn (θ−n ,θ̂ (θ−n ,w̄(z,ǫ),ǫ),ǫ)
                                                    dF (θ−n )
                                          f (θ̂ (θ−n , w̄(z, ǫ), ǫ) | θ−n )
                                     ˆ
                                 ×                                             wǫ (θ−n , θ̂ (θ−n , w̄(z, ǫ), ǫ), ǫ) dF (θ−n ).
                                         wθn (θ−n , θ̂ (θ−n , w̄(z, ǫ), ǫ), ǫ)

To see that this establishes the desired equality, define

                                          G (W | θ−n ) = F (θ̂ (θ−n , W, ǫ) | θ−n )

the c.d.f. for W = w(θ, ǫ) conditional on θ−n ; differentiating, one sees that

                                                                 f (θ̂ (θ−n , W, ǫ) | θ−n )
                                         g (W | θ − n ) =
                                                                wθn (θ−n , θ̂ (θ−n , W, ǫ), ǫ)

represents the associated conditional density. Noting that

                                                           g(W | θ−n )dF (θ−n )
                                          g ( θ−n | W ) = ´
                                                            g(W | θ−n )dF (θ−n )

the result then follows: w̄ǫ (z, ǫ) = E [wǫ (θ, ǫ) | w(θ, ǫ) = w̄(z, ǫ)].

    The following simple corollary will be employed below, for any differentiable function N (w, ǫ)


                                                                    34
define n(θ, ǫ) = N (w(θ, ǫ), ǫ) and n̄(z, ǫ) = N (w̄(z, ǫ), ǫ) then

                                     n̄ǫ (z, ǫ) = E [nǫ (θ, ǫ) | w(θ, ǫ) = w̄(z, ǫ)].


Proof of Lemma 1. We shall engineer variations that ensure all the equilibrium conditions are
met except G ∗ (y∗ ; φ) ≤ 0. We must evaluate how the variation affects welfare W (Ū ) and G ∗ (y∗ ; φ).
To do so, define the Lagrangian
                                                L = W (Ū ) − γG ∗ (y∗ ; φ)

with Lagrange multiplier γ > 0.13 At an optimum the variation in L must be set to zero.
    The new tax schedule is given by

                                          ti∗ (ǫ) = ti∗ + ǫt̂i∗ for all i,
                                       T ( x, ǫ) = T ( x ) + ǫ T̂ ( x ) for all x ≥ 0,

for some arbitrary vector new technology taxes, t̂∗ , income tax schedule, T̂, and ǫ ∈ R. We let
{c(θ, ǫ)}, {n(θ, ǫ)}, y(ǫ) ≡ {yi (ǫ)}, and y∗ (ǫ) ≡ {yi∗ (ǫ)} denote the associated equilibrium allo-
cation and we let p(ǫ) ≡ { pi (ǫ)}, p∗ (ǫ) ≡ { pi∗ (ǫ)} and {w(θ, ǫ)} denote the associated prices and
wages. They are given by conditions (C.1)-(C.3) and (C.5)-(C.8). The only equilibrium condition
that is not imposed is G ∗ (y∗ (ǫ); φ) = 0.
    Let W ({Ū (z, ǫ)}) denote the social welfare associated with a given value of ǫ. Since house-
holds have identical preferences, all households of a given quantile z of the utility distribution
have wage w̄(z, ǫ) and achieve utility

                             Ū (z, ǫ) = maxñ(θ ) u(C ( p(ǫ), R(w̄(z, ǫ)ñ(θ ), ǫ)), ñ(θ )),

with labor supply n̄(z, ǫ), consumption, c̄(z, ǫ), and earnings, x̄ (z, ǫ) ≡ w̄(z, ǫ)n̄(z, ǫ). Let Ūǫ (z, ǫ) ≡
∂Ū (z, ǫ)/∂ǫ denote the marginal change in utility at quantile z. The Envelope Theorem implies

               Ūǫ (z, ǫ) = ūC (z, ǫ) C̄R (z, ǫ) [ R̄ x (z, ǫ)n̄(z, ǫ)w̄ǫ (z, ǫ) + R̄ǫ (z, ǫ) − c̄(z, ǫ) · pǫ ],

with

                                    ūC (z, ǫ) ≡ uC (C, n)|C=C( p(ǫ),R̄(z,ǫ)),n=n̄(z,ǫ) ,
                                    C̄R (z, ǫ) ≡ CR ( p, R)| p= p(ǫ),R= R̄(z,ǫ) ,
                                     R̄(z, ǫ) ≡ R( x̄ (z, ǫ), ǫ),
                                    R̄ x (z, ǫ) ≡ R x ( x, ǫ)| x= x̄(z,ǫ),ǫ ,
                                    R̄ǫ (z, ǫ) ≡ Rǫ ( x, ǫ)| x= x̄(z,ǫ),ǫ .

   13 The   formal argument establishing that γ cannot be equal to zero is given in Appendix F.2.


                                                               35
This further implies

   dW ({Ū (z, ǫ)})
                    =                                                                                                  (D.2)
         dǫ
                            ∂W
                    ˆ
                                   ūC (z, ǫ) C̄R (z, ǫ) [ R̄ x (z, ǫ)n̄(z, ǫ)w̄ǫ (z, ǫ) − c̄(z, ǫ) · pǫ + R̄ǫ (z, ǫ)] dz.
                           ∂Ū (z)

Now consider the change in the cost of resources used by the new technology,

                            dG ∗ (y∗ (ǫ); φ)
                                                                     ˆ

                                   dǫ
                                             =       ∑ Gy∗∗ yi,ǫ
                                                           i
                                                             ∗
                                                                 +       Gn∗∗ (θ ) n∗ǫ (θ, ǫ)dF (θ ).
                                                      i

Using equation (C.8), this can be rearranged as

                   dG ∗ (y∗ (ǫ); φ)
                                                                          ˆ
                                    = Gy∗1 {( p∗ − p) · y∗ǫ + p ·             cǫ (θ, ǫ)dF (θ ) − p · yǫ }.             (D.3)
                          dǫ

From the first-order conditions associated with (C.3), we know that

                                               ∂y( p, n)
                                            p·           = 0 for all i,
                                                 ∂pi
                                               ∂y( p, n)
                                            p·           = w(θ ) for all θ.
                                                ∂n(θ )

It follows that

                           ∂y( p, n)                ∂y( p, n)
                                                ˆ                                     ˆ
        p · yǫ = p · [∑              pi,ǫ +                   nǫ (θ, ǫ)dF (θ )] =         w(θ )nǫ (θ, ǫ)dF (θ ),       (D.4)
                       i
                             ∂pi                     ∂n(θ )

From the budget constraint associated with (C.1), we also know that

                              d                                      dR(w(θ, ǫ)n(θ, ǫ), ǫ)
                                            ˆ
                                 [ p(ǫ) ·       c(θ, ǫ)dF (θ )] =                          .
                              dǫ                                             dǫ

It follows that
           ˆ                    ˆ                     ˆ
        p · cǫ (θ, ǫ)dF (θ ) = − pǫ · c(θ, ǫ)dF (θ ) + [ Rǫ (w(θ, ǫ)n(θ, ǫ), ǫ)                                        (D.5)
                                                                                               
                                  + R x (w(θ, ǫ)n(θ, ǫ), ǫ) wǫ (θ, ǫ)n(θ, ǫ) + w(θ, ǫ)nǫ (θ, ǫ) dF (θ ).

Combining (D.3)-(D.5) and using w(θ, ǫ)n(θ, ǫ) = x (θ, ǫ), we get

  dG ∗ (y∗ (ǫ); φ)
                                                  ˆ
                           ∗
                              ∗              ∗
                      = Gy1 ( p − p) · yǫ − pǫ · c(θ, ǫ)dF (θ )
         dǫ
   ˆ
       [ Rǫ ( x (θ, ǫ), ǫ) + R x ( x (θ, ǫ), ǫ)wǫ (θ, ǫ)n(θ, ǫ) − (1 − R x ( x (θ, ǫ), ǫ))w(θ, ǫ)nǫ (θ, ǫ))]dF (θ ) .




                                                               36
Applying the corollary of Lemma 2, we have
                                              ˆ
                               n̄ǫ (z, ǫ) =       nǫ (θ, ǫ) f (θ |w(θ, ǫ) = w̄(z, ǫ))dθ.

Thus we can rearrange the previous expression as

  dG ∗ (y∗ (ǫ); φ)
                                                  ˆ
                   = Gy∗1 {( p∗ − p) · y∗ǫ +          [ R̄ǫ (z, ǫ) + R̄ x (z, ǫ)n̄(z, ǫ)w̄ǫ (z, ǫ) − c̄(z, ǫ) · pǫ ]dz
         dǫ
                                                                           ˆ
                                                                      − (1 − R̄ x (z, ǫ))w̄(z, ǫ)n̄ǫ (z, ǫ)]dz}. (D.6)

A necessary condition for a feasible variation not to improve welfare is that

                               dW ({Ū (z, ǫ)})                   dG ∗ (y∗ (ǫ); φ)
                                                             −γ                             = 0.
                                     dǫ               ǫ =0               dǫ          ǫ =0

Combining equations (D.2) and (D.6), this implies
  ˆ
       [λ̄(z) − 1][(1 − τ (z))n̄(z)w̄ǫ (z) − c̄(z) · pǫ − T̄ǫ (z)]dz
                                                                                                       ˆ
                                                                                 ∗
                                                                           = (p −       p) · y∗ǫ   −       τ (z)w̄(z)n̄ǫ (z)dz,

with

                                           (∂W/∂Ū (z))|ǫ=0 ūC (z, 0) C̄R (z, 0))
                                 λ̄(z) ≡                                           ,
                                                     γGy∗1 (y∗ (0))
                                 τ (z) ≡ 1 − R̄ x (z, 0),
                                T̄ǫ (z) ≡ − R̄ǫ (z, 0),

as well as the obvious short hand notation, n̄(z) ≡ n̄(z, 0) etc.


D.2 Proposition 1
Preliminaries. We introduce the following definitions,

                                              C̃ ( x, ǫ) ≡ C ( R( x, ǫ), p(ǫ)),
                                                                  un (C, n)
                                        MRS(C, n) ≡ −                       .
                                                                  uC (C, n)




                                                              37
For the household at the quantile z of the utility distribution, we then have

                                                          Ū (z, ǫ) =u(C̃ ( x̄ (z, ǫ), ǫ), n̄(z, ǫ))],                        (D.7)
                                   MRS(C̃ ( x̄ (z, ǫ), ǫ), n̄(z, ǫ)) = w̄(z, ǫ)C̃x ( x̄ (z, ǫ), ǫ),                           (D.8)
                                                               x̄ (z, ǫ) = w̄(z, ǫ)n̄(z, ǫ),                                  (D.9)

where the second equation corresponds to the first-order condition associated with C.2.
    Differentiating equations (D.7)-(D.9) with respect to ǫ implies

                              Ūǫ = ūC (C̃x n̄w̄ǫ + C̃ǫ ),                                                                  (D.10)
                                        (C̃xx w̄n̄ + C̃x )w̄ǫ + C̃xǫ w̄ − MRSC (C̃x n̄w̄ǫ + C̃ǫ )
                              n̄ǫ =                                                                                          (D.11)
                                                   ( MRSC C̃x w̄ + MRSn − C̃xx w̄2 )

Below we use equations (D.10) and (D.11) to construct variations such that n̄ǫ = 0 and Ūǫ = 0.


Variation δT = 0. Consider a first variation such that

                                                     ti∗ (ǫ) = ti∗ + ǫt̂i∗ for all i,
                                                   T ( x, ǫ) = T ( x ) for all x ≥ 0,

From Lemma 1, if Tǫ = 0, then
                 ˆ                      ˆ
     ∗        ∗
  ( p − p) · yǫ − τ (z)w̄(z)n̄ǫ (z) dz = (λ̄(z) − 1)((1 − τ (z))n̄(z) w̄ǫ (z) − c̄(z) · pǫ ) dz.                             (D.12)


Pick t̂∗ ≡ {t̂i∗ } such that y1,ǫ
                              ∗ , y∗ 6 = 0 and y∗ = 0 for all j 6 = 1, i. This implies
                                   i,ǫ          j,ǫ


                                                                δw̄(z)                                                     δp
                ˆ                                                                                 ˆ
pi − pi∗                                                        u
                                                                      
           =−        (λ̄(z) − 1)(1 − τ (z)) + τ (z) ε (z) n̄(z)        |δT =0 dz −                    (λ̄(z) − 1)c̄(z) ·        |δT =0 dz,
                                                                 δyi∗                                                      δyi∗

                    w̄(z) δn̄(z)
where εu (z) ≡      n̄(z) δw̄(z)
                                   denotes the uncompensated labor supply elasticity.


Variation δn = 0. Consider a variation

                                                ti∗ (ǫ) = ti∗ + ǫt̂i∗ for all i,
                                           T ( x, ǫ) = T ( x ) + ǫ T̂ ( x ) for all x ≥ 0,

such that n̄ǫ = 0 and (dG ∗ (y∗ (ǫ))/dǫ)ǫ=0 = 0. From Lemma 1, we know that if n̄ǫ (z) = 0 for all z,
then                                        ˆ
                    ( p∗ − p) · y∗ǫ =            [λ̄(z) − 1][ R̄ x (z)n̄(z)w̄ǫ (z) − c̄(z) · pǫ + R̄ǫ (z)]dz.




                                                                    38
By definition of C̃ ( x, ǫ) ≡ C ( R( x, ǫ), p(ǫ)), we must also have

                                                           C̃x ( x̄ (z), 0) = C̄R (z) R̄ x (z),                                                            (D.13)
                                                               C̃ǫ ( x̄ (z), 0) = C̄R (z)[ R̄ǫ − c̄(z) · pǫ ].                                             (D.14)

Thus, we can rearrange the previous expression as

                                                                                                                          [λ̄(z) − 1]
                                                           ˆ
                              ∗
                           (p −       p) · y∗ǫ    =              [C̃x ( x̄ (z), 0)n̄(z)w̄ǫ (z) + C̃ǫ ( x̄ (z), 0)]                    dz.                  (D.15)
                                                                                                                             C̄R (z)

         Let us now compute C̃ǫ . By equation (D.11), for n̄ǫ = 0, C̃ǫ must solve

                                                       C̃xǫ ( x̄ (z), 0) − ρ(z)C̃ǫ ( x̄ (z), 0) = g(z),

with

                      MRSC (C̃ ( x̄ (z), 0), n̄(z))
          ρ(z) ≡                                                                                                                                           (D.16)
                               w̄(z)
                          w̄ǫ (z)                      C̃xx ( x̄ (z), 0)w̄(z)n̄(z)
          g(z) ≡ −                C̃x ( x̄ (z), 0)[1 +                             ] + ρ(z)C̃x ( x̄ (z), 0)n̄(z)w̄ǫ (z).                                   (D.17)
                           w̄(z)                               C̃x ( x̄ (z), 0)

The general solution to this ODE is
                                  ˆ    z          ˆ        z                                          ˆ     z
            C̃ǫ ( x̄ (z), 0) =             exp[                ρ(v)d x̄ (v)] g(z̃)dx (z̃) + exp[                ρ(v)d x̄ (v)]C̃ǫ ( x̄ (0), 0).             (D.18)
                                   0                  z̃                                                0


The initial condition C̃ǫ ( x̄ (0), 0), in turn, is given by the requirement that (dG ∗ (y∗ (ǫ))/dǫ)ǫ=0 = 0.
Using equations (D.6), (D.13), and (D.14), we can rearrange this requirement as

                                                                                                                             1
                                                           ˆ
                           ( p∗ − p) · y∗ǫ +                    [C̃x ( x̄ (z), 0)n̄(z)w̄ǫ (z) + C̃ǫ ( x̄ (z), 0)]                 dz = 0.
                                                                                                                          C̄R (z)

Combining this expression with equation (D.18) leads to
                                                                       ´z         ´z
                     ( p − p∗ ) · y∗ǫ − [C̃x ( x̄ (z), 0)n̄(z)w̄ǫ (z) + 0 exp[ z̃ ρ(v)d x̄ (v)] g(z̃)dx (z̃)] C̄ 1(z) dz
                                       ´
                                                                                                                R
  C̃ǫ ( x̄ (0), 0) =                                          ´z                                                         .
                                                         exp[ 0 ρ(v)d x̄ (v)] C̄ 1(z) dz
                                                       ´
                                                                                                                R

                                                                                                                                                            (D.19)

         Next, substituting for C̃ǫ in (D.15) using (D.18) and (D.19), we obtain
                          ˆ                                                       ˆ    z                     ˆ      z           ˆ   z̃
     ∗
(p       − p) · y∗ǫ   =       [C̃x ( x̄ (z), 0)n̄(z)w̄ǫ (z) exp[−                          ρ(v)d x̄ (v)] +              exp[−            ρ(v)d x̄ (v)] g(z̃)dx (z̃)]dΥ(z),
                                                                                   0                            0               0




                                                                                      39
with                                    ´          ´ z̃                                             
                                                            ρ(v)d x̄ (v)] C̄ 1(z̃) dz̃
                                                                                                                ´z
                                             exp[       0                                                exp[      ρ(v)d x̄ (v)]
                                                                               R                                0
                 dΥ(z) ≡  ´                                                λ̄(z̃)
                                                                                            λ̄(z) − 1                           dz.
                                                                                                                 C̄R (z)
                                                    ´ z̃
                                             exp[       0   ρ(v)d x̄ (v)] C̄          dz̃
                                                                             R ( z̃ )

Integrating by parts, we get
                                    ˆ
       ∗
    (p −    p) · y∗ǫ   =−                ξ (z){C̃xx x̄z (z)w̄ǫ n̄ + C̃x w̄ǫz n̄ + C̃x w̄ǫ n̄z − ρ(z) x̄z (z)C̃x w̄ǫ n̄ + g(z) xz }dz.

                            ´z                          ´z
with ξ (z) ≡ exp[−              0   ρ(v)d x̄ (v)]           0   dΥ(z̃). Substituting for g(z) using (D.17) implies

                                                                                        w̄ǫ
                                                                 ˆ
                                    ∗
                                (p −         p) · y∗ǫ   =−           ξ (z)C̃x {−            x̄z (z) + w̄ǫz n̄ + w̄ǫ n̄z }dz.
                                                                                         w̄

Using the fact that x̄z (z) = w̄z n̄ + w̄n̄z , one can further check that

                                                        w̄ǫ
                                                  −         x̄z (z) + w̄ǫz n̄ + w̄ǫ n̄z = (w̄n̄)ωǫ ,
                                                         w̄
            d ln w̄
with ω ≡      dz .     This leads to
                                                                     ˆ
                                        ( p∗ − p) · y∗ǫ = −              ψ̄(z)(1 − τ (z))w̄(z)n̄(z)ωǫ (z)dz

with
                                 ´     ´ z′              λ̄(z̃)
                                                                                                           
                       ˆ    z       exp[ 0 ρ(v)d x̄ (v)] C̄ (z′ ) dz′      C̄R (z)
                                                                                          ˆ z̃              
                                                            R
           ψ̄(z) ≡                ´     ´ z′              λ̄(z′ )
                                                                       −1           exp[      ρ(v)d x̄ (v)] dz̃.
                        0           exp[ 0 ρ(v)d x̄ (v)] C̄ (z′ ) dz′      C̄R (z̃)       z                
                                                                            R



Pick T̂ and t̂∗ ≡ {t̂i∗ } such that, in addition to n̄ǫ = 0, C̃ǫ ( x̄ (0), 0) = −κ and y1,ǫ
                                                                                        ∗ , y∗ 6 = 0 and
                                                                                             i,ǫ
y∗j,ǫ = 0 for all j 6= 1, i. Then

                                                                                                      δω
                                                             ˆ
                                          pi −   pi∗    =        ψ̄(z)(1 − τ (z))w̄(z)n̄(z)                |δn=0 dz.
                                                                                                      δyi∗

Variation δU = 0. Consider a variation

                                                        ti∗ (ǫ) = ti∗ + ǫt̂i∗ for all i,
                                                  T ( x, ǫ) = T ( x ) + ǫ T̂ ( x ) for all x ≥ 0,




                                                                                   40
such that Ūǫ = 0. From Lemma 1, we know that
                          ˆ
    ∗
  (p −     p) · y∗ǫ   −       τ (z)w̄(z)n̄ǫ (z) dz
                                                          ˆ
                                                      =       (λ̄(z) − 1)[(1 − τ (z))n̄(z) w̄ǫ (z) − c̄(z) · pǫ − Tǫ (z)] dz.

In the proof of Lemma 1, we have already established that

                          Ūǫ (z) = ūC (z) C̄R (z)[(1 − τ (z))n̄(z) w̄ǫ (z) − c̄(z) · pǫ − Tǫ (z)].

It follows that if Ūǫ = 0, then
                                                                      ˆ
                                                  ∗
                                              (p −     p) · y∗ǫ   =       τ (z)w̄(z)n̄ǫ (z) dz.                         (D.20)


    Let us now compute n̄ǫ (z). By equation (D.10), Ūǫ = 0 implies

                                           C̃x ( x̄ (z), 0)n̄(z)w̄ǫ (z) + C̃ǫ ( x̄ (z), 0) = 0.                         (D.21)

Differentiating with respect to z implies
                                                    
                                  C̃ǫx + C̃xx w̄ǫ n̄ (n̄z w̄ + n̄w̄z ) + C̃x w̄ǫz n̄ + C̃x w̄ǫ n̄z = 0.                 (D.22)

Differentiating (D.8) with respect to z further implies

                                                       C̃xx w̄n̄ + C̃x − MRSC C̃x n̄
                                            n̄z =                                    w̄z .
                                                      MRSC C̃x w̄ + MRSn − C̃xx w̄2

Substituting for n̄z in equation (D.22), we get

                                             
   C̃ǫx + C̃xx w̄ǫ n̄         C̃x w̄ + MRSn n̄ w̄z
               + MRSC C̃x w̄ + MRSn − C̃xx w̄2 C̃x w̄ǫz n̄ + C̃x w̄ǫ C̃xx w̄n̄ + C̃x − MRSC C̃x n̄ w̄z = 0.
                                                                                                 


                MRS(C̃ ( x̄ (z),0),n̄(z))
Let ε(z) ≡     MRSn (C̃ ( x̄ (z),0),n̄(z))n̄(z)
                                                  denote the consumption-compensated elasticity of labor supply.
Using equation (D.8), the previous expression can be rearranged as

                          ε MRSC C̃x w̄n̄ + MRSn n̄ − C̃xx w̄2 n̄ w̄ǫz
                                                                 
  C̃ǫx   = −C̃xx w̄ǫ n̄ −
                                          1+ε                      w̄z w̄
                                                                     ε MRSC C̃x w̄n̄ − C̃x w̄ − C̃xx w̄2 n̄ w̄ǫ
                                                                                                           
                                                                 +                                               .
                                                                                   1+ε                       w̄2




                                                                      41
Together with equation (D.21), equation (D.11) further implies

                                                                (C̃xx w̄n̄ + C̃x )w̄ǫ + C̃xǫ w̄
                                                   n̄ǫ =                                        .
                                                             ( MRSC C̃x w̄ + MRSn − C̃xx w̄2 )

Substituting for C̃ǫx leads to
                                                                                                                                                    w̄ǫ 
                       ε
                                                                                 w̄2       n̄ w̄w̄ǫzz                                      w̄2 n̄
                                                                                       
          C̃x w̄ǫ −   1+ ε       MRSC C̃x w̄ + MRSn − C̃xx                                              − MRSC C̃x n̄w̄ − C̃x w̄ − C̃xx               w̄
  n̄ǫ =                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                             ( MRSC C̃x w̄ + MRSn − C̃xx w̄2 )

                              d ln w̄
Differentiating ω ≡             dz       with respect to ǫ also implies
                                                                                                         
                                 ωǫ    1 ∂                   w̄z            1        w̄zǫ   w̄z w̄ǫ                 w̄zǫ   w̄ǫ
                                    = w̄z                              =   w̄z            −                     =        −     .
                                 ω     w̄
                                          ∂ǫ                  w̄            w̄
                                                                                      w̄      w̄2                   w̄z     w̄

Combining the two previous expressions we obtain

                                        C̃x w̄ǫ        ε         w̄ǫz                 ε    ωǫ
                                                                                                        MRSC C̃x w̄ − C̃xx w̄2
                                                                                                                                   
                                         1+ ε     −   1+ε n̄MRSn w̄z             −   1+ε n̄ ω
                             n̄ǫ =                                                                                                     .
                                                             ( MRSC C̃x w̄ + MRSn − C̃xx w̄2 )

By equation (D.8), we know that

                                                   C̃x w̄ǫ   MRS w̄ǫ     ε        w̄ǫ
                                                           =          =     n̄MRSn .
                                                   1+ε       1 + ε w̄   1+ε        w̄

It follows that
                                                                                  ε   ωǫ
                                                                   n̄ǫ = −          n̄ .
                                                                                 1+ε ω
Substituting for n̄ǫ into (D.20), we obtain

                                                                                                          ε ( z ) ωǫ ( z )
                                                                       ˆ
                                         ∗
                                   (p −           p) · y∗ǫ   =−            τ (z)w̄(z)n̄(z)                                 dz.
                                                                                                        1 + ε(z) ω (z)

Pick T̂ and t̂∗ ≡ {t̂i∗ } such that, in addition to Ūǫ = 0, y1,ǫ
                                                              ∗ , y∗ 6 = 0 and y∗ = 0 for all j 6 = 1, i. Then
                                                                   i,ǫ          j,ǫ


                                                                                   ǫ(z)     1 δω (z)
                                                    ˆ
                                 pi − pi∗ =             τ (z)w̄(z)n̄(z)                              |δU =0 dz.
                                                                                 ǫ(z) + 1 ω (z) δyi∗


E Section 5
E.1 Preliminaries
Government Problem. Suppose, as in Section 5, that skill heterogeneity is one-dimensional so
that we can write social welfare as a function of the utility of each skill type, W ({U (θ )}). Using



                                                                                 42
the revelation principle, we can express the government problem as

                                                      max W ({U (θ )})
                                                      U,n,p


subject to
                                                                            w( p, n; θ̃ )
                                                                                           
                                 θ ∈ argmaxθ̃ u C (n(θ̃ ), U (θ̃ )), n(θ̃ )                     ,
                                                                            w( p, n; θ̃ )
                                             G ∗ (c( p, n, U ) − y( p, n); φ) ≤ 0,

where C (n(θ ), U (θ )) is the aggregate consumption required to achieve utility U (θ ) given labor
                                                                              ´
supply n(θ ), that is the solution to u(C, n(θ )) = U (θ ), and c( p, n, U ) = c( p, C (n(θ ), U (θ )))dF (θ )
is the total demand for goods conditional on prices, p, labor supply, n ≡ {n(θ )}, and utility levels,
U ≡ {U (θ )}, with c( p, C ) the solution to minc̃(θ ) { p · c̃|v(c̃) ≥ C }.
    The envelope condition associated with the Incentive Compatibility constraint gives

                                 U ′ (θ ) = −un (C (n(θ ), U (θ )), n(θ ))n(θ )ω ( p, n; θ )

                       wθ ( p,n;θ )
with ω ( p, n; θ ) ≡   w( p,n;θ )
                                    .   For piecewise differentiable allocations, the envelope condition and
monotonicity of the mapping from wages, w( p, n; θ ), to before-tax earnings, w( p, n; θ )n(θ ) is equiv-
alent to incentive compatibility. We will focus on cases where w( p, n; θ ) is increasing in θ, which
for a given allocation can be interpreted as a normalization or ordering of θ. Under the previous
conditions, we can rearrange our planning problem as

                                                      max W ({U (θ )})
                                                      U,n,p


subject to

                                 U ′ (θ ) = −un (C (n(θ ), U (θ )), n(θ ))n(θ )ω ( p, n; θ ),

                                             G ∗ (c( p, n, U ) − y( p, n); φ) ≤ 0.

Under the functional-form assumptions of Section 5 this simplifies further into
                                                              ˆ
                                                    max           U (θ )dΛ(θ )                         (E.1a)
                                                    U,n,pm


subject to

                                             U ′ (θ ) = h′ (n(θ ))n(θ )ω ( pm ; θ ),                   (E.1b)
                             ˆ
                        φ[       (U (θ ) + h(n(θ )))dF (θ ) − y f ( pm , n)] − ym ( pm , n) ≤ 0,       (E.1c)



                                                                  43
                  (n(θ ))1+1/ǫ
with h(n(θ )) ≡     1+1/ǫ        and Λ(θ ) = 1 for all θ, that is full weight at θ.


Lagrangian. The Lagrangian associated with the planner’s problem (E.1) is given by
       ˆ                    ˆ
                                 µ(θ ) U ′ (θ ) − h′ (n(θ ))n(θ )ω ( pm ; θ ) dθ
                                                                             
  L=       U (θ )dΛ(θ ) +
                                                       ˆ
                                               − γ[φ[ (U (θ ) + h(n(θ )))dF (θ ) − y f ( pm , n)] − ym ( pm , n)].

Integrating by parts, we get
       ˆ                    ˆ
  L=       U (θ )dΛ(θ ) −        µ′ (θ )U (θ )dθ + U (θ̄ )µ(θ̄ ) − U (θ )µ(θ )
                                            ˆ
                                         − µ(θ )h′ (n(θ ))n(θ )ω ( pm ; θ )dθ
                                                      ˆ
                                               − γ[φ[ (U (θ ) + h(n(θ )))dF (θ ) − y f ( pm , n)] − ym ( pm , n)].

Since U (θ̄ ) and U (θ ) are free we must have

                                                 µ(θ ) = µ(θ̄ ) = 0.


First-order Conditions: U (θ ). The first-order condition with respect to U (θ ) leads to

                                           λ(θ ) − µ′ (θ ) − γφ f (θ ) = 0.

Since µ(θ ) = 0, integrating between θ and θ, we get

                                             µ(θ ) = Λ(θ ) − γφF (θ ).

Since µ(θ̄ ) = 0, we must also have
                                                    1 − γφ = 0.

Combining the two previous observations, we obtain

                                               µ(θ )
                                                     = Λ ( θ ) − F ( θ ).                                      (E.2)
                                                γφ

First-order Conditions: n(θ ). The first-order condition with respect to n(θ ) is given by

                                                                     1
                            γφ[y f ,n(θ ) ( pm , n) − h′ (n(θ )) +     y       ( pm , n}] f (θ )               (E.3)
                                                                     φ m,n(θ )
                                        = µ(θ )[h′′ (n(θ ))n(θ ) + h′ (n(θ ))]ω ( pm ; θ ),



                                                          44
with y f ,n(θ ) ≡ ∂y f /∂n(θ ) and ym,n(θ ) ≡ ∂ym /∂n(θ ). The first-order conditions of old technology
firms, new technology firms, and households imply

                                      y f ,n(θ ) ( pm , n) + pm ym,n(θ ) ( pm , n) = w(θ ),
                                                                                             p∗m = 1/φ,
                                                                                    h′ (n(θ )) = w(θ )(1 − τ (θ )).

Thus, we can rearrange equation (E.3) into

                                                                                                                    ǫ(θ ) + 1
                     γφ[w(θ )τ (θ ) + ( p∗m − pm )ym,n(θ ) ] f (θ ) = µ(θ )h′ (n(θ ))[                                        ] ω ( p m ; θ ),   (E.4)
                                                                                                                      ǫ(θ )

with ǫ(θ ) ≡ d ln(n(θ ))/d ln h′ (n(θ ))).


First-order Conditions: pm . The first-order condition with respect to pm is given by
                                                                       ˆ
                                  γφ( p∗m     − pm )ym,pm =                    µ(θ )h′ (n(θ ))n(θ )ω pm ( pm ; θ )dθ,                            (E.5)

with ym,pm ≡ ∂ym /∂pm and ω pm ≡ ∂ω/∂pm .


Optimal Tax on Machines Using equation (E.4) to substitute for µ(θ )h′ (n(θ ))/γ in equation
(E.5) and noting that ∂ ln ym ( pm , n(θ ); θ )/∂ ln n(θ ) = 1,14 we obtain
                                                               ´    ǫ(θ )           d ln ω (θ )
                                                                   ǫ(θ )+1
                                                                               ·    d ln |ym |
                                                                                                · τ (θ ) · x (θ )dF (θ )
                                      pm −      p∗m    =                                                                        ,
                                                                                     ǫ(θ )
                                                                                             · d ln ω (θ ) · y|my(mθ|) dF (θ )]
                                                                           ´
                                                           |ym |[1 −               ǫ(θ )+1 d ln |ym |

       d ln ω (θ )            ∂ ln pm       d ln ω ( pm ;θ )
with   d ln |ym |
                     =   ∂ ln |ym ( pm ,n)|    d ln pm .       Using y∗m = |ym | and t∗m = pm /p∗m − 1, this implies

                                                               ´ǫ(θ ) d ln ω (θ )
                                                               ǫ(θ )+1 d ln y∗m
                                                                                  τ (θ ) x (θ )dF (θ )
                                             t∗m   =                 ´ ǫ(θ ) d ln ω (θ ) ym (θ )       .                                         (E.6)
                                                       p∗m y∗m [1 − ǫ(θ )+1 d ln y∗ y∗ dF (θ )]
                                                                                         m     m



Optimal Income Tax. Equations (E.2) and (E.4) imply

                                                                             [Λ(θ ) − F (θ )] ′         ǫ(θ ) + 1
                 [w(θ )τ (θ ) + ( p∗m − pm )ym,n(θ ) ] =                                     h (n(θ ))[           ] ω ( p m ; θ ).
                                                                                  f (θ )                  ǫ(θ )




   14 Recall  that ym ( pm , n(θ ); θ ) is implicitly defined as the solution to pm = ∂g(ym (θ ), n(θ ); θ )/∂ym (θ ).
Since g(·, ·; θ ) is homogeneous of degree one, this is equivalent to pm = ∂g(ym (θ )/n(θ ), 1; θ )/∂ym (θ ). Dif-
ferentiating, we therefore get ∂ ln ym ( pm , n(θ ); θ )/∂ ln n(θ ) = 1.


                                                                                     45
Using again the fact that ∂ ln ym ( pm , n(θ ); θ )/∂ ln n(θ ) = 1 and h′ (n(θ )) = w(θ )(1 − τ (θ )), from
the first-order condition of the household’s utility maximization problem, this leads to

                                                  pm − p∗m pm ym (θ )
                            τ (θ ) = τ ∗ (θ ) −                       (1 − τ ∗ (θ )),                    (E.7)
                                                    pm       x (θ )

with
                                                                    1
                                 τ ∗ (θ ) ≡         ǫ(θ )                 f (θ )
                                                                                                .
                                              1+   ǫ(θ )+1
                                                             ·   (Λ(θ )− F (θ ))ω ( pm ;θ )


Equation (8). Combining equations (E.6) and (E.7), we obtain
                                      ´ ǫ(θ ) d ln ω (θ ) ∗
                        t∗m              ǫ(θ )+1
                                                 · d ln y∗ · τ (θ ) · x (θ )dF (θ )
                                                         m
                            ∗
                              =             ´ ǫ(θ ) d ln ω (θ )             y (θ )
                                                                                                         (E.8)
                      1 + tm    pm ym [1 − ǫ(θ )+1 · d ln y∗ · τ ∗ (θ ) · my∗ dF (θ )]
                                    ∗
                                                                         m                          m


In the parametric example of Section (5), we have assumed

                                              ǫ(θ ) = ǫ for all θ,                                       (E.9)
                                              Λ(θ ) = 1 for all θ,                                      (E.10)
                                              f (θ ) = 1 for all θ,                                     (E.11)
                                              F (θ ) = θ for all θ.                                     (E.12)

We therefore immediately get

                                                                        1
                                   τ ∗ (θ, pm ) =              ǫ              1
                                                                                            .           (E.13)
                                                    1+       ǫ +1   ·   (1−θ )ω ( pm ;θ )

In Section 5, we have also established that

                                       w( pm ; θ ) = (1 − θ )−1/γ( pm ) ,

which implies
                                                            1      1
                                        ω ( pm ; θ ) =          ·      .
                                                         γ( pm ) 1 − θ
Substituting into equation (E.13), we therefore get

                                                             1
                                      τ ∗ (θ ) =           ǫ                  ≡ τ∗.                     (E.14)
                                                   1+    ǫ +1 γ ( p m )

In Section (5), we have also established that

                                        d ln ω ( pm ; θ )
                                                          = − βγ( pm ),
                                            d ln pm


                                                         46
which implies
                                   d ln ω (θ )                   d ln pm          d ln ω
                                               = − βγ( pm )                     =          .                (E.15)
                                   d ln |ym |               d ln |ym ( pm , n)|   d ln y∗m
Combining equations (E.8), (E.9), (E.14) and (E.15), we obtain

                                                           ǫ d ln ω ∗
                                        t∗m                           ∗ τ
                                                                                      ´
                                                          ǫ+1 d ln ym                     x (θ )dF (θ )
                                              =                                                         ,   (E.16)
                                      1 + t∗m   1−        ǫ d ln ω ∗
                                                         ǫ+1 d ln y∗m τ ( θ,   pm )         pm y∗m

                          pm ym∗
Letting sm ≡   ´
                   x (θ )dF (θ )+ pm y∗m
                                         ,   this leads to equation (8).


E.2 Proposition 1
From equation (8), we know that

                                                             ǫ d ln ω ∗
                                                  t∗m                 ∗ τ
                                                            ǫ+1 d ln ym     1 − sm
                                                      ∗
                                                        =      ǫ d ln ω ∗
                                                                                   ,
                                                1 + tm    1 − ǫ+1 d ln y∗ τ   sm
                                                                           m


with

                                          d ln ω                        d ln pm
                                                    = − βγ( pm )                      ,
                                         d ln |ym |               d ln |ym ( pm , n)|
                                                              1
                                                τ∗ =        ǫ            ,
                                                      1 + ǫ +1 γ ( p m )
                                                                  pm |ym ( pm , n)|
                                                  sm = ´                                     ,
                                                           x (θ )dF (θ ) + pm |ym ( pm , n)|

This expression can be rearranged as

                                                        t∗m       Φ 1 − sm
                                                            ∗
                                                              =                                             (E.17)
                                                      1 + tm    ρ − Φ sm

with

                                                                ǫβγ( pm )
                                                    Φ=−                       ,                             (E.18)
                                                           (ǫ + 1) + ǫγ( pm )
                                                        ∂ ln |ym ( pm , n)|
                                                     ρ=                     .
                                                             ∂ ln pm

We first demonstrate that Φ, sm , and ρ can be expressed as functions of t∗m and φ.
   Using the fact that pm = (1 + t∗m )/φ, we can immediately rearrange equation (E.18) as

                                                     ǫβγ((1 + t∗m )/φ)
                                      Φ=−                                   ≡ Φ(t∗m , φ).                   (E.19)
                                                 (ǫ + 1) + ǫγ((1 + t∗m )/φ)

To express sm and ρ as a function of t∗m and φ, we further need to solve for the optimal labor supply


                                                                  47
of each agent, n(θ ), which itself depends on the marginal income tax rates, τ (θ ). Together with
equations (E.14), equation (E.7) implies

                                                            t∗m pm ym (θ )
                                                ǫ+1−            ∗
                                                           1+ t m x (θ )
                                                                           ǫγ( pm )
                                     τ (θ ) =                                             .
                                                       ǫ + 1 + ǫγ( pm )

From the first-order condition of the old technology firms, we know that

                                              pm ym (θ )
                                                         = − β ln(1 − θ ),                                                 (E.20)
                                                x (θ )

which leads to                                           ∗
                                                        tm
                                              ǫ+1+     1+t∗m βǫγ ( pm ) ln(1 −           θ)
                                   τ (θ ) =                                                    .                           (E.21)
                                                       ǫ + 1 + ǫγ( pm )
The optimal labor supply is given by the agent’s first-order condition

                                             n(θ ) = ((1 − τ (θ ))w(θ ))ǫ .                                                (E.22)

Combining equations (E.21) and (E.22) with the fact that w( pm ; θ ) = (1 − θ )−1/γ( pm ) , we get

                                  ǫγ( pm )              t∗
                  n(θ ) = (                    )ǫ (1 − m ∗ β ln(1 − θ ))ǫ (1 − θ )−ǫ/γ( pm ) ,
                              ǫ + 1 + ǫγ( pm )        1 + tm

and in turn,

                                    ǫγ( pm )                           t∗m
           ˆ                                              ˆ
                                                                                                    − 1+ ǫ
               w(θ )n(θ )dθ = (                  )ǫ           (1 −         ∗
                                                                             β ln(1 − θ ))ǫ (1 − θ ) γ( pm ) dθ
                                ǫ + 1 + ǫγ( pm )                     1 + tm

Using equation (E.20), we further get

                                                 ǫγ( pm )              t∗                        − 1+ ǫ
 pm ym ( pm , n(θ ); θ ) = − β ln(1 − θ )(                    )ǫ (1 − m ∗ β ln(1 − θ ))ǫ (1 − θ ) γ( pm ) , (E.23)
                                             ǫ + 1 + ǫγ( pm )        1 + tm

and in turn,

                            ǫγ( pm )                                     t∗m
                                                ˆ
                                                                                                      − 1+ ǫ
 pm |y( pm , n)| = − β(                  )ǫ         ln(1 − θ )(1 −           ∗
                                                                               β ln(1 − θ ))ǫ (1 − θ ) γ( pm ) dθ. (E.24)
                        ǫ + 1 + ǫγ( pm )                               1 + tm

The aggregate share of robots is therefore given by

                                           ∗
                                          tm                               − γ((1+1+t∗ǫ )/φ)
                                                          θ ))ǫ (1 − θ )
                  ´
                      β ln(1 − θ )(1 −   1+t∗m β ln(1 −
                                                                                     m         dθ
       sm = ´                                                                                            ≡ sm (t∗m , φ),   (E.25)
                                               ∗
                                              tm                                − γ((1+1+t∗ǫ )/φ)
                ( β ln(1 − θ ) − 1)(1 −      1+t∗m β ln(1 −    θ ))ǫ (1 − θ )             m         dθ

where we have again used pm = (1 + t∗m )/φ. The elasticity ρ can be computed in a similar manner.



                                                              48
From equation (E.20) and the fact that w( pm ; θ ) = (1 − θ )−1/γ( pm ) , we get

                             pm y( pm , n(θ ); θ ) = − β ln(1 − θ )n(θ )(1 − θ )−1/γ( pm ) .

                                                                         ∂ ln |ym ( pm ,n)|
Using the previous expression with the definition of ρ ≡                      ∂ ln pm       ,   we get

                                             y( pm , n(θ ); θ ) d ln w( pm ; θ )
                                         ˆ
                                   ρ=                                            dθ − 1.
                                              |ym ( pm , n)|       d ln pm

                                                                                                            d ln w( pm ;θ )
Combining the previous expressions with equations (E.23), (E.24), and using the fact that                      d ln pm        =
β ln(1 − θ ) and pm =      (1 + t∗m )/φ,   we get

                                                      ∗                                     1+ ǫ
                                                                                     −
             ( β ln(1 − θ ) − 1) ln(1 − θ )(1 − 1+tmt∗ β ln(1 − θ ))ǫ (1 − θ ) γ((1+t∗m )/φ) dθ
         ´
   ρ=                                                m
                                                                         1+ ǫ                   ≡ ρ(t∗m , φ).     (E.26)
                                        t∗m                         −      ∗
                       ln(1 − θ )(1 − 1+t∗ β ln(1 − θ ))ǫ (1 − θ ) γ((1+tm )/φ) dθ
                     ´
                                             m


    At this point, we have established that the three statistics in equation (E.17) can be expressed
as Φ(t∗m , φ), ρ(t∗m , φ), and sm (t∗m , φ). We can therefore rearrange equation (E.17) as

                                     H (t∗m , Φ(t∗m , φ), ρ(t∗m , φ), sm (t∗m , φ)) = 0,

with
                                                            Φ    1 − sm    t∗
                                   H (t∗m , Φ, ρ, sr ) ≡       ·        − m∗.
                                                           ρ−Φ     sm    1 + tm
By the Implicit Function Theorem, we have

                                                  dt∗m    dH/dφ
                                                       =−         .                                               (E.27)
                                                  dφ      dH/dt∗m

Since the tax on robots is chosen to maximize welfare, the second derivative of the government’s
value function, expressed as a function of t∗m only, must be negative. Noting that H corresponds
to its first derivative—which is equal to zero at the optimal tax—we therefore obtain

                                                     dH/dt∗m < 0.                                                 (E.28)

Since γ(·) is a strictly increasing function, equation (E.19) implies

                                                    ∂Φ(t∗m , φ)
                                                                > 0.                                              (E.29)
                                                       ∂φ

To establish the monotonicity of sm and ρ with respect to φ, it is convenient to introduce the fol-




                                                            49
lowing function:

                                                   t∗m                             − γ((1+1+t∗ǫ )/φ)
                    d(t∗m , φ, ζ; θ ) = (1 − β           ln ( 1 − θ )) ǫ
                                                                         ( 1 − θ )           m       (ln(1 − θ ))−ζ .
                                                 1 + t∗m

By construction, d is log-supermodular in (φ, ζ, θ ). Since log-supermodularity is preserved by
integration, the following function,
                                                               ˆ
                                              D (φ, ζ ) =          d(t∗m , φ, ζ; θ )dθ,

is also log-supermodular. It follows that

                                     ∗                             1+ ǫ
                                                              −
                           (1 − β 1+tmt∗ ln(1 − θ ))ǫ (1 − θ ) γ((1+t∗m )/φ) dθ
                         ´
    D (φ, ζ = 0)                       m
                 =´                                                          1+ ǫ     is increasing in φ,
   D (φ, ζ = −1)                            ∗                       −
                     (ln(1 − θ ))(1 − β 1+trt∗ ln(1 − θ ))ǫ (1 − θ ) γ((1+t∗m )/φ) dθ
                                               r
                                               ∗                               1+ ǫ
                                             t                         −
                     (ln(1 − θ ))2 (1 − β 1+mt∗ ln(1 − θ ))ǫ (1 − θ ) γ((1+t∗m )/φ) dθ
                   ´
   D (φ, ζ = −2)                                 m
                 = ´                                                          1+ ǫ      is decreasing in φ.
   D (φ, ζ = −1)                            tr∗                        −
                     (ln(1 − θ ))(1 − β 1+t∗ ln(1 − θ ))ǫ (1 − θ ) γ((1+t∗m )/φ) dθ
                                                           m


Noting that

                                                                   1
                                                 sm =                          ,
                                                               1 D (φ,ζ =0)
                                                          1−   β D (φ,ζ =−1)
                                                            D (φ, ζ = −2)
                                                   ρ=β                    − 1,
                                                            D (φ, ζ = −1)

we obtain that

                                                         ∂sm (t∗m , φ)
                                                                       > 0,                                             (E.30)
                                                             ∂φ
                                                          ∂ρ(t∗m , φ)
                                                                       < 0.                                             (E.31)
                                                              ∂φ

        ∂H          ∂H               ∂H
Since   ∂Φ   < 0,   ∂sm   < 0, and   ∂ρ   > 0, inequalities (E.29)-(E.31) imply

                                       dH   ∂H ∂Φ   ∂H ∂sm   ∂H ∂ρ
                                          =       +        +       < 0.
                                       dφ   ∂Φ ∂φ   ∂sm ∂φ   ∂ρ ∂φ

Combining this observation with equation (E.27) and (E.28), we conclude that dt∗m /dφ > 0.




                                                                   50
F       Section 6
F.1 Relaxed Problem
Define the feasible set

Ω R = {(c, N, n, y, y∗ , p, p∗ , w, T, t∗ , Ū ) such that equations (C.1)-(C.3), (C.5), and (C.7) hold} ⊂ Ω.

Consider the value function VR (φ) associated with the relaxed version of the government problem

                                     VR (φ) =                      max                     W (Ū )
                                                     (c,N,n,y,y∗ ,p,p∗ ,w,T,t∗ ,Ū )∈Ω R


subject to
                                                         G ∗ (y∗ ; φ) ≤ 0.

Since Ω ⊂ Ω R , we must have
                                                        VR (φ) ≥ V (φ).

Conversely, take a solution (c, N, n, y, y∗ , p, p∗ , w, T, t∗ , Ū ) of the relaxed problem. Construct p̃∗
and t̃∗ such that

                                         p̃i∗ = Gy∗∗ (y∗ )/Gy∗∗ (y∗ ) for all i,
                                                        i              1

                                          t̃i∗   =   pi /pi∗   − 1 for all i.

Since (c, N, n, y, y∗ , p, p̃∗ , w, T, t̃∗ , Ū ) ∈ Ω, we must have

                                                        VR (φ) ≤ V (φ).

This establishes that V (φ) = VR (φ), as argued in Section 6.


F.2 Lagrange Multiplier is Strictly Positive
In the proof of Lemma 1, we have focused on the case γ > 0. In Footnote 11, we have discussed the
reasons why γ might, in general, be equal to zero. We now provide the formal argument showing
that γ cannot be equal to zero at an optimum in our environment.
    Start with γ ≥ 0. Following the same steps as in the proof of Lemma 1, one can show that for
any variation that satisfies all the equilibrium conditions except G ∗ (y∗ ; φ) ≤ 0, we must have
    ˆ
        [λ̃(z) − γ][(1 − τ (z))n̄(z)w̄ǫ (z) − c̄(z) · pǫ − T̄ǫ (z)]dz
                                                                                                               ˆ
                                                                                           ∗
                                                                              = γ[( p −         p) · y∗ǫ   −       τ (z)w̄(z)n̄ǫ (z)dz],



                                                                  51
with

                                           (∂W/∂Ū (z))|ǫ=0 ūC (z, 0) C̄R (z, 0))
                               λ̃(z) ≡                                             .
                                                      Gy∗1 (y∗ (0))

    Now construct a variation in the taxes on old technology firms and the income tax schedule,

                                      ti∗ (ǫ) = ti∗ + ǫt̂i∗ for all i,
                                   T ( x, ǫ) = T ( x ) + ǫ T̂ ( x ) for all x ≥ 0,

such that n̄ǫ = 0, pǫ = 0, and, in turn, w̄ǫ = 0. For any such variation, the same steps as in the
proof our second formula leads to the counterpart of equation (D.15),

                                                   C̃ǫ ( x̄ (z), 0)               C̃ǫ ( x̄ (z), 0)λ̃(z)
                                               ˆ                              ˆ
                           ∗
                      γ[( p −   p) · y∗ǫ   +                        dz] =                               dz,   (F.1)
                                                       C̄R (z)                             C̄R (z)

with C̃ ( x, ǫ) ≡ C ( R( x, ǫ), p(ǫ)) the indirect utility of households with earnings x.
    By equation (D.11), for n̄ǫ = 0 and w̄ǫ = 0, the change in indirect utility C̃ǫ must solve

                                     C̃xǫ ( x̄ (z), 0) − ρ(z)C̃ǫ ( x̄ (z), 0) = 0,

with

                                                    MRSC (C̃ ( x̄ (z), 0), n̄(z))
                                      ρ(z) ≡                                      .
                                                             w̄(z)

The solution to this ODE is
                                                          ˆ    z
                               C̃ǫ ( x̄ (z), 0) = exp[             ρ(v)d x̄ (v)]C̃ǫ ( x̄ (0), 0).             (F.2)
                                                           0


Now, pick T̂ (0) such that C̃ǫ ( x̄ (0), 0) > 0. By equation (F.2), we therefore have C̃ǫ ( x̄ (z), 0) > 0 for
all z. For such a variation, the right-hand side of equation (F.1) is strictly positive. So the left-hand
side must be strictly positive as well. This establishes that γ cannot be zero.




                                                               52
