                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      WHO VOTES FOR MEDICAID EXPANSION? LESSONS FROM MAINE’S 2017
                             REFERENDUM

                                       David A. Matsa
                                       Amalia R. Miller

                                      Working Paper 25109
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25109


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




We thank Ariza Gusti and Kevin Hare for research assistance, and Analia Schlosser for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by David A. Matsa and Amalia R. Miller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Votes for Medicaid Expansion? Lessons from Maine’s 2017 Referendum
David A. Matsa and Amalia R. Miller
NBER Working Paper No. 25109
September 2018
JEL No. D72,I13,I23

                                          ABSTRACT

In November 2017, Maine became the first state in the nation to vote on a key provision of the
Affordable Care Act: the expansion of Medicaid. We analyze local voting results to identify
characteristics of areas that support Medicaid expansion. Support is strongly correlated with voter
education. Places with more bachelor’s degree holders more often vote in favor, whereas those
with more associate’s degree graduates vote against. Other patterns are consistent with economic
self-interest. Conditional on education rates, areas with more uninsured individuals who would
qualify for expanded coverage tend to vote in favor, while those with more high-income
individuals vote against. Also conditional on education rates, greater hospitals employment is
associated with support for expansion, but the presence of other health professionals, whose
incomes might decrease from expansion, is associated with less support. Extrapolating from
Maine to other states, our model predicts that hypothetical referendums on Medicaid expansion
would pass in five of the 18 states that had not yet expanded Medicaid coverage.


David A. Matsa
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
dmatsa@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Amalia R. Miller
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P. O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904
and NBER
armiller@virginia.edu
The landmark 2012 U.S. Supreme Court decision in National Federation of Independent

Business (NFIB) v. Sebelius (567 U.S. 519 [2012]) upheld the 2010 Patient Protection and

Affordable Care Act (ACA) as federal law. Yet, it limited a key provision of the law that would

have expanded health insurance coverage rates for adults in low-income households in all 50

states. Traditional Medicaid limits eligibility based on both financial resources and categorical

rules (e.g., age, disability status, and family structure). As enacted, the ACA raised the income

eligibility cutoff to 138% of the federal poverty level and removed Medicaid’s categorical rules,

thereby permitting non-disabled, non-elderly adults with no children to qualify for benefits. The

NFIB v. Sebelius decision prevented the federal government from requiring states to expand

Medicaid but allowed states to elect to do so individually.

       Leaving the expansion decision to individual states created uncertainty about the timing

and eventual scope of Medicaid expansion under the ACA (Rosenbaum and Westmoreland

2012). The first state expansions came into effect in January 2014. By November 6, 2017, 31

states and Washington, D.C., had expanded their Medicaid programs, while 19 others had not.

State expansion of Medicaid largely aligned with Democratic Party control of state government,

but other factors, including medical providers’ political power and the state’s administrative

capacity also facilitated expansion (Jacobs and Callaghan 2013; Lanford and Quadagno 2016;

Hertel-Fernandez et al. 2016). States’ decisions to expand Medicaid have had wide-ranging

effects, including on insurance coverage and access to care (Sommers et al. 2015; Courtemanche

et al. 2017; Frean, Gruber, and Sommers 2017), labor force participation (Gooptu et al. 2016;

Duggan, Goda, and Jackson 2017), rates of uncompensated care at hospitals (Nikpay,

Buchmueller, and Levy 2015; Dranove, Garthwaite, and Ody 2016), and payday borrowing

(Allen et al. 2017).




                                                 1
         Although researchers can estimate the costs and benefits of Medicaid expansion across

various subgroups in the population, it is unclear whether these groups actually support or

oppose expansion. Little is known about how voting for Medicaid expansion aligns with social

and economic characteristics of individuals and local areas. Do those who gain financially from

the expansion support it the most at the ballot box?

         Opinion polls, such as those conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation, reveal

correlations between individual characteristics, such as race, party affiliation, and Medicaid

receipt, and stated opinions about Medicaid expansion (Grogan and Park 2017a, 2017b). 1

Unfortunately, existing surveys lack the ability to identify the opinions of healthcare providers. It

is anyhow unclear how stated support for Medicaid expansion in a survey translates into actual

voting behavior. Because survey responses carry no economic consequences, respondents may

not invest in developing their opinion or respond truthfully (Matsusaka and McCarty 2001;

Brunner, Ross, and Washington 2011). Furthermore, survey samples may not be representative

of the voting population. To overcome these limitations, we instead examine voting data directly

from a referendum on Medicaid expansion as a standalone issue.

         On November 7, 2017, Maine became the first state in the nation to hold a popular vote

on whether to expand Medicaid. In this historic referendum, 59% of votes were cast in favor of

expansion. This vote provides a unique view into popular support for the Medicaid expansion

when isolated from other political issues. Indeed, to date, it is the only element of the ACA that



1
    Stated support for Medicaid expansion is also greater among people without health insurance

and lower among those who believe that Medicaid stigmatizes recipients (Grogan and Park

2017b; Table 4).




                                                 2
has been evaluated through direct democracy. In this article, we analyze how citizens voted

across localities in Maine.

       Our analysis provides the first empirical evidence on the characteristics of populations

that support Medicaid expansion as a standalone ballot issue. This enables us to provide new

insight into the factors that affect voting for Medicaid expansion. We identify key economic and

demographic factors that correlate with localities in Maine voting in support of Medicaid

expansion and assess how these factors align with financial self-interest. Finally, we use these

factors to predict vote shares for hypothetical standalone ballot measures on Medicaid expansion

in other states. Dissonance between state policy and these predicted voting outcomes point to a

potential role for direct democracy in shaping the evolution of Medicaid policy across states.



Background

Politics of Medicaid Expansion

Reflecting the highly politicized nature of the ACA, political partisanship played a large role in

states’ decisions to expand Medicaid, with Democratic politicians generally favoring expansion

and Republicans opposing it. Nevertheless, several Republican-led states have opted to expand

their programs. Medicaid expansion was more extensive in states with more affluent residents,

state administrative capacity, generous Medicaid coverage rules already in place before the

ACA, and politically influential healthcare providers; it was less extensive in areas with higher

levels of conservative ideology or racial resentment in the population (Jacobs and Callaghan

2013; Lanford and Quadagno 2016; Hertel-Fernandez et al. 2016). When conservative politicians

support expansion, they sometimes do so in combination with other program changes using a

Medicaid waiver (Rosenbaum and Westmoreland 2012). This strategy enables them to frame the




                                                3
expansion as a “reform” to Medicaid rather than as an expansion of the existing program

(Grogan, Singer, and Jones 2017).

         These various political factors result in state Medicaid expansion policies that appear

imperfectly aligned with popular opinion. Barrilleaux and Rainey (2014) find that increased

public support for the ACA does not reduce gubernatorial opposition to Medicaid expansion.

Grogan and Park (2017a) find that greater public support for Medicaid expansion among whites

increases the probability of a state expanding Medicaid but that public support among non-

whites does not. The conflict is evident in non-expansion states where large majorities of the

population favor expanding Medicaid. 2 Opinion polling itself may not represent constituents’

preferences if their opinions are not fully formed (Matsusaka and McCarty 2001) or truly

reported (Skibba 2016) or if low response rates yield unrepresentative samples (Skibba 2016).

Nevertheless, the discrepancy between polling and policy suggests that statewide votes on

Medicaid expansion might yield different policy choices in some states.

         A central argument for direct democracy is that allowing voters to initiate laws without

going through their elected representatives can better align public policy with public opinion

(e.g., Lascher et al., 1996; Besley and Case, 2003). 3 A key feature of ballot initiatives, like the

2
    The Kaiser Family Foundation’s Health Tracking Poll asked residents of non-expansion states

if they thought their state should expand Medicaid or keep the current program rules. In July

2015, 61% favored expansion and 32% were opposed (KFF 2015). In February 2018, after three

more states (Alaska, Montana, and Louisiana) expanded, 56% of the remaining non-expansion

states supported expansion and 37% were opposed (KFF 2018).
3
    A second argument is that direct democracy increases participation rates and voter turnout, but

empirical support for this hypothesis has been limited (see, e.g., Lascher et al. 1996, Tolbert and

Smith 2005).



                                                  4
one studied in this paper, is that they allow voters to decide on a single issue in isolation. This

achieves an “unbundling” of the various social and economic positions that each candidate for

political office offers to voters (Besley and Coate, 2000). Empirical studies that compare states

with and without direct democracy provisions find mixed evidence of greater policy alignment

(see Besley and Case 2003, p.47, for an early summary of this literature; Bowler and Donovan

2004; Lax and Phillips 2009). In theory, the ability to pursue a ballot initiative should in itself

affect policy outcomes (Gerber 1996; Besley and Coate 2000). In practice, voters in several

states make regular use of the initiative process to create policy (Matsusaka and McCarty 2001;

Matsusaka 2005).

       Maine is one of 24 states with direct democracy provisions that allow new statutes or

constitutional amendments to be adopted through a ballot initiative process, and its politics made

Medicaid expansion a natural question to pose to voters. Over the years, Governor Paul LePage

vetoed five different bills passed by Maine’s legislature to expand the program under the ACA,

despite public opinion polling showing 68% support for expansion (Maine People’s Resource

Center 2013). Medicaid expansion’s peripheral status as a political issue likely contributed to this

dissonance. The Maine electorate voted in 2017 to expand Medicaid, despite having re-elected

Governor LePage only three years earlier. Even after the Maine referendum passed, Governor

LePage continued to obstruct its implementation.



Maine Ballot Initiative

The Maine ballot initiative was the first binding vote in any state on a component of the ACA.

After a petition for the initiative obtained the required number of signatures, Secretary of State

Matthew Dunlap wrote the ballot question and determined that it would be positioned second on




                                                 5
the ballot, following an initiative to allow slot machines or a casino in York County. The

question was worded as follows:

        Do you want Maine to expand Medicaid to provide healthcare coverage for

        qualified adults under age 65 with incomes at or below 138% of the federal

        poverty level, which in 2017 means $16,643 for a single person and $22,412 for a

        family of two?

The original proposed question text asked about “expanding Medicaid to provide health

insurance,” but a group of Republican lawmakers advocated for changing “insurance” to

“taxpayer-funded health benefits” or “government-funded health benefits” (Thistle 2017a). The

group also wanted to include an estimated annual cost in the question text. The final wording

(stated above) referred to “healthcare coverage” and did not include estimates of direct costs,

federal transfers, or cost savings from the expansion.

        The proposed legislation that the question represented was titled “An Act to Enhance

Access to Affordable Health Care.” As per direct democracy procedures in Maine, the legislature

could amend the law after the vote and before its adoption, but the governor could not veto it. In

advance of the vote, the Secretary of State circulated a summary of the legislation; an estimate of

its fiscal impact (annual costs of $54 million to Maine and $525 million to the Federal

government); and two public comments filed in support of the measure. No public comments

were filed in opposition to it.

        The organization leading the pro-expansion efforts, “Mainers for Health Care,” was a

consortium of advocacy groups including: the Maine Center for Economic Policy, the Maine

Equal Justice Partners, the Maine People’s Alliance, the Maine Voice’s Network, and the

Planned Parenthood of Northern New England Maine Action Fund. They spent nearly $2 million




                                                 6
on the campaign. The primary opposition group was “Welfare to Work PAC,” run by a former

advisor to Governor LePage and formed in late August 2017 (Thistle 2017b); this group spent

$385,000.

       Echoing broader Medicaid politics (see Lanford and Quadagno 2016; Hertel-Fernandez et

al. 2016), the business community in Maine was divided on the issue. The National Federation of

Independent Business of Maine (NFIB) opposed expansion, consistent with its parent

organization’s role as the plaintiff in the 2012 NFIB v. Sebelius lawsuit. But the Maine Small

Business Coalition endorsed expansion as did several health care interest groups, including the

Maine Medical Association, the Maine Primary Care Association, and the Maine Hospital

Association (Stone 2013; Wight 2017). The Maine Chamber of Commerce did not take a

position.

       Proponents of the initiative argued for the morality of expanding insurance coverage to

low-income individuals; advertisements featured healthcare providers and others making

personal appeals for clients or friends who would benefit from the expansion. The economic

arguments in favor of expansion centered on obtaining federal subsidies for expansion (Ardoff

2017) and improving the financial status of hospitals (Peterson 2017). The opposition’s

arguments focused on the potential costs of the expansion to the state, citing Maine’s experience

with a 2002 Medicaid expansion and claiming, in an appeal to senior citizens, that Medicaid

expansion would necessitate cutting funding for nursing homes.




                                               7
Data and Methods

We examine official election results of the November 2017 referendum from the Maine Bureau

of Corporations, Elections, and Commissions, which reports nonzero vote totals for 495

localities. Our analysis consists primarily of weighted least squares regressions.

          The primary outcome of interest is the vote share in favor of Medicaid expansion. Vote

shares reflect actual voting behavior that has real financial consequences for taxpayers,

healthcare providers, and people who could potentially become eligible for Medicaid coverage.

These real financial consequences distinguish votes on ballot initiatives from responses to survey

questions, which suffer from potential biases from survey respondents misreporting their

preferences, characteristics, or intentions to vote (Matsusaka and McCarty 2001; Brunner, Ross,

and Washington 2011).

          Explanatory variables are drawn from the U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community

Survey 5-year estimates (ACS, 2011-2015). There are three exceptions: we obtained information

about hospital employment from the American Hospital Association’s 2012 Annual Survey;

voter registration in August 2017 from the Maine Bureau of Corporations, Elections, and

Commissions; and the land area of each locality from the U.S. Census Bureau’s 2014 Gazetteer

Files. We also examine the determinants of voter turnout, defined as the total number of votes

cast in the referendum divided by the number of registered voters. After matching, we are left

with a final sample of 491 observations. Summary statistics for all variables are listed in

Appendix Table A1. Regressions explaining voting outcomes are weighted by the total number

of votes cast in each locality, and turnout regressions are weighted by the number of registered

voters.




                                                 8
       Because we study a single referendum in a single state, our analysis is limited to

identifying correlations in a simple cross-section. The economic and social factors that we study

may affect voting patterns in Maine differently than they do in other states. Our analysis is based

on observational, not experimental or quasi-experimental, sources of variation. The estimates

should be interpreted as correlations, not causal effects. For example, the coefficient estimate

associated with college education might reflect the selection of individuals who attend college in

addition to (or instead of) the influence of a college education on an individual’s voting

preference. Our aggregated unit of analysis limits us to studying variation across localities rather

than within them. It also reduces the number of observations in the analysis, though each

observation represents many votes.



Results

Educational Attainment

The first result to emerge from our analysis is a striking and robust relationship between the

Medicaid vote share and educational attainment. Figure 1 reveals the pairwise association. The

share of the population with at least a bachelor’s degree (x-axis) is plotted against the vote share

for Medicaid expansion (y-axis) using a circle for each locality in the data, sized to reflect the

total number of votes cast. College education has a strong, positive, and roughly linear

association with voting in favor of Medicaid. The association’s estimated slope is 0.65 and

highly statistically significant (p < 0.001). Variation in education also explains a majority of the

variation in Medicaid voting across localities (R2 = 0.54).

       Although having a college degree is highly correlated with income, controlling for

income does not diminish the estimated importance of education. Rather, when variables that




                                                 9
measure the population shares in various annual household income categories ($25-50K; $50-

75K; $75-100K; $100K+) are added to the model, the slope on college education increases to

0.79.

         As shown in Table 1, controlling for college education has an important effect on

estimates for income categories. When education is not included in the model (column 1),

middle-income households are associated with less support for expansion than are low-income

households (the difference is statistically significant for households with income of $50-75K and

$75-100K), but high-income households (with incomes over $100K) are associated with even

stronger support (coefficient = 0.18; p < 0.001). Adding the control for college graduates to the

model reverses the sign on high-income households to a negative and statistically significant

−0.46 (p < 0.001), making the general pattern more monotonic (column 2). Relative to the lowest

income groups (<$25K and $25K–50K, which are not statistically distinguishable), middle-

income levels are associated with moderate opposition (coefficients = −0.20 and −0.18) and high

incomes are associated with the strongest opposition. This reversal of high-income households’

association with support from positive to negative by controlling for college education suggests

there is a major split within the group between high-income individuals with college degrees

who support expansion and high-income individuals with less education who oppose it. This

could mean that more income on its own lowers support for redistributive programs, possibly

because of the anticipated tax burden and the limited personal benefit, 4 but that a college



4
    Although Medicaid expansion in Maine would be funded largely by taxpayers in other states,

Maine voters might worry that their expansion could lead other states to follow. They might also

be concerned that federal contributions will decrease over time. The federal government, which




                                               10
education mitigates this effect such that even college graduates with annual incomes above

$100K favor expanding Medicaid.

       This variation in support for Medicaid expansion across households in different income

categories might also reflect the importance of income inequality. Political economy theory

predicts that growing inequality bolsters popular support for redistributive economic policies

(Ashok, Kuziemko, and Washington 2015). To examine this hypothesis, we measure income

inequality in each locality using the Gini coefficient. Higher levels of local inequality are

associated with greater support for Medicaid expansion, both in models with (coefficient = 0.35;

p < 0.001) and without (coefficient = 0.66; p < 0.001) a control for the share of college

graduates. Statewide or national levels of income inequality might also affect support for

redistributive policies, but we are unable to examine their effect in our setting, because they do

not vary within our sample.

       Because college graduates are more likely to live in more densely populated areas, the

regressions reported in Table 1 and all subsequent tables control for the natural logarithm of

population density. That variable is positively related to voting for Medicaid expansion

(coefficient = 0.03; p < 0.001), consistent with the tendency of more urban areas to support

public policies that increase redistribution. Excluding the variable for density makes the

estimated impact of college education even larger.

       All models also control for the areas’ racial and ethnic composition using the population

shares of blacks and Hispanics. In opinion polling, a respondent’s race is among the strongest



provides 94% of expansion funding in 2018, is set to reduce funding to 90% from 2020 onward,

and Congress could decide to reduce it further.




                                                  11
predictors of support for Medicaid expansion (Grogan and Park 2017a, 2017b). 5 Because race is

measured at the locality level in our analysis, it also captures the effects of the locality’s racial

diversity on policy preferences (Matsubayashi and Rocha 2012). Controlling for race has

virtually no effect on the estimated impact of college education.

         Column 3 of Table 1 reports results from a specification that also controls for the party

affiliation, which is another strong predictor of support for Medicaid expansion (Grogan and

Park 2017a, 2017b). We control for party affiliation using the Republican share of registered

voters. We exclude party affiliation from our main model because it is itself a political outcome,

which may partly reflect voters’ preferences about the ACA and Medicaid expansion.

Controlling for party affiliation could therefore cause the relationship between college education

and support for Medicaid expansion to be understated. Nevertheless, the results in column 3

show that the effect of college remains large and highly statistically significant when we control

for party affiliation (coefficient = 0.70; p < 0.001).

         The relationship between college education and preferences for Medicaid expansion has

not been highlighted in previous research on state policymaking or public opinion about

Medicaid expansion. The finding builds on opinion polling reported in Table 4 of Grogan and



5
    Public support for the ACA overall may be affected by race and racial attitudes because of the

law’s strong association with President Obama. The racial divide in public support for health

care reform increased by 20 percentage points between 1993–1994 and 2009–2010 (Tesler,

2012), and experimental evidence shows that linking health care reform to President Obama

rather than to President Clinton increases opposition among individuals with higher levels of

racial resentment and implicit prejudice (Knowles, Lowrey, and Schaumberg 2010; Tesler 2012).




                                                  12
Park (2017b), which estimates that support for Medicaid expansion is 2.4 times greater among

the college educated than among high school dropouts. But that estimate is not statistically

significant and Grogan and Park emphasize the importance of race, political partisanship, and

health insurance coverage (i.e., being uninsured, a Medicaid beneficiary, or a beneficiary’s friend

or family member), not educational attainment. Other studies of public opinion about Medicaid

expansion, as well as the broader literatures on public opinion about the ACA, its other

components, and healthcare reform more generally, have similarly focused on explanatory

factors other than educational attainment (see, e.g., Berk, Gaylin, and Schur 2006; Blendon et al.

2008; Sussman, Blendon, and Campbell 2009; Brodie et al. 2010; Grande, Gollust, and Asch

2011; Blendon and Benson 2017).

       One potential explanation for the stronger, and more precisely estimated, relationship

between college and voting for Medicaid, is that college education is related both to holding a

more favorable opinion about expanding Medicaid and to being more likely to vote. Sondheimer

and Green (2010) and Mayer (2011) show that education increases voter turnout in federal

elections. We examine the relevance of this effect in our setting by analyzing turnout in the

referendum. The raw correlation between college education and voter turnout across localities in

our sample is depicted in Figure 2. The estimation results using turnout as the dependent variable

are reported in column 4 of Table 1. Voter turnout is greater in areas where a greater share of the

population has a bachelor’s degree. A bachelor’s degree is associated with 16-percentage-point

higher turnout, a 47% increase relative to the sample mean.

       The power of college education in explaining Medicaid vote shares naturally raises

questions about what aspects of college are driving the positive effect. We investigate this in two

ways. First, we consider effects of post-secondary schooling leading to an associate’s rather than




                                                13
a bachelor’s degree. Second, we test for differences among graduates of 4-year colleges based on

their subject of study. The results are reported in Table 2.

          Higher rates of postsecondary education in the form of associate’s degrees have a large,

negative, and significant association with support for Medicaid expansion; this is the opposite of

what we find for bachelor’s degrees. In our baseline model, an additional 1% of a locality in

which voters’ highest educational level is an associate’s degree (rather than a high school

diploma or less) is associated with a 0.70 percentage point lower vote share for Medicaid

(column 1). When controlling for party affiliation, the estimate is smaller in magnitude but still

highly statistically significant (coefficient = 0.38; p < 0.001; column 2). The opposite signs of

the vote share associations for bachelor’s and associate’s degree holders may result from the

preferences or economic circumstances of students who obtain 2-year rather than 4-year degrees,

their instructional experiences (e.g., part-time versus full-time), or the subjects they study.

Associate’s degree programs involve less coursework and tend to be more vocationally oriented.

          There is also substantial variation in Medicaid support among localities with higher rates

of 4-year college graduates based on the graduates’ primary field of study. The ACS divides

bachelor’s degree holders based on the broad subject area of their (first) bachelor’s degree. We

include in our model the shares of the local population who have bachelor’s degrees in each of

the following groups: science and engineering; science- and engineering-related fields (such as

nursing, architecture, and math teacher education); business; education; and arts, humanities, and

others.

          The different majors are associated with starkly different voting patterns. Undergraduate

business majors appear more similar to 2-year college graduates than their peers with other

bachelor’s degrees. Localities with more business majors tend to have lower vote shares for




                                                  14
Medicaid. The positive association with bachelor’s degree holders overall is driven by

substantial positive relationships for science and engineering, education, and arts and humanities

majors. The largest association is 0.85–0.97 for arts and humanities majors (p < 0.001). Each

additional person in an area with one of these degrees is associated with nearly one more vote for

Medicaid expansion. The strength of this association could reflect robust preferences by those

degree-holders for Medicaid expansion. It may also reflect their being more likely to turn out to

vote in the election.

       We examine the question of turnout directly by again analyzing the total number of votes

cast scaled by the number of registered voters. The results are reported in column 3. We find a

large and significant positive relationship between arts and humanities majors and turnout for the

Medicaid vote (coefficient = 0.57; p < 0.001). We also find a significant increase in turnout

associated with more business majors (coefficient = 0.44; p < 0.01), which suggests that turnout

amplifies the impact of that group’s preference against the expansion.

       Higher rates of advanced degrees are also correlated with Medicaid voting. We repeated

the analysis after breaking down bachelor’s degree holders into those with no advanced degree,

those with a master’s degree, those with a professional degree, and those with a doctoral degree.

The model continues to control for the population share with an associate’s degree, population

density, and race. The estimates imply that bachelor’s degree holders without advanced degrees

are modestly more supportive of Medicaid expansion than are people without college degrees

(coefficient of 0.21; p < 0.001), whereas those with master’s and doctoral degrees are even more

supportive (coefficients of 1.10 and 1.24, respectively; p < 0.001) and those with professional

degrees are less supportive (coefficient = −0.62; p < 0.05). Further analysis suggests that the

negative estimate for professional degrees is driven by health professionals, as the effect is no




                                               15
longer present after we control for the population share employed in health care diagnosis and

treatment. We examine health professionals in greater detail in the next section.



Interest Groups

Four-year college graduates’ strong implied support for Medicaid expansion is interesting in part

because it does not obviously align with their economic self-interest. College graduates are less

likely to be uninsured or to become eligible for Medicaid under the expansion.

       Self-interest is, however, an apparent motivator for other populations. In Table 3, we

report results for other directly affected groups. First, we look at the population that is most

likely to gain insurance coverage from the proposed expansion of Medicaid: the uninsured with

incomes below 138% of the poverty line. Consistent with self-interested voting, areas with

higher population shares in this group are significantly more favorable to Medicaid expansion

(see column 1; coefficient = 0.78; p < 0.001).

       We also examine the votes of healthcare providers, who would benefit from their patients

gaining expanded insurance coverage that increases demand for their services (Card, Dobkin,

and Maestas 2008; Finkelstein et al. 2012; Taubman et al. 2014; Finkelstein et al. 2016). The

financial benefit is greater for hospitals, because expansion reduces uncompensated care

(Nikpay, Buchmueller, and Levy 2015; Nikpay, Buchmueller, and Levy 2016; Nikpay 2016).

Unlike physicians’ offices, hospitals are required (by the 1946 Hill-Burton Act and the 1986

Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act) to provide care to patients in emergency

situations regardless of their ability to pay. Outside the hospital setting, however, the financial

impact of Medicaid expansion on healthcare providers is less obvious. Medicaid has a relatively




                                                 16
low reimbursement rate 6 and physicians may not see much financial gain from its expansion,

particularly if some of the expansion comes from crowding out higher-paying private insurance

(Frean, Gruber, and Sommers 2017; Kaestner et al. 2017).

         Consistent with both incentives, we find that support for Medicaid expansion is positively

associated with hospital employment (total full-time equivalent hospital employment as a share

of the area population) and negatively associated with non-hospital providers. 7 Like our finding

for the uninsured, the positive association with hospital employment (coefficient = 0.31; p <

0.001) is consistent with self-interest as hospitals expected to benefit from an expanded health

insurance safety net. These votes align with the Maine Hospital Association’s endorsement of the

referendum. Although Maine’s major physician and nurse associations also supported Medicaid

expansion, the voting data suggest that their members were less likely to fall in line. The

negative association with the population share working in health diagnosis and treatment 8

(coefficient = −0.71; p < 0.001) is consistent with healthcare providers outside of hospitals

expecting Medicaid expansion to make them worse off because of Medicaid’s low
6
    Maine has a Medicaid-to-Medicare fee index for “all services” of only 0.64, which is lower

than the national average of 0.72 (excluding Tennessee, where data are not available), 37 other

states, and the District of Columbia (Zuckerman, Skopec, and Epstein 2017).
7
    Because of differences in data sources, the geographic basis for the occupation data on all

health professionals is the worker’s residence (which is also where they vote), but it is the

hospital location for hospital employment.
8
    This Census occupational category is “health diagnosing and treating practitioners and other

technical occupations” and it includes physicians and surgeons, therapists, nurses, dentists,

veterinarians, and chiropractors.




                                                17
reimbursement rate. The association is also negative but statistically insignificant for health

technologists and technicians; it is positive and insignificant for healthcare support occupations. 9

         The model in Table 3, column 1, includes controls for the shares of the population with

associate’s and bachelor’s degrees. The other estimates should thus be interpreted as the

associations with changes in those variables while keeping the shares of college graduates

unchanged. Because workers in health diagnosis and treatment typically have bachelor’s degrees,

the negative estimate indicates that they are less likely to support Medicaid expansion than other

4-year college graduates, who tend to favor expansion (coefficient in this model = 0.57; p <

0.001). The other healthcare provider groups are drawn more from associate’s degree holders,

who are less likely to support the expansion (coefficient in this model = −0.61; p < 0.001).

         If we omit the education variables from our regression model, we find a significant

positive association for health diagnosis and treatment workers (coefficient = 0.62; p < 0.001)

and significant negative associations for health technologists and technicians (coefficient =

−1.10; p < 0.001) and for those in healthcare support occupations (coefficient = −0.89; p <

0.001). 10 Taken together, these results appear to show that health diagnosis and treatment
9
     The Census occupational category “healthcare support occupations” includes nursing,

psychiatric, and home health aides, occupational and physical therapists and aides, massage

therapists, dental assistants, and pharmacy assistants.
10
     In the model without education controls, the coefficient for the low-income uninsured

population share remains positive but is smaller and not statistically significant. This is because

the low-income uninsured population has lower average educational attainment, which is

otherwise associated with opposition to Medicaid expansion; omitting education controls

introduces a downward bias in the estimate for the uninsured.




                                                 18
workers are more supportive of Medicaid expansion than the general population but less

supportive than other 4-year college graduates; other healthcare workers are roughly as

supportive as others with similar education.

       Controlling for party affiliation leaves the estimates qualitatively unchanged but smaller

in magnitude. Estimates from a specification with this control, which is reported in column 3,

can be compared to those from a specification without it, which is reported in column 1. The

magnitude of the coefficient estimate on the population eligible to gain insurance decreases only

slightly (from 0.78 to 0.76), the one on hospital employment decreases moderately (from 0.31 to

0.26), and the one on health diagnosis and treatment workers decreases by a lot (from −0.71 to

−0.21). All three estimates remain statistically significant. The larger impact of these controls on

the negative estimates than on the positive ones has multiple potential interpretations. For

example, partisanship could be a bigger factor driving people to vote against expansion than to

vote for it; or opposition to the ACA could be more likely to motivate moderates to register

Republican than support for it motivates them not to.



Projection to Other States

At the time of Maine’s referendum, 18 other states had not yet expanded Medicaid under the

ACA. Opinion polls in these states show popular support for expansion (KFF 2018), and

advocates are campaigning for ballot initiatives in Idaho, Nebraska, and Utah. Yet it is unclear

how these or similar initiatives would fare at the ballot box.

       In this section, we use regression estimates from the vote for Medicaid expansion in

Maine to project votes for expansion in other states, based on those states’ economic and

demographic characteristics. The resulting estimates predict how other states would vote in a




                                                 19
referendum similar to Maine’s, but does not account for how differences in the context, framing,

or timing of ballot initiatives in other states would affect their popularity. Maine is an unusual

state in several dimensions. For example, it is more rural, has a smaller minority population, and

has lower Medicaid reimbursement rates than average. Yet, it is not homogeneous. To the extent

that the variation within Maine can inform variation elsewhere, a regression model estimated

across localities in Maine can be used to predict vote shares in hypothetical referendums in other

states. Because this assumption is impossible to verify, this exercise is fundamentally speculative

in nature.

       The goal of this regression is to predict total voting shares rather than to interpret the

magnitude of individual coefficients, as we did in the regressions reported above. To increase the

model’s explanatory power, we include all of the variables (except voter registration) from the

previous models. Instead of Republican voter registration, we use President Donald J. Trump’s

vote share in the 2016 election to capture party affiliation and voting preferences for the Obama

agenda, including the ACA. We use Trump’s vote share instead of voter party registration

because of differences across states in the importance of party registration for selecting

candidates for ballots. Altogether, these variables explain 92% of the variation in vote share

across localities in Maine.

       Figure 3 depicts the results of this analysis on a map of the United Sates. States are

colored based on whether their economic and demographic characteristics make their predicted

vote share in a hypothetical Medicaid expansion referendum greater than 50% (blue, for passing

the referendum) or less than 50% (red, failure to pass). The figure uses shading to indicate how

the predicted passage compares to the current status of the Medicaid expansion in the state.




                                                20
States are shaded darker when the model predicts a deviation from current policy and shaded

lighter when no change is predicted.

          Although we project the outcomes of hypothetical referendums in all states, not all states

allow citizens to use direct democracy to make laws. 11 For states without direct democracy, the

projection results indicate how citizens would vote if they could. The projections allow us to

identify states where the result of a hypothetical ballot initiative differs from the realized policy

outcome. These differences point to a potential role for direct democracy in shaping Medicaid

policy.

          Among the states that had not expanded Medicaid at the time of the Maine referendum,

our model predicts that five would vote in favor of an expansion in a statewide ballot. In

decreasing order of predicted vote share, ranging from 57% to 51%, these are Utah, Texas,

Wisconsin, Florida, and Virginia. 12 Under current law, citizens in two of those five states (Utah

and Florida) have the access to direct ballot initiatives. A hypothetical initiative on Medicaid

expansion is predicted to fail in the remaining 13 non-expansion states, with predicted vote

shares ranging from 46% (Idaho) to 29% (Mississippi).
11
     Twenty-one states have citizen-initiated state statutes: Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California,

Colorado, Idaho, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, North

Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Dakota, Utah, Washington and Wyoming. Three other

states have citizen-initiated constitutional amendments: Florida, Illinois, and Mississippi.

Maryland and New Mexico allow citizens to initiate a referendum to veto a new law but not to

pass a new one.
12
     Virginia subsequently became an expansion state on June 7, 2018, when Governor Ralph

Northam signed into law a state budget that included Medicaid expansion.




                                                  21
       We use a similar exercise to predict the outcome of expansion votes in states that have

already expanded their Medicaid programs. For these states, we use the proportion of uninsured

with incomes below 138% of the poverty line in 2012 (before Medicaid expanded) as the basis

for the calculation. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the majority of these states are predicted to support

the expansion in a referendum, with vote shares ranging from 77% (Washington, D.C.) to

50.03% (Pennsylvania). However, the model predicts that a referendum to expand Medicaid

would fail in 11 states that have already expanded. In decreasing order of predicted vote share

ranging from 49% to 33%, these states are Michigan, Iowa, Alaska, Montana, Ohio, Indiana,

Kentucky, Arkansas, North Dakota, West Virginia, and Louisiana. Six of these 11 states allow

direct democracy ballot initiatives.

       This last result should be interpreted carefully. The basis of our prediction is an empirical

model of voting in 2017 in a state that had not yet expanded Medicaid under the ACA. This is

not the same as predicting how residents of these 11 states would have voted at the time that their

program was expanded; some of the reversals may reflect changing preferences rather than an

adoption that constituents would not have voted for themselves. The status quo also likely affects

voters’ preferences. While our model predicts that majorities of voters in some expansion states

would not approve a ballot initiative favoring Medicaid expansion, this does not imply that

majorities would support a measure that takes away people’s benefits by retracting their state’s

already adopted expansion.



Conclusions

Maine’s 2017 referendum on Medicaid expansion provides a unique opportunity to observe how

people vote on Medicaid expansion as a standalone issue. Consistent with some votes reflecting




                                                22
self-interest, we find greater support for Medicaid expansion in areas where more of the

population would gain insurance and where hospitals (that would benefit from a reduced need for

uncompensated care) have a larger presence. At the same time, we find a robust positive

association between the share of an area’s population with a bachelor’s degree and its support for

Medicaid expansion, which appears to contradict financial self-interest. These correlations may

reflect the causal impact of a 4-year college education on an individual’s preference for Medicaid

expansion and voting behavior, but they may also be driven in part by differences in the attitudes

of individuals who self-select into college attendance and completion. Uncovering the

mechanism that drives this association is an interesting area for future research.

       Even without understanding the precise sources of each association, it is possible to use

the associations to predict the outcomes of ballot initiatives on Medicaid expansion in other

states. Our model predicts that ballot initiatives would pass in five of the 18 the states that had

not expanded Medicaid at the time of Maine’s vote. Laws in two of these states—Utah and

Florida—allow for ballot initiatives. These results suggest that, by allowing voters to isolate the

issue of Medicaid expansion in a standalone ballot initiative, state-level direct democracy rights

can lead to greater adoption of Medicaid expansion than the level produced through elected state

governments. Although direct democracy was originally adopted among Progressive era reforms

in the early twentieth century, in recent decades it has been used to limit taxation that supports

the social safety net (Tolbert 2003). The outcomes of Maine’s referendum and of our analysis

indicate that direct democracy can nevertheless still be used to expand the social safety net.




                                                 23
References

Allen, Heidi, Ashley Swanson, Jialan Wang, and Tal Gross. 2017. “Early Medicaid expansion
       associated with reduced payday borrowing in California.” Health Affairs 36, no. 10:
       1769-1776.
Ardoff, Arthur Barry. 2017. “Medicaid expansion would be a ‘win-win’ for Maine.” Bangor
       Daily News. September 13.
Ashok, Vivekinan, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Ebonya Washington. 2015. “Support for redistribution
       in an age of rising inequality: New stylized facts and some tentative explanations.”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring: 367-405.
Barrilleaux, Charles, and Carlisle Rainey. 2014. “The politics of need: Examining governors’
        decisions to oppose the “Obamacare” Medicaid expansion.” State Politics & Policy
        Quarterly 14, no. 4: 437-460.
Berk, Marc, Gaylin Daniel, and Schur Claudia. 2006. “Exploring the public’s views on the health
       care system: A national survey on the issues and options.” Health Affairs 25, no. 6:
       w596-w606.
Besley, Timothy, and Anne Case. 2003. “Political institutions and policy choices: evidence from
       the United States.” Journal of Economic Literature 41, no. 1: 7-73.
Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate. 2000. “Issue unbundling via citizens' initiatives.” National
       Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. w8036.
Blendon, Robert J., Drew E. Altman, John M. Benson, Mollyann Brodie, Tami Buhr, Claudia
      Deane, and Sasha Buscho. "Voters and health reform in the 2008 presidential election."
      New England Journal of Medicine 359, no. 19 (2008): 2050-2061.
Blendon, Robert, and John Benson. 2017. “Public opinion about the future of the Affordable
      Care Act.” New England Journal of Medicine 377, no. 9: e12.
Bowler, Shaun, and Todd Donovan. 2004. “Measuring the effect of direct democracy on state
      policy: Not all initiatives are created equal.” State Politics & Policy Quarterly 4, no. 3:
      345-363.
Brodie, Mollyann, Drew Altman, Claudia Deane, Sasha Buscho, and Elizabeth Hamel. 2010.
       “Liking the pieces, not the package: Contradictions in public opinion during health
       reform.” Health Affairs 29, no. 6:1125-1130.
Brunner, Eric, Stephen Ross, and Ebonya Washington. 2011. “Economics and policy
      preferences: Causal evidence of the impact of economic conditions on support for
      redistribution and other ballot proposals.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93, no.
      3:888-906.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. 2008. “The impact of nearly universal
      insurance coverage on health care utilization: evidence from Medicare.” American
      Economic Review 98, no. 5:2242-58.
Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela Zapata.
      2017. “Early impacts of the Affordable Care Act on health insurance coverage in



                                               24
       Medicaid expansion and non‐expansion states.” Journal of Policy Analysis and
       Management 36, no. 1:178-210.
Cousins, Christopher. 2016. “Why Maine voters won’t have last word on referendums they
      passed.” Bangor Daily News. December 11.
Dranove, David, Craig Garthwaite, and Christopher Ody. 2016. “Uncompensated care decreased
      at hospitals in Medicaid expansion states but not at hospitals in nonexpansion states.”
      Health Affairs 35, no. 8:1471-1479.
Duggan, Mark, Gopi Goda, and Emilie Jackson. 2017. “The effects of the Affordable Care Act
      on health insurance coverage and labor market outcomes.” NBER Working Paper No.
      23607.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Heidi Allen, Bill Wright, and Katherine Baicker. 2016.
       “Effect of Medicaid Coverage on ED Use—Further Evidence from Oregon's
       Experiment.” New England Journal of Medicine 375, no. 16:1505-1507.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph
       Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and the Oregon Health Study Group. 2012.
       “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year.” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 127, no. 3:1057-1106.
Frean, Molly, Jonathan Gruber and Benjamn Sommers. 2017. “Premium subsidies, the mandate,
       and Medicaid expansion: Coverage effects of the Affordable Care Act.” Journal of
       Health Economics 53, 72-86.
Gerber, Elisabeth R. 1996. “Legislative Response to the Threat of the Popular Initiative.”
       American Journal of Political Science 40: 99–128.
Gooptu, Angshuman, Asako Moriya, Kosali Simon, and Benjamin Sommers. 2016. “Medicaid
      expansion did not result in significant employment changes or job reductions in
      2014.” Health Affairs 35, no. 1:111-118.
Grande, David, Sarah Gollust, and David Asch. 2011. “Polling analysis: Public support for
      health reform was broader than reported and depended on how proposals were
      framed.” Health Affairs 30, no. 7:1242-1249.
Grogan, Colleen M., and Sunggeun Park. 2017a. “The racial divide in state Medicaid
      expansions.” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law 42, no. 3: 539-572.
Grogan, Colleen M., and Sunggeun Ethan Park. 2017b. “The Politics of Medicaid: Most
      Americans Are Connected to the Program, Support Its Expansion, and Do Not View It as
      Stigmatizing.” Milbank Quarterly 95, no. 4: 749-782.
Grogan, Colleen M., Phillip M. Singer, and David K. Jones. 2017. “Rhetoric and reform in
      waiver states.” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law 42, no. 2: 247-284.
Hertel-Fernandez, Alexander, Theda Skocpol, and Daniel Lynch. 2016. “Business associations,
       conservative networks, and the ongoing republican war over Medicaid
       expansion.” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law 41, no. 2: 239-286.
Jacobs, Lawrence, and Timothy Callaghan. 2013. “Why states expand Medicaid: Party,
       resources, and history.” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law 38, no. 5:1023-1050.


                                              25
Kaestner, Robert, Bowen Garrett, Anuj Gangopadhyaya, and Caitlyn Fleming. 2017. “Effects of
       ACA Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage and labor supply.” Journal of
       Policy Analysis and Management 36, no. 3:608-642.
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). 2015. “Medicare and Medicaid at 50.” Publication 8755-T.
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). 2018. “Kaiser Health Tracking Poll – February 2018: Health
       Care and the 2018 Midterms, Attitudes Towards Proposed Changes to Medicaid.”
       Publication 9161-T.
Knowles, Eric D., Brian S. Lowery, and Rebecca L. Schaumberg. 2010. “Racial prejudice
      predicts opposition to Obama and his health care reform plan.” Journal of Experimental
      Social Psychology 46, no. 2: 420-423.
Lascher, Edward L., Jr., Michael G. Hagen, and Steven A. Rochlin. 1996. “Gun Behind the
       Door: Ballot Initiatives, State Policies and Public Opinion.” Journal of Politics 58
       (August): 760-775.
Lanford, Daniel, and Jill Quadagno. “Implementing ObamaCare: The politics of medicaid
       expansion under the affordable care act of 2010.” Sociological Perspectives 59, no. 3
       (2016): 619-639.
Lax, Jeffrey R., and Justin H. Phillips. 2009. “Gay rights in the states: Public opinion and policy
       responsiveness.” American Political Science Review 103, no. 3: 367-386.
Maine People’s Resource Center. 2013. Public Opinion Survey: March 31-April 3, 2013.
      http://mprc.me/research/0413_health_results.pdf
Matsubayashi, Tetsuya, and Rene R. Rocha. 2012. “Racial diversity and public policy in the
      states.” Political Research Quarterly 65, no. 3: 600-614.
Matsusaka, John G. 2001. “Problems with a methodology used to evaluate the voter
      initiative.” Journal of Politics 63, no. 4: 1250-1256.
Matsusaka, John G. 2005. “Direct democracy works.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19, no.
      2: 185-206.
Matsusaka, John G., and Nolan M. McCarty. 2001. “Political resource allocation: Benefits and
      costs of voter initiatives.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 17, no. 2: 413-
      448.
Mayer, Alexander K. “Does education increase political participation?” The Journal of Politics
      73, no. 3 (2011): 633-645.
Nikpay, Sayeh. 2016. “The relationship between uncompensated care and hospital financial
      position: Implications of the ACA Medicaid expansion for hospital operating
      margins.” Journal of Health Care Finance 43, no. 2: 72-89.
Nikpay, Sayeh, Thomas Buchmueller, and Helen Levy. 2015. “Early Medicaid expansion in
      Connecticut stemmed the growth in hospital uncompensated care.” Health Affairs 34, no.
      7:1170-1179.
Nikpay, Sayeh, Thomas Buchmueller, and Helen Levy. 2016. “Affordable Care Act Medicaid
      expansion reduced uninsured hospital stays in 2014.” Health Affairs 35, no. 1:106-110.



                                                26
Peterson, Robert. 2017. “Medicaid expansion is critical to the survival of Maine’s rural
       hospitals.” Bangor Daily News. October 31.
Rosenbaum, Sara, and Timothy Westmoreland. 2012. “The Supreme Court’s surprising decision
      on the Medicaid expansion: How will the federal government and states proceed?”
      Health Affairs 31, no. 8:1663-1672.
Skibba, Ramin. 2016. “The polling crisis: How to tell what people really think.” Nature 538, no.
       7625.
Sommers, Benjamin, Munira Gunja, Kenneth Finegold, and Thomas Musco. 2015. “Changes in
     self-reported insurance coverage, access to care, and health under the Affordable Care
     Act.” JAMA 314, no. 4:366-374.
Sondheimer, Rachel Milstein, and Donald P. Green. 2010. “Using experiments to estimate the
      effects of education on voter turnout.” American Journal of Political Science 54, no. 1:
      174-189.
Stone, Matthew. 2013. “Maine Hospital Association supports Medicaid expansion.” Bangor
       Daily News. March 27.
Sussman, Tara, Robert Blendon, and Andrea Campbell. 2009. “Will Americans support the
      individual mandate?” Health Affairs 28, no. 3:w501-w509.
Taubman, Sarah, Heidi Allen, Bill Wright, Katherine Baicker, Amy Finkelstein, and the Oregon
     Health Study Group. 2014. “Medicaid Increases Emergency Department Use: Evidence
     from Oregon's Health Insurance Experiment.” Science 343, no. 6168:263-268.
Tesler, Michael. 2012. “The spillover of racialization into health care: How President Obama
        polarized public opinion by racial attitudes and race.” American Journal of Political
        Science 56, no. 3: 690-704.
Thistle, Scott. 2017a. “Republican group asks to strike ‘insurance’ from Medicaid expansion
        ballot wording.” Portland Press Herald. August 22.
Thistle, Scott. 2017b. “Opponents to Medicaid expansion in Maine form political action
        committee.” Portland Press Herald. August 25.
Tolbert, Caroline J. 2003. “Direct democracy and institutional realignment in the American
       states.” Political Science Quarterly 118, no. 3:467-489.
Tolbert, Caroline J., and Daniel A. Smith. 2005. “The educative effects of ballot initiatives on
       voter turnout.” American Politics Research 33, no. 2: 283-309.
Wight, Patty. October 11, 2017. “Maine Medical Association Announces Support For Ballot
       Initiative Expanding Medicaid.” Maine Things Considered.
Zuckerman, Stephen, Laura Skopec, and Marni Epstein. 2017. “Medicaid Physician Fees after
      the ACA Primary Care Fee Bump.” March. Washington, DC: Urban Institute.




                                              27
              Figure 1. College Graduates and the Vote Share for Medicaid Expansion

                                      1
  Vote Share for Medicaid Expansion




                                      .8



                                      .6



                                      .4



                                      .2



                                      0
                                           0      .2                   .4                 .6
                                               College Graduate Share of Population


Notes: Each circle represents a locality and its size reflects the total number of votes cast. The x-axis
shows the share of the adult population with a bachelor’s degree in the locality, and the y-axis shows
the share of votes cast in favor of expansion.
                                                  Figure 2. College Graduates and Voter Turnout

                                         .8
  Total Votes Cast / Registered Voters




                                         .6




                                         .4




                                         .2




                                         0
                                              0               .2                   .4             .6
                                                           College Graduate Share of Population


Notes: Each circle represents a locality and its size reflects the total number of registered voters. The
x-axis shows the share of the adult population with a bachelor’s degree in the locality, and the y-axis
shows the share of registered voters who voted in the referendum.
Figure 3. Predicted Outcomes of State Referendums on Medicaid Expansion




                   Has not expanded Medicaid, but a referendum is predicted to pass
                   Has expanded Medicaid, and a referendum is predicted to pass
                   Has not expanded Medicaid, and a referendum is predicted to fail
                   Has expanded Medicaid, but a referendum is predicted to fail
Notes: This map depicts predicted outcomes of state referendums on Medicaid expansion based on
demographic and economic characteristics of each state and ordinary least squares parameter
estimates from our analysis of the Maine referendum. States’ Medicaid expansion policy is coded as
of the date of Maine’s referendum. See the text for details.
                                           Table 1
                  Effect of Household Income on Votes for Medicaid Expansion

                                                                                        Votes cast /
                                                                                        Registered
         Dependent variable:           Vote share for Medicaid expansion                  voters
                                     (1)               (2)             (3)                  (4)

Share of population
 with household income:
   $25-50K                         -0.049             0.022             0.088              0.107
                                   (0.108)           (0.074)           (0.059)            (0.074)

     $50-75K                      -0.377***         -0.200***          -0.094*             0.012
                                    (0.102)           (0.070)          (0.056)            (0.070)

     $75-100K                     -0.236**          -0.180***         -0.112**           0.195***
                                   (0.095)            (0.065)          (0.052)            (0.065)

     $100K+                       0.176***          -0.455***         -0.272***          0.160***
                                   (0.062)            (0.050)           (0.041)           (0.050)

Share of population                                 0.794***          0.698***           0.156***
 with bachelor’s degree                              (0.034)           (0.027)            (0.035)

Controls
  Log population density              X                 X                 X                  X
  Race                                X                 X                 X                  X
  Party affiliation                                                       X

N                                    491               491               491                491
R2                                  0.54               0.79              0.87               0.25

Notes: This table summarizes results from regressions of voting outcomes on the shares of the
population with household income in various categories, the natural logarithm of population density,
and the shares of the population that is black and Hispanic. In the models reported in columns 1–3, the
dependent variable is the vote share for Medicaid expansion and the regressions are weighted by the
total number of votes cast; in the model reported in column 4, the dependent variable is voter turnout
and the regression is weighted by the total number of registered voters. The models reported in
columns 2–4 include a control for the share of the population with a bachelor’s degree. The model
reported in column 3 also includes a control for the share of the population that is registered
Republican. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.
                                           Table 2
 Effect of Bachelor’s Degree by Major and Associate’s Degree on Votes for Medicaid Expansion

                                                                                         Votes cast /
                        Dependent variable:      Vote share for Medicaid expansion     Registered voters
                                                       (1)                (2)                 (3)

Share of population with bachelor’s degree in:
   Science and engineering                         0.496***           0.474***              -0.002
                                                    (0.089)            (0.072)              (0.089)

     Science and engineering related                 0.142             0.409**               0.144
                                                    (0.227)            (0.183)              (0.234)

     Business                                      -0.657***          -0.332***            0.439***
                                                     (0.146)            (0.118)             (0.151)

     Education                                      0.319**           0.338***               0.073
                                                    (0.157)            (0.126)              (0.162)

     Arts, humanities, and other                   0.969***           0.854***             0.570***
                                                    (0.113)            (0.091)              (0.118)

Share of population with associate’s degree        -0.700***          -0.377***             0.199*
                                                     (0.108)            (0.089)             (0.109)

Controls
  Log population density                               X                  X                    X
  Race                                                 X                  X                    X
  Party affiliation                                                       X

N                                                     491                491                  491
R2                                                    0.78               0.86                 0.23

Notes: This table summarizes results from regressions of voting outcomes on the shares of the
population whose first bachelor’s degree is in the fields shown, the share of the population with an
associate’s degree, the natural logarithm of population density, and the shares of the population that is
black and Hispanic. In the models reported in columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is the vote share
for Medicaid expansion and the regressions are weighted by the total number of votes cast. The model
reported in column 2 includes a control for the share of the population that is registered Republican. In
the model reported in column 3, the dependent variable is voter turnout and the regression is weighted
by the total number of registered voters. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels, respectively.
                                           Table 3
Effect of Potential Receipients and Healthcare Employment on Votes for Medicaid Expansion

Dependent variable: Vote share for Medicaid expansion
                                                  (1)                   (2)               (3)

Share of population that is uninsured and has      0.782***            0.271           0.764***
   income below 138% of the poverty line            (0.169)           (0.240)           (0.134)

Hospital employment / Population                   0.312***           0.217*           0.256***
                                                    (0.092)           (0.132)           (0.074)

Share of population working in:
   Health diagnosis and treatment                 -0.711***          0.618***           -0.208*
                                                    (0.143)           (0.181)           (0.118)

     Health technologists and technicians           -0.218          -1.100***           -0.121
                                                    (0.211)           (0.302)           (0.168)

     Healthcare support occupations                  0.132          -0.889***           -0.023
                                                    (0.169)           (0.239)           (0.135)

Share of population with:
   Associate’s degree                             -0.605***                            -0.306***
                                                    (0.114)                              (0.092)

     Bachelor’s degree                             0.575***                            0.537***
                                                    (0.029)                             (0.024)

Controls
  Log population density                              X                  X                 X
  Race                                                X                  X                 X
  Party affiliation                                                                        X

N                                                    491                491               491
R2                                                   0.77              0.51               0.86

Notes: This table summarizes results from regressions of the vote share for Medicaid expansion on
the shares of population that is uninsured and has income below 138% of the poverty line, works in
a hospital, works in various healthcare professions, is black, and is Hispanic, and the natural
logarithm of population density. The models reported in columns 1 and 3 include controls for the
shares of the population with an associate’s degrees and a bachelor’s degree. The model reported in
column 3 includes a control for the share of the population that is registered Republican. All of the
regressions are weighted by the total number of votes cast in each locality. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                               Appendix Table A1
                               Summary Statistics

                                                          Mean         Std. Dev.

Dependent variables:
Vote share for Medicaid expansion                         0.585          0.119
Votes cast / Registered voters                            0.331          0.065

Explanatory variables:
Share of population with household income:
   $25-50K                                                0.233          0.066
   $50-75K                                                0.200          0.048
   $75-100K                                               0.153          0.043
   $100K+                                                 0.243          0.118
Income inequality: Gini coefficient                       0.430          0.048
Share of population whose highest degree is:
   Associate’s degree                                     0.095          0.026
   Bachelor’s degree                                      0.310          0.134
      No advanced degree                                  0.198          0.077
      Master’s degree                                     0.079          0.041
      Professional degree                                 0.019          0.017
      Doctoral degree                                     0.014          0.013
Share of population with (first) bachelor’s degree in:
   Science and engineering                                0.109          0.057
   Science and engineering related                        0.031          0.015
   Business                                               0.045          0.025
   Education                                              0.047          0.018
   Arts, humanities, and other                            0.082          0.048
Share of population that is uninsured and has             0.032          0.018
   income below 138% of the poverty line
Hospital employment / population                          0.020          0.039
Share of population working in:
   Health diagnosis and treatment                         0.046          0.022
   Health technologists and technicians                   0.018          0.013
   Healthcare support occupations                         0.032          0.017

Control variables:
Log population density                                    5.305          1.363
Share of population that is:
   Black                                                  0.012          0.019
   Hispanic                                               0.015          0.012
Republican share of registered voters                     0.268          0.067

Notes: Summary statistics are weighted by the total number of votes cast in each
locality, except for turnout (Votes cast / Registered voters), which is weighted by
the number of registered voters. N = 491.
