                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 IS EDUCATION CONSUMPTION OR INVESTMENT?
             IMPLICATIONS FOR THE EFFECT OF SCHOOL COMPETITION

                                     W. Bentley MacLeod
                                      Miguel Urquiola

                                     Working Paper 25117
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25117


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2018, Revised April 2019




For useful comments we are grateful to Evan Riehl, Juan Saavedra, and an anonymous referee.
For excellent research assistance we thank Sakshi Gupta. All remaining errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by W. Bentley MacLeod and Miguel Urquiola. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Education Consumption or Investment? Implications for the Effect of School Competition
W. Bentley MacLeod and Miguel Urquiola
NBER Working Paper No. 25117
October 2018, Revised April 2019
JEL No. I2,J01

                                         ABSTRACT

Friedman (1955) argued that giving parents freedom to choose schools would improve education.
His argument was simple and compelling because it extended results from markets for consumer
goods to education. We review the evidence, which yields surprisingly mixed results on
Friedman’s prediction. A key reason is that households often seem to choose schools based on
their absolute achievement rather than their value added. We show this can be rational in a model
based on three ingredients economists have highlighted since Friedman worked on the issue.
First, education is an investment into human capital (Becker, 1964). Second, labor markets can
feature wage premia: individuals of a given skill level may receive higher wages if they match to
more productive firms (Card et al., 2018). Third, distance influences school choice and the
placements schools produce (Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2017, Weinstein, 2017). These imply that
choice alone is too crude a mechanism to ensure the effective provision of schooling.


W. Bentley MacLeod
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
bentley.macleod@columbia.edu

Miguel Urquiola
Columbia University
SIPA and Economics Department
1022 IAB, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
msu2101@columbia.edu
1    Introduction
Friedman (1955) argued that giving parents freedom to choose schools would improve edu-
cation. His argument was simple and compelling because it extended results from markets
for consumer goods to education. Empirical work has produced surprisingly mixed results
on Friedman’s prediction. For example, voucher experiments suggest choice can have highly
positive, highly negative, or modest effects (Bettinger et al., 2017, Abdulkadiroglu et al.,
2018, and Muralidharan and Sundararaman, 2015, respectively). Considering analogous ev-
idence, Beuermann and Jackson (2018) observe that “the lack of robust achievement effects
of attending schools that parents prefer is something of a puzzle.”
    This paper reviews the evidence, pointing out that a key factor behind this puzzle is that
households often seem to choose schools based on their absolute achievement rather than
their value added—in other words, based on how good their students’ skills are, as opposed
to how good they are at improving their students’ skills.
    The paper also offers an explanation for this behavior, one based on three ingredients
labor and education economists have highlighted since Friedman wrote on the issue. First, in
large part education is an investment into human capital (Becker, 1964). Hence, households
use schools to purchase an asset rather than a consumption good, and this asset is only
assigned a value in subsequent arenas like labor markets. As a result, a student’s school choice
depends on her beliefs regarding how agents like employers will value her skills. Second, labor
markets can feature wage premia: individuals of a given skill level may receive higher wages
if they match to more productive firms (e.g., Card et al., 2018). Hence, schools can provide
two commodities that affect the value of human capital: skills and job match quality. Third,
distance, broadly construed, influences school choice and the placements schools produce.
Households often prefer schools close to home (e.g., Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2017), and firms
may opt to recruit at schools that are nearby or will yield many promising candidates (e.g.,
Weinstein, 2017). Further, firms’ concern for distance may be endogenous to household
preferences; for example, if high ability students prefer a certain school, firms may prefer to
recruit there. While we focus on labor markets, similar considerations arise in other venues
in which human capital is valued, like marriage markets or college admissions.
    We show that under the appropriate conditions school choice can enhance the school
sector’s performance. When labor markets feature no transaction costs there is perfect
assortative matching, with the most skilled workers going to the most productive firms. In
this case households’ care only about skill, and subject to some assumptions, giving them
greater choice raises overall skill. This is the case implicitly assumed by much of the school
choice literature.
    However, labor markets do feature transaction costs. For example, firms do not perfectly
observe all potential employees’ attributes, and they tend to recruit at a limited number of
schools (MacLeod et al., 2017, Weinstein, 2017). Hence, rational income-maximizing house-
holds may prefer schools that provide the best job placements rather than the most skills.
In this case, increasing school choice may actually worsen the school sector’s production
of skill. In other words, for students making human capital investments, schools supply a
bundled commodity—they provide skills and access to agents that mater later in life, like

                                               2
employers. Since households prefer schools that produce good final outcomes like jobs, in
some scenarios they may not choose schools with the greatest value added in terms of skill.
In short, choice alone is too crude a mechanism to ensure the effective provision of school-
ing, and policymakers may need to consider more nuanced interventions in order to enhance
school performance and labor market outcomes.
    This paper relates to several areas of research. It is relevant to work attempting to deter-
mine what drives parental choice in educational markets. The importance of this question
to understanding the effects of competition between schools has been noted by multiple au-
thors over the years, e.g., Hanushek (1981), Rothstein (2006), Hastings et al. (2009), and
Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2017).
    We also bring together work on labor and education, making the case that thinking of
education as investment helps to understand school markets. Much work in labor economics
focuses on estimating the returns to an additional year of schooling (Mincer, 1974, Card,
2001, Lemieux, 2006). We focus instead on the return to attending different schools, and
the implications this has on the effects of school competition. This relates to theoretical and
empirical work on the returns to school identity, e.g., Dale and Krueger (2002), Hoekstra
(2009), Saavedra (2009), Chetty et al. (2014b), MacLeod and Urquiola (2015), and MacLeod
et al. (2017).
    In addition, our work helps to tie research on education and labor income inequality
and its inter-generational transmission (e.g., Black and Devereux, 2011, Autor, 2014, Chetty
et al., 2014, and Chetty et al., 2017). We note that if schools help allocate students to jobs,
school markets can play an important role in determining the distribution of income. This
role may grow if wage premia increase (Card et al., 2013) or if the school sector becomes
increasingly stratified (Hoxby, 2009).
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the empirical
literature and Section 3 presents our model. Section 4 concludes.


2       Evidence
This section presents an overview of research on the impact of competition and choice in
school markets. This is a vast area of work that has grown rapidly, making a full review
difficult to carry out in the present format. In light of this we make two choices. First, we
focus on only a subset of studies.1 Second, we note that—especially as it pertains to the
model we will present—much of this literature can be summarized in two key findings:
    1. There is clear evidence that households prefer schools that have higher levels of absolute
       achievement.

    2. There is much less evidence that households systematically prefer schools with higher
       value added in the production of skill (i.e., that this preference is strong enough to be
    1
    This choice additionally reflects the availability of recently published reviews, for example Epple et al.
(2017) on vouchers, Epple et al. (2016) on charter schools, and Urquiola (2016) on competition more generally.
For earlier reviews see McEwan (2004), Rouse and Barrow (2009), and Bettinger (2011).

                                                      3
      the primary driver of school choice).

To be precise, consider individual i who attends school s in period 0 and obtains outcome
w1is in period 1. This outcome could be college placement after high school, starting wage
after college, life-time earnings, marriage quality, etc. Suppose outcomes are a function of
skill, θ:
                                         w1is = f (θ1is ),                             (2.1)
and that student i enters school s with skill θ0is and leaves with skill θ1is . When we ask
whether students prefer schools with higher value added, we are asking whether they choose a
school s over s0 if θ1is − θ0is > θ1is0 − θ0is0 . When we ask whether they prefer schools with high
absolute achievement, we are asking whether they choose a school s over s0 if w1is > w1is0 .
In practice measures of absolute achievement are usually strongly correlated with each other
and with measures of peer quality. Thus, if w1is > w1is0 it is almost always also the case that
θ1is > θ1is0 and θ0is > θ0is0 , and isolating a preference for a single measure is difficult.
     Note that due to data availability considerations, educational research often focuses on
test scores as a proxy for skills, θ. One question is whether test scores improve real outcomes
like wages, as (2.1) assumes. Chetty et al. (2011) and Chetty et al. (2014b) suggest this is
the case: they use administrative data including tax records to show that school and teacher
value added measured using test scores do contribute to labor market outcomes.2 Hence,
it is reasonable for researchers to use test score value added as a measure of school quality.
Our model will ask if this always makes sense for parents too.
     The next section discusses the evidence on the use of absolute achievement as a metric
for school quality, followed by a section discussing the evidence on the use of school value
added as a metric.

2.1     Households prefer schools with higher absolute achievement
The evidence of a preference for schools with high absolute achievement emerges from mul-
tiple methodologies applied in diverse settings. A first type of study exploits information
experiments. For instance, Hastings and Weinstein (2008) provide a randomly selected sub-
set of households in North Carolina with information on the absolute testing outcomes of
schools they are eligible to apply for. They find that households that receive this information
are more likely to request the higher achievement schools for their children.
    A second set of studies considers whether families are willing to pay more for houses that
allow their children to attend public schools with higher achievement. For example, Black
(1999) exploits boundary cutoffs in a way that essentially mimics a regression discontinuity
design. The motivation is that differences in neighborhood quality (e.g. safety and other
amenities like restaurants) are unlikely to change discontinuously at exactly the same bound-
aries that separate school enrollment catchment areas. Yet, house prices rise discretely just
  2
   For a review on evidence surrounding the impact of test scores and national income see Hanushek and
Woessmann, 2010.




                                                  4
as one crosses into the higher achievement area. Broadly similar results emerge in cities in
Australia, France, South Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States.3
    A third type of study analyzes households’ preferences in school choice mechanisms.
Specifically, these are settings in which parents are allowed to request different public schools
for their children. The lists parents submit tend to show a clear preference for schools
with better absolute outcomes. This is seen, for example, with respect to high schools in
Boston and New York City (Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2014 and Dobbie and Fryer, 2014), China
(Hoekstra et al., 2018), the United Kingdom (Burgess et al., 2015), Romania (Pop-Eleches
and Urquiola, 2013), and Trinidad and Tobago (Jackson, 2010).4
    A fourth set of papers analyzes the impact of large scale national voucher schemes, i.e.,
settings in which all households are allowed to freely choose schools, and the private sec-
tor can fully respond. Theoretical models suggest that if households have preferences for
attributes correlated with absolute achievement, then stratification will develop in such set-
tings; for example, the rich or the able will segregate into schools. Epple and Romano (1998)
show this can be driven by a concern for peer effects, and MacLeod and Urquiola (2015) by
informational concerns—students prefer to be pooled with high ability peers because this re-
veals they themselves are able. Consistent with these predictions, Hsieh and Urquiola (2006)
suggest that the introduction of vouchers in Chile led to substantial sorting by attributes
like household income.5 One can see broadly similar patterns of choice leading to increased
stratification in liberalized markets including Sweden’s school voucher system (Bohlmark
and Lindahl, 2007, 2015) and the American and Colombian college sectors (Hoxby, 2009,
2016, and MacLeod et al., 2017, respectively).6

2.2     Less evidence that households systematically choose higher
        value added schools
There is much less evidence that households systematically choose schools with higher value
added in the sense of causally raising skill levels, i.e., schools with high θ1is − θ0is . A first
set of studies focus on parental preferences per se, and provide a useful contrast with the
literature reviewed in the previous section. For example Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2017) use data
from New York City to explore whether the schools parents request suggest that they prefer
   3
      On Australia see Davidoff and Leigh (2008). On France see Fack and Grenet (2010). On South Korea
see Moon, 2018. On the United Kingdom see Gibbons and Machin (2003), Cheshire and Sheppard (2004),
Rosenthal (2006), and Gibbons and Machin (2008). On the U.S see Brasington and Haurin (2006), Bayer
et al. (2007), and also Figlio and Lucas (2004). For further discussion on this literature, see the review by
Machin (2011).
   4
     An analogous pattern emerges for colleges in the U.S. (Avery et al., 2013).
   5
     In addition, Valenzuela et al. (2013) show that Chile displays one of the highest levels of school level
stratification in the OECD. Further, Mizala et al. (2007) suggest stratification is particularly extensive in
the private sector. See also McEwan et al. (2008).
   6
     Voucher schemes in the United States are not nationwide, but rather tend to be relatively small and local.
The U.S. nonetheless displays a large amount of choice between school districts (Tiebout, 1956). Urquiola
(2005) presents evidence that this type of choice also leads to stratification by socioeconomic characteristics,
although Hoxby (2000) finds less evidence of such an effect.


                                                       5
schools with higher value added, over and above their valuation of peer quality (i.e., over and
above absolute achievement). They find this not to be the case. Related to this, Rothstein
(2006) points out that if parents demand school value added, a school’s peer group quality
will be correlated with its valued added in a housing market equilibrium. This should induce
an upward bias in cross-sectional peer effect estimates, one that is stronger in markets with
greater school choice. Rothstein finds “no evidence that the school-level association between
student characteristics and outcomes is stronger in high-choice markets,” suggesting that
value added is not a primary determinant of parental choices.
    A second set of papers shows that when households are given vouchers that greatly
expand their access to private schools, the impact on their children’s outcomes is sometimes
positive and large, sometimes negative and large, and most often modest in magnitude.
For example, a series of papers suggest Colombia’s voucher program significantly benefitted
students, including by raising their test scores (Angrist et al., 2002, Angrist et al., 2006, and
Bettinger et al., 2010). In fact one recent follow-up study suggests that at least for certain
types of students, the vouchers more than paid for themselves in that they raised graduates’
wages and hence tax revenue too (Bettinger et al., 2017).7 In stark contrast, Abdulkadiroglu
et al. (2018) suggest that a voucher program in Louisiana substantially reduced students’
test scores. A large number of studies lie in between these two, with the majority suggesting
that vouchers have modest effects in multiple dimensions (Epple et al., 2017). Similarly
mixed results apply to charter schools, where some are found to substantially outperform
public alternatives in terms of raising test scores, and some to do worse (Chabrier et al.,
2016, Epple et al., 2016, and Cohodes, 2018). Consistent with the former, Hanushek et al.
(2007) finds that parental decisions to exit charter schools in Texas are indeed correlated
with value added.8
    A third and rapidly growing literature studies students whose school choice sets are ex-
panded not by vouchers but by gaining admission to selective schools with higher absolute
achievement. This work mainly considers public school settings in which households exert
(often substantial) effort to get their children into schools with clear cutoff scores that lend
themselves to regression discontinuity analyses. These studies similarly produce mixed and
often modest findings regarding the effect of greater access to educational options. Some pa-
pers find positive effects (e.g. Hoekstra, 2009, Jackson, 2010, and Pop-Eleches and Urquiola,
2013), and some find negative effects at least for certain subgroups and along some dimen-
sions (e.g. Barrow et al., 2017, Beuermann and Jackson, 2018). In between, multiple studies
point to modest effects (e.g., Park et al., 2008, Clark, 2010, Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2014,
Ajayi, 2014, Bui et al., 2014, Dobbie and Fryer, 2014, Lucas and Mbiti, 2014).
    A fourth set of studies considers the impact of information on testing value added, pro-
viding a useful counterpoint to the work on information and housing valuations discussed in
Section 3.1. Imberman and Lovenheim (2016) consider the release of information on school
value added on housing valuations in Los Angeles. This arguably provided the market with
   7
     Bettinger et al., 2017 note that a caveat arises because the vouchers may have had unmeasured negative
externalities.
   8
     In addition, there is evidence that charter schools can be more sought after by families for whom their
causal effect is smaller (Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2016, Walters, 2018).

                                                     6
new data, as schools’ value added and absolute achievement have been shown to not be
perfectly correlated in some markets.9 Imberman and Lovenheim find that the information
had little if any effect on housing valuations. Similarly, Mizala and Urquiola (2013) consider
a Chilean program that publicly identified schools that outperformed peers with similar so-
cioeconomic compositions, providing parents with a proxy for school value added. They find
that the school market essentially did not react to such information: schools’ market shares,
prices, and socioeconomic composition were unaffected.
    Finally, while studies show that (as reviewed above) generalized school choice can produce
stratification, the evidence is less robust regarding whether it increases skills as measured by
test scores. For example, in the U.S. Hoxby (2000) finds that urban areas in which parents can
choose between more districts have more productive schools, but Rothstein (2007) questions
the robustness of the result. In Chile, Hsieh and Urquiola (2006) find that while vouchers
led to massive private growth and stratification, it is less clear that they increased average
educational attainment. Indeed if vouchers had fully succeeded Chile would have been
done with educational reform. In fact, over the past decade—and despite some subsequent
improvement in its international testing performance—Chile has been experimenting with
extensive reforms to target vouchers, reduce sorting, and make school productivity more
transparent such that it might drive parental choice.10


3       School Choice and the Labor Market
The key finding highlighted above is that households often seem to choose schools based on
their absolute achievement rather than their value added. One interpretation might be that
parents are irrational and/or have a taste for schools with low value added. This section
shows, however, that integrating school choice with recent developments in labor economics
implies that households that care about final outcomes should not always choose schools
with higher value added. In some cases, favoring schools with higher absolute achievement
will lead to better final outcomes, even when there are no explicit peer effects. We build a
simple a model to illustrate this point. The text describes the model and its key results;
while the technical details are relegated to the appendix.

3.1     Setup
Suppose there are two neighboring school districts, A and B, with the number of students
in each normalized to 1. Each district operates a school indexed by s ∈ {A, B}. Each school
uses a constant returns to scale technology, and could, in principle, serve all students in both
districts. Students who cross the district boundary to attend school must pay a cost C—
    9
    See for instance Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2014).
  10
     For recent work on Chile see Feigenberg et al. (2014), Navarro-Palau (2017), Neilson (2017), and Aguirre
(2018). Related to this MacLeod and Urquiola (2015) note that the use of lotteries—as is done in American
charter schools—may render value added more transparent and increase the likelihood that it drives school
choice.


                                                     7
the motivation being that households usually prefer schools close to home.11 This cost can
be set high enough so all parents use their home school. We will parameterize increasing
school choice by reductions in C, since these allow more households to cross the boundary
to buy schooling.
    Students have either high or low ability, αk ∈ {αH , αL } where αH > αL . Each individual
observes her ability, but it may or may not be observable to others. We will let ρA and ρB
stand for the fraction of high ability students in the district denoted by the subscript. When
they attend school s, individuals receive value added vs . More precisely, let skill be equal to
ability augmented by school value added:

                                              θks = αk + vs .
    We will assume that ρA > ρB and vB > vA (this is important and consistent with results
suggesting that schools with better peer composition do not always have higher value added,
as reviewed in Section 2). In other words, district A has a greater prevalence of high ability
children, but district B has a more productive school. We also make the assumption that

                                          αH − αL > vB − vA .

In words, schools close only a fraction of the ability gap. This is reasonable given the evidence
that schools do not easily equalize achievement between salient groups (e.g. between blacks
and whites in the U.S., or between low and high socioeconomic status students in many
countries).12 This implies that in terms of their skill levels, there are four types of graduates,
{αH , αL } × {A, B}:

                                        θHB > θHA > θLB > θLA ,                                         (3.1)
with high ability students who went to school B being the most skilled.
    On the labor market side, assume that the number of employers is equal to the number
of graduates (mass of 2). We index these firms by their productivity:

                                            β ∈ [1 − γ, 1 + γ] ,

which is uniformly distributed with density γ1 , where γ ∈ [0, 1]. Thus, γ measures the
variation in firm quality. When γ = 0, all employers are equally productive.
   We assume a perfectly competitive labor market, such that an individual with skill θ who
works at firm β earns a wage:
                                       w (θ, β) = βθ.                                  (3.2)
  11
     The literature provides ample evidence of such a preference. See for example Bayer et al. (2007), Gallego
and Hernando (2009), Hastings et al. (2009), Burgess et al. (2015), Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2017), Neilson
(2017), and Walters (2018).
  12
     The point is that extremely successful schooling interventions might close such gaps, but the fact that
there is concern regarding the intergenerational transmission of inequality suggests that such interventions
are the exception rather than the rule.



                                                      8
In other words, there is complementarity and individuals of a given skill level receive higher
wages if they match to more productive firms. There is evidence supporting this important
assumption. For instance, Card et al. (2013) and Card et al. (2018) build upon Abowd et al.
(1999) to demonstrate the empirical importance of firm matches for compensation.13
    Equation (3.2) illustrates that in the standard neo-classical framework (Becker, 1964,
Mincer, 1974), education is an investment that creates an asset—human capital or skill,
θ. The value of this asset is not determined by the student, but by the market. Hence, a
rational student’s school choice will depend on how he believes employers will value his skills
in the future. While our focus is on the labor market, a student may similarly consider how
going to a given high school will affect his prospects in the marriage market, or how he is
viewed by college admissions officers. In all these cases beliefs as to other agents’ valuations
will guide students’ decisions.14
    This might not be a major consideration—as regards the school market—if there were
no labor market frictions. In that case there would be perfect assortative matching of firms
and graduates, with the highest θ individuals working for the highest β firms.15 As result,
households would always prefer schools with higher value added. Much of the literature on
school choice implicitly assumes this, perhaps because it conveniently implies that the only
goal of education is skill acquisition, which in turn can be proxied using test scores.
    However, a growing literature in labor economics suggests that matching is imperfect:
an individual of a given skill level can be paid different amounts at different firms.16 This
suggests that the matching process is expensive: prospective employers cannot screen every
person in the market. We therefore assume that employers recruit at only one school (A or
B). This assumption is consistent with Weinstein (2017), who shows that recruitment costs
lead firms to search mainly within local labor markets. Similar considerations arise when
schools prepare students for subsequent educational markets. For example, Hoxby and Avery
(2013) describe college admissions officers’ visits to high schools. They state that while there
are about forty thousand high schools in the U.S., a college whose staff visits one hundred
“is considered to be exceptionally dedicated and well-funded.” Those they visit most are
typically “feeder” schools known to produce many applicants. As stated, such preferences
on the part of firms and schools may be endogenous to household preferences. For instance,
if high ability students are more likely to use a certain school, it may make sense for firms
  13
     More generally, earlier work in labor economics suggests some firms pay higher wages for equally skilled
workers. This work highlights mechanisms like efficiency wages and rent-sharing, e.g., Krueger and Summers
(1988) and Van Reenen (1996).
  14
     Browning et al. (2014).
  15
     For example, the absence of search frictions produces this type of assortative matching with careers as
shown by Rosen (1981).
  16
     As indicated above, Abowd et al. (1999), Card et al. (2013), and Card et al. (2018) underline the
empirical importance of firm matches. See also Card et al. (2014), Autor et al., 2017, and Caldwell and
Harmon (2019). Further, von Wachter and Bender (2006) and Oreopoulos et al. (2012) provide evidence
that careers matter by considering how the trajectories of otherwise identical individuals differ depending
upon whether or not they got their job during a recession. More broadly, research shows that the labor
market returns to schooling vary with educational level and have evolved in different ways; see for example
Autor et al. (2008) and Acemoglu and Autor (2011).


                                                     9
to recruit there.17
    This implies that a rational, income-maximizing household will care not only about a
school’s value added, but also about the quality of employers its graduates are likely to face.
To reflect this, we henceforth consider the following sequence of choices:

   1. Students observe their ability and then choose a school (paying a cost C if they use
      the one outside their district).

   2. Students acquire human capital and graduate with skill θks = αk + vs .

   3. Employers choose one school from which to recruit employees. At this school, they can
      use interviews or other means to gather information on graduates.

By definition, a market is competitive if there is no coordination of choice. Thus, we suppose
that students and firms make their choices independently.

3.2     Implications
We use the above setup to study three scenarios. These cases illustrate that in our setup both
perfect information and the absence of capacity constraints are necessary for competition
to enhance the production of skill. In particular, Case 1 shows that when both are present
increasing households’ freedom to choose raises average school value added, and thus provides
precise conditions under which Friedman’s (1955) hypothesis is correct. Cases 2 and 3 show
that when either is missing, competition can fail to produce excess demand at the higher
value added school, or can even lead to its exit.

3.2.1    Case 1: Perfect information and no capacity constraints
The best conditions for competition arise when information is perfect and symmetric—skill is
easily observable—and there are no capacity constraints. In this case employers can identify
the highest-skilled graduates at school B (the high value added school). Hence the highest
productivity (β) firms recruit there and pick off these students, and in general there is perfect
matching. It is therefore optimal for all students to choose school B, and for all firms to
recruit there. In this case greater school choice—reductions in C—will allow more district
A students to use the higher value added school (and this might put pressure on school A
to improve).18 This is summarized as Result 1:
  17
     These considerations are obviously related to geography. Since distance is a key driver of school choice,
as long as there is residential sorting there will also be educational sorting along dimensions like ability
or socioeconomic status. Growing work suggests there are significant labor market returns to location; see
Moretti (2010) for a review and Davis and Dingel (2014) for theory and evidence.
  18
     Hoxby (2002) points out that choice can improve outcomes through both of these channels: transfers to
school B and responses from school A. There is evidence of the latter channel being active (e.g., Chakrabarti,
2008), although if school choice leads to sorting, these channels are hard to disentangle (Hsieh and Urquiola,
2003). In addition, McMillan (2005) shows that if schools’ effort is endogenous to the types of students they
attract, it does not immediately follow that competition will put pressure on school A to improve. See also


                                                     10
           Result 1: When information is symmetric and schools have no capacity
        constraints, the labor market will feature perfect assortative matching. In this
        case, greater competition (lower C) raises average school value added, as more
        students switch from the low to the high productivity school.
This is a formal statement of Friedman’s result (proofs and further details are in the ap-
pendix).19 The intuition behind it is that given perfect matching, a school’s ability to deliver
skills and to deliver jobs are perfectly aligned. In this case, households will choose schools
as if skills were the only thing that mattered.

3.2.2     Case 2: Perfect information and capacity constraints
We continue to assume that information is perfect and symmetric, but now suppose that
there are capacity constraints: each school can handle only half the total population of
students. The question is whether competition will produce excess demand for school B.
Capacity constraints immediately raise the question of how seats at more desirable schools
are rationed. We consider equilibria under two procedures commonly used in school choice
schemes: selective admissions based on ability, and lotteries.20 In this case we also simplify
the analysis by supposing that C = 0 and ρA + ρB = 1 (the appendix considers the more
general case).
    It is clear that one equilibrium is to have all students prefer school B, and for this school
to only admit the high ability students. However, suppose that all high ability students
prefer school A. In that case all the high productivity firms with β ∈ [1, 1 + γ] will opt
to recruit from school A. Ex ante, students do not know which firm will employ them,
and hence their expected wage at school A is 1 + γ2 (αH + vA ). If one of the high ability
students considered using school B instead, she could predict being hired by the best firm
recruiting at school B, thus receiving payoff (αH + vB ). This person will decide against that
option and remain at school A if and only if:
                                                     vB − vA
                                              γ≥2            .                                            (3.3)
                                                     αH + vA
In other words, as long as the variance in firm productivity (γ) is sufficiently large (i.e., the
variance in returns to skill is significant enough), then high ability students will prefer school
Gilraine et al. (2019), who points out that the competitive effects of choice will depend on whether schools
are horizontally or vertically differentiated.
  19
     Notice that even in this environment there are potential political economy concerns. Even though the
perfectly competitive allocation is Pareto efficient, some students in district B earn lower incomes relative to
the situation in which district A students are forced to accumulate lower skill. They would naturally oppose
school choice.
  20
     In many cities students can access “magnet” public schools if they score high enough on a test (e.g., Pop-
Eleches and Urquiola, 2013; Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2014). Lotteries are also commonly used to determine
access; for example by charter schools in the U.S. (Epple et al., 2016). We do not consider prices as a
rationing mechanism. The vast majority of school choice programs around the world do not use prices to
ration slots (Epple et al. 2017). An exception is Chile’s voucher program, which allowed private schools to
charge add-ons for many years, but is moving away from that practice.

                                                      11
A.21 In short, in this scenario even complete freedom to choose (C = 0) does not generate
excess demand for the high value added school.
    The intuition has two parts. First, households realize that while schools impart skills,
they also provide pathways to jobs. Because households’ goal is ultimately labor market
success, they are willing to trade off school performance in one dimension for the other.22
Second, employers wish to hire skilled workers—they do not care about value added per
se (recall θks = αk + vs : employers desire high θ but do not care where it originates).
In other words, firms want the best employees, and if ability can overwhelm value added
(αH − αL > vB − vA ), they will not mind recruiting at a low value added school.
    Could a similar equilibrium obtain under randomized admissions? To see that it could,
suppose all low ability students choose school B, while their high ability counterparts choose
A. As long as condition (3.3) is satisfied, high ability students will prefer school A. Now
consider the choice of a low ability student. If accepted by school A, she would be the lone low
ability graduate there, and would get matched with the lowest productivity         firm,
                                                                                         which at
                                                                                      γ
this equilibrium has β = 1. This student’s expected payoff at school B is 1 − 2 (αL + vB ).
Hence, under a random admission process, this student prefers school B to school A if and
only if:
                                                vB − vA
                                         γ≤2             .                                    (3.4)
                                                αL + vB
In other words, as long as the variance in firm productivity is sufficiently small, low ability
students will continue to prefer school B. To summarize, in this case having each type of
student self-select into one school (high ability into A and low ability into B) is an equilibrium
under the random allocation if and only if:
                                           vB − vA      vB − vA
                                       2           ≥γ≥2         .                                          (3.5)
                                             θLB          θHA
Our assumption that θHA > θLB ensures that this condition is feasible. This is summarized
as Result 2.

          Result 2: When information is symmetric but there are capacity constraints
       there exist equilibria under which the high value added school experiences no
       excess demand. This reflects rational self-selection on the part of students, and
       can happen even with perfect competition (C = 0) and under both selective and
       randomized admissions policies.
   21
      Note that even if low ability individuals were to prefer school A, the selective admission policy precludes
their admission.
   22
      This type of result is also possible in the model presented by MacLeod and Urquiola (2015), although in
that case the result arises from information transmission rather than from the fact that the higher produc-
tivity firms recruit in certain schools (MacLeod et al. (2017) present causal evidence that such informational
channels are relevant). In addition, Riehl et al. (2016) present empirical evidence consistent with the ex-
istence of tradeoffs in universities’ ability to impart skills and deliver high earnings; see Beuermann and
Jackson (2018) and Kraft (2019) for variation in other dimensions.




                                                       12
3.2.3     Case 3: No capacity constraints, imperfect information
The final case is one without capacity constraints but with imperfect information. Specif-
ically, we assume firms cannot observe the skill level of every individual in a school—they
only observe the average level. In this scenario, suppose that the mean skill at school A
when there is no competition (C is very high) is greater than at school B (this follows from
our assumption that ρA > ρB ). In that case, the most productive firms will hire at school A.
As competition is increased (C is reduced), there will be a point at which the high ability
students self-select into school A (as in Case 2 above), which in turn leads more high pro-
ductivity firms to recruit at this school. Finally, when there is perfect competition (C = 0),
all students choose school A. Thus we have Result 3.

            Result 3: Suppose there is imperfect information in that firms must choose
        where to recruit based only on the expected skill of students. If school A is
        sufficiently positively selected (i.e., it begins with a sufficient number of high
        quality students) then increasing competition (lowering C) may lead all students
        to prefer school A even though school B has higher value added.

Thus under some conditions allowing families freedom of choice may even lead to the higher
value added school being essentially displaced from the market. In the appendix we show
that this result depends in part upon having sufficiently high returns to skill (γ sufficiently
large). In particular, there are cases in which the combination of competition and sufficient
returns to skill leads to school A being the desirable school, with only low skill individuals
using school B (Proposition 5 in the appendix). The low skill workers left in school B have
the worst job opportunities, since the most productive firms choose to recruit at school A.
Hence, in this case increasing competition might lead to worse outcomes for students in less
desirable areas, increasing inequality.
    To summarize, the essential finding from this section is that, depending upon the context,
increasing choice and competition may or may not enhance the production of skill. The key
reason for this is that in buying education, households invest in human capital, and the value
of this asset depends upon the quality of the match they subsequently make in the labor
market (or the marriage market, or later educational arenas like graduate school admissions).
As a result, students are willing to trade off a school’s ability to deliver: i) value added in
terms of skill, and ii) pathways to outcomes like good jobs.
    In most cases this leads households to prefer schools that have high absolute levels of
ability and final achievement—this is the outcome in all cases above. However, in some
scenarios—cases 2 and 3—these are not the schools with higher value added. These results
are consistent with the existing empirical evidence (Section 2).

3.3      Discussion
Our simple model illustrates that school choice entails a coordination problem. If high ability
students and firms were able to coordinate on a move, they would migrate to a higher value
added school. But a variety of frictions make such coordination unlikely. Firms may choose a

                                               13
school due to proximity along geographical or other dimensions.23 In addition, if high ability
students prefer certain schools, then firms are also likely to recruit there, generating self-
reinforcing dynamics. For example, Hoxby (2009) shows that (at the top end of selectivity)
American colleges have become increasingly stratified—the specific college a student attends
conveys more information about his SAT score than it did a few decades ago. Hoxby points
out that this may be due to decreasing transportation and information-related costs. This
is certainly possible, but it may additionally reflect increasingly strong reputational effects
that lead the most productive firms to prefer recruiting at the most prestigious colleges, and
hence to an increasing desire by students to enroll there.
    This also helps to explain why the benefits of incumbency seem to be so marked in
education. Once a school or college establishes a reputation as a destination for certain
types of recruiters, it will tend to display inertia, staying in that position. For example, in
the law industry certain schools are known for sending students into areas such as corporate
law, clerkships, or public-interest law. Employers will have an incentive to return to those
schools, and good students with an interest in these areas will have every incentive to enroll
in them. This situation will tend to persist even if these schools do not produce the highest
value added in terms of skills. This idea was captured by Antonin Scalia when he described
the schools he preferred his clerks to have attended:24

           By and large, I’m going to be picking from the law schools that basically are
        the hardest to get into. They admit the best and the brightest, and they may
        not teach very well, but you can’t make a sow’s ear out of a silk purse. If they
        come in the best and the brightest, they’re probably going to leave the best and
        the brightest, O.K.?

We also note that the economic literature has been producing increasing evidence regarding
another key ingredient in our example: the possibility that matches matter, e.g., that equally
skilled individuals can earn different wages depending upon the productivity of the firms they
work for. This effect has been discussed for some time, particularly in the sociology literature.
For example, books by Kahn (2011) and Rivera (2015) detail the process by which schools
prepare students for elite jobs, and of course the networks discussed by Granovetter (1973)
are partially developed at school.
    Analogous match effects can arise in arenas beyond the job market. Kaufmann et al.
(2013) use regression discontinuities to show that admission to elite colleges in Chile improves
partner/spouse quality, and Zimmerman (2016) shows that school selectivity can affect the
probability that students end up on prestigious corporate boards. In addition, Arcidiacono
and Lovenheim (2016) and Riehl (2018) present evidence of match effects at college, which
may lead certain schools to specialize in the graduates of certain types of high schools.
    In addition, in the U.S. there is evidence of increasing skill biased technical change (Autor
et al., 2003; Autor et al., 2006). This could in part reflect an increase in the importance of
the match component. If so, it would raise the value of schools that provide good matches,
 23
      Firms’ attachment to specific locations may be persistent; see Moretti (2004).
 24
      See http://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/12/us/12bar.html


                                                      14
enhancing the role of the school sector in the inter-generational transmission of inequality.25
Related, MacLeod et al. (2017) show that the Colombian university system is stratified
by ability, with students who attend more prestigious colleges experiencing an earnings
advantage that grows with experience. This in turn generates a demand for prestige.26
     Note that our theoretical results rely upon the hypothesis that students understand
their skill and choose schools accordingly. However, Hoxby and Turner (2013) find that
this is often not the case for many well qualified students from disadvantaged backgrounds.
In our framework this would imply that these students would end up with lower quality
employment matches, and hence lower incomes. Finally, Result 3 implies that students from
disadvantaged backgrounds who attend elite colleges should get an income boost. However,
at the margin if students from good backgrounds make optimal choices, then the effect
of going to a different college for them should be small. This is exactly what Dale and
Krueger (2002, 2014) find: students with lower socioeconomic status get a significant income
boost from attending an elite college, which is not the case for students from advantaged
backgrounds.
     In short, schools provide both value added in terms of skill and a pool of potential
employers or spouses or colleges, etc. This can lead to equilibria with segregation of students
into “good” and “bad” schools, with the feature that the “bad” schools may have higher value
added.
     Another possibility is that households may be unable to observe and/or understand the
concept of value added, or to process the information necessary to approximate it. That
is, they may find it difficult to disentangle innate ability and value added—after all, this is
challenging even for econometricians with access to a lot of data.27 While this is possible,
our analysis shows that even if households understand/observe value added, they may still
rationally opt for lower value added schools.
     Two elements are necessary for this to work. First, the variance in skill must be larger
than the variance in value added; second, there must be significant variation in the return
to skill across firms. If additionally employers seek high skill graduates without regard for
whether their skill originates in innate ability or value added, one can get self-reinforcing
equilibria where high skill individuals and high productivity firms coordinate on certain
schools. Thus, the recent rise in returns to skill and college selectivity may be a mutually
reinforcing phenomena that have contributed to the overall increase in income inequality.


4      Conclusion
Friedman (1955) argued that introducing choice and competition would enhance education.
  25
     There is also much work in sociology highlighting the role that education plays in generating inequality,
see Neckerman and Torche (2007).
  26
     MacLeod et al. (2017) further find that the introduction of a national exit exam reduced the labor market
return to college prestige. This suggests that improving the measurement of individual performance may be
one way to reduce the self-enforcing nature of the link between school and occupational choice.
  27
     See for instance the discussions in Rothstein (2017), and Chetty et al. (2017).



                                                     15
His idea proved influential in part due to mounting evidence of problems with schools’ pro-
ductivity. For example, Hanushek (1997) showed that school systems can increase spending
with little to show for it in terms of testing improvements.28 Hoxby (2003) summarized the
implications to argue that choice could have a major impact, leading the average student in
the U.S. to score “at an advanced level where fewer than 10 percent of students now score.”
    In general, these observers did not feel a need to specify or formalize how this would hap-
pen. After all, in many areas of the economy market liberalization produces better outcomes
without need for any specifics or detailed understanding of the sector in question. Banerjee
(2007) provides a critique of this type of approach. Making explicit reference to education, he
states that economists are sometimes too fond of “one-stop” solutions advertised as cure-alls.
He explicitly singles out school vouchers and states:

           It is the same with all of these: incentives, vouchers, ... . We come to them
       ... as a one-stop solution to the problems of education. To those who believe
       in [these, they are] ... an abstraction, a metonymy for faith in the power of the
       market. They do not claim to know how exactly the market will achieve the
       promised miracle, but it will do it (indeed, for them this unpredictability is part
       of its appeal).

Banerjee calls instead for economists to “step into the machine”—to get into the details of
a sector like education and understand how its performance might be improved.
    On the one hand, the argument we have made in this review is consistent with Banerjee’s.
Once one considers the characteristics of education, it is possible to see that introducing
greater choice may not automatically produce better outcomes. In particular, this paper
shows that all one needs are: i) the idea that education is partially an investment rather
than just consumption, and ii) the notion that schools can contribute to delivering good jobs
(or other types of) matches.
    On the other hand, the model also raises caveats regarding Banerjee’s (2007) general
point. Many education economists have truly “stepped into the machine,” running ran-
domized trials to identify ways to improve school value added, for instance. Pritchett (2009)
points out, however, that there may be limited demand for the findings produced by random-
ized control trials. Our results suggest one reason for this may be that in many cases schools
are not under intense competitive pressure to become better producers of skill, and this will
tend to limit their readiness to create or take up innovations identified in experiments.
    Finally, exploring the complementarity between school choice and employer search may
be a fruitful avenue for research. There is the technical question of how to measure comple-
mentarities that are known to play an important role in firm performance (e.g., Athey and
Stern, 1998, Caroli and van Reenen, 2001 and Bresnahan et al., 2002). In addition, a devel-
oping literature in spatial economics recognizes that location affects information flows and
  28
    Hanushek’s finding was for the U.S.; Gundlach et al. (2001) present analogous evidence of declining
school productivity in other OECD countries. More recent studies measuring the causal impact of resources
produce mixed results. For example, Jackson et al. (2016) and Lafortune et al. (2018) find that spending
improves outcomes, while de Ree et al. (2018) find no impact.


                                                   16
worker productivity (e.g., Moretti, 2011). Davis and Dingel (2019) show that the costs of
information exchange may be lower when firms locate close to each other, which gives rise to
location-related complementarities. They show that this leads to agglomeration economies
that can explain a number of the stylized facts about cities. In this paper we have shown
that students’ search for schools and firms’ search for workers can also be complements,
which may explain the segregation of students into schools by absolute achievement rather
than value added. The importance of these complementarities are magnified when there are
greater returns to skill, and hence our framework is consistent with the observation that
colleges have become more selective in a period that has seen increasing returns to skill.
In short, integrating school choice into analyses of production complementaries in spatial
economies has the potential to provide novel insights on growth and inequality.




                                            17
References
Abdulkadiroglu, A., N. Agarwal, and P. Pathak (2017). The welfare effects of coordinated
 assignment: Evidence from the new york city high school match. American Economic
 Review 107 (12), 3635–3689.

Abdulkadiroglu, A., J. Angrist, P. Hull, and P. Pathak (2016). Charters without lotteries:
 Testing takeovers in new orleans and boston. American Economic Review 106 (7), 1878–
 1920.

Abdulkadiroglu, A., J. Angrist, and P. Pathak (2014). The elite illusion: Achievement effects
 at boston and new york exam schools. Econometrica 82 (1), 137–196.

Abdulkadiroglu, A., P. Pathak, J. Schellenberg, and C. Walters (2017). Do parents value
 school effectiveness? Mimeo, Duke University.

Abdulkadiroglu, A., P. Pathak, and C. R. Walters (2018). Free to choose: Can school choice
 reduce student achievement? American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10 (1),
 175–206.

Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis (1999). High wage workers and high wage
 firms. Econometrica 67 (2), 251–333.

Acemoglu, D. and D. Autor (2011). Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employ-
  ment and earnings. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics,
  Volume 4, Chapter 12, pp. 1043–1171. Elsevier.

Aguirre, J. (2018). How can progressive vouchers help the poor benefit from school choice?
  evidence from the chilean voucher system. Technical report, Teachers College, Columbia
  University.

Ajayi, K. (2014). Does school quality improve student performance? new evidence from
  ghana. Mimeo, Boston University, Mimeo.

Altonji, J. G. and C. R. Pierret (2001). Employer learning and statistical discrimination.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (1), 313–350.

Angrist, J., E. Bettinger, E. Bloom, M. Kremer, and E. King (2002). The effect of school
 vouchers on students: Evidence from colombia. American Economic Review 92 (5), 1535–
 1558.

Angrist, J., E. Bettinger, and M. Kremer (2006). Long-term consequences of secondary
 school vouchers: Evidence from administrative records in colombia. American Economic
 Review 96 (847-862), 3.




                                             18
Araujo, M. C., P. Carneiro, Y. Cruz-Aguayo, and N. Schady (2016). Teacher quality and
  learning outcomes in kindergarten. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3), 1415–
  1453.

Arcidiacono, P. and M. Lovenheim (2016). Affirmative action and the quality-fit tradeoff.
  Journal of Economic Literature 54 (1), 3–51.

Athey, S. and S. Stern (1998, June). About complementarity in organizational design. Tech-
  nical Report 6600, NBER, Cambridge, MA.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson, and J. Van Reenen (2017). The fall of the
 labor share and the rise of superstar firms. Mimeo, National Bureau of Economic Research
 Working Paper No. 23396.

Autor, D., F. Levy, and R. J. Murname (2003). The skill content of recent technological
 change: An empirical exploration. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4), 1279–1334.

Autor, D. H. (2014). Skills, education, and the rise of earnings inequality among the ’other
 99 percent’. Science 344 (6186), 843–851.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearny (2006). The polarization of the u.s. labor market.
 American Economic Review 96 (2), 189–194.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearny (2008). Trends in u.s. wage inequality: Revising
 the revisionists. Review Of Economics and Statistics 90, 300–323.

Avery, C. N., M. E. Glickman, C. M. Hoxby, and A. Metrick (2013). A revealed preference
  ranking of us colleges and universities. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (1), 425–467.
  Avery, Christopher N. Glickman, Mark E. Hoxby, Caroline M. Metrick, Andrew.

Banerjee, A. (2007). Inside the machine: Toward a new development economics. Boston
  Review 32 (2), 12–18.

Barrow, L., L. Sartain, and M. de la Torre (2017). The role of selective high schools in
  equalizing educational outcomes: Using place-based affirmative action to estimate hetero-
  geneous effect by neighborhood socioeconomic status. Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of
  Chicago.

Bayer, P., F. Ferreira, and R. McMillan (2007). A unified framework for measuring prefer-
  ences for schools and neighborhoods. Journal of Political Economy 115 (4), 588–638.

Becker, G. (1964). Human capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis, with special reference
  to Education. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bettinger, E. (2011). Educational vouchers in international contexts. In E. Hanushek,
  S. Machin, and L. Woessmann (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 4,
  Chapter 7, pp. 551–572. Elsevier.

                                             19
Bettinger, E., M. Kremer, M. Kugler, C. Medina, C. Posso, and J. E. Saavedra (2017). Can
  educational voucher programs pay for themselves. Mimeo, Harvard University.

Bettinger, E., M. Kremer, and J. E. Saavedra (2010). Are educational vouchers only redis-
  tributive? Economic Journal 120 (546), F204–F228.

Beuermann, D. W. and C. K. Jackson (2018). Do parents know best? The short and long-run
  effects of attending the schools that parents prefer. Mimeo, National Bureau of Economic
  Research Working Paper No. 24920.

Black, S. (1999, August). Do better schools matter? parental valuation of elementary
  education. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (2), 577–599.

Black, S. and P. Devereux (2011). Recent developments in intergenerational mobility. In
  O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4, pp. 1487–
  1541. Elsevier.

Bohlmark, A., H. Holmlund, and M. Lindahl (2015). School choice and segregation: evidence
  from sweden. Mimeo, Institute for Evaluation of Labour Market and Education Policy
  Working Paper 2015:8.

Bohlmark, A. and M. Lindahl (2007). The impact of school choice on pupil achievement,
  segregation and costs: Swedish evidence. Mimeo, IZA Working Paper 2786.

Brasington, D. and D. Haurin (2006). Educational outcomes and house values: a test of the
  value added approach. Journal of Regional Science 46 (2), 245–268.

Bresnahan, T. F., E. Brynjolfsson, and L. M. Hitt (2002, Feb). Information technology,
  workplace organization, and the demand for skilled labor: Firm-level evidence. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 117 (1), 339–376.

Browning, M., P.-A. Chiappori, and Y. Weiss (2014). Economics of the Family. Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press.

Bui, S. A., S. G. Craig, and S. A. Imberman (2014). Is gifted education a bright idea?
  assessing the impact of gifted and talented programs on students. American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy 6 (3), 30–62.

Burgess, S., E. Greaves, A. Vignoles, and D. Wilson (2015). What parents want: School
  preferences and school choice. Economic Journal 125 (587), 1262–1289.

Caldwell, S. and N. Harmon (2019). Outside options, bargaining, and wages: Evidence from
  coworker networks. Mimeo, University of Copenhagen.

Card, D. (2001, September). Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent
  econometric problems. Econometrica 69 (5), 1127–1160.


                                            20
Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, J. Heining, and P. Kline (2018). Firms and labor market inequality:
  Evidence and some theory. Journal of Labor Economics 36 (S13-S70), 84–111.

Card, D., F. Devicienti, and A. Maida (2014). Rent-sharing, holdup, and wages: Evidence
  from matched panel data. Review of Economic Studies 81 (1), 84–111.

Card, D., J. Heining, and P. Kline (2013). Workplace heterogeneity and the rise of west
  german wage inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (3), 967–1015.

Caroli, E. and J. van Reenen (2001). Skill-biased organizational change? evidence from a
  panel of british and french establishments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4),
  1449–1492.

Chabrier, J., S. Cohodes, and P. Oreopoulos (2016). What can we learn from charter school
 lotteries? Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (3), 57–84.

Chakrabarti, R. (2008). Can increasing private school participation and monetary loss in a
 voucher program affect public school performance? evidence from milwaukee. Journal of
 Public Economics 92 (5-6), 1371–1393.

Cheshire, P. and S. Sheppard (2004). Capitalising the value of free schools: the impact of
 supply characteristics and uncertainty. Economic Journal 114, F397–F424.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, D. W. Schanzenbach, and D. Yagan (2011).
 How does your kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4), 1593–1660.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. Rockoff (2014a). Measuring the impacts of teachers i:
 Evaluating bias in teacher value-added estimates. American Economic Review 104 (9),
 2593–2632.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. Rockoff (2014b). Measuring the impacts of teachers
 ii: Teacher value-added and student outcomes in adulthood. American Economic Re-
 view 104 (9), 2633–2679.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. Rockoff (2017). Measuring the impacts of teachers: Reply.
 American Economic Review 107 (6), 1685–1717.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, E. Saez, N. Turner, and D. Yagan (2017). Mobility report cards:
 The role of colleges in intergenerational mobility. Mimeo, Stanford University, mimeo.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, and E. Saez (2014). Where is the land of opportunity?
 the geography of intergenerational mobility in the united states. Mimeo, NBER Working
 Paper No. 19843.

Clark, D. (2010). Selective schools and academic achievement. B.E. Journal of Economic
  Analysis and Policy: Advances 10 (1).

                                            21
Cohodes, S. R. (2018). Charter schools and the achievement gap. The Future of Children Pol-
  icy Issue, 1–16.

Dale, S. B. and A. B. Krueger (2002, November). Estimating the payoff to attending a more
 selective college: An application of selection on observables and unobservables. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 117 (4), 1491–1527.

Dale, S. B. and A. B. Krueger (2014, November). Estimating the effects of college char-
 acteristics over the career using administrative earnings data. The Journal of Human
 Resources 49 (2), 323–358.

Davidoff, I. and A. Leigh (2008). How much do public schools really cost? estimating the
 relationship between house prices and school quality. The Economic Record 84, 193–206.

Davis, D. R. and J. I. Dingel (2014). The comparative advantage of cities. Working paper,
 NBER Working Paper No. 20602.

Davis, D. R. and J. I. Dingel (2019). A spatial knowledge economy. 109 (1), 153 – 170.

de Ree, J., K. Muralidharan, M. Pradhan, and H. Rogers (2018). Double for nothing? exper-
  imental evidence on an unconditional teacher salary increase in indonesia. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 133 (2), 993–1039.

Dobbie, W. and R. Fryer (2014). The impact of attending a school with high-achieving
 peers: Evidence from new york city exam schools. American Economics Journal: Applied
 Economics 6 (3), 58–75.

Epple, D., R. Romano, and M. Urquiola (2017). School vouchers: A survey of the economics
  literature. Journal of Economic Literature 55 (2), 441–492.

Epple, D., R. Romano, and R. Zimmer (2016). Charter schools: A survey of research on their
  characteristics and effectiveness. In E. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Woessmann (Eds.),
  Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 5, Chapter 3, pp. 139–208. Elsevier.

Epple, D. and R. E. Romano (1998, March). Competition between private and public schools,
  vouchers, and peer-group effects. American Economic Review 88 (1), 33–62.

Fack, G. and J. Grenet (2010). When do better schools raise housing prices? evidence from
  paris public and private schools. Journal of Public Economics 94 (1-2), 59–77.

Farber, H. S. and R. Gibbons (1996, November). Learning and wage dynamics. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 111 (4), 1007–47.

Feigenberg, B., S. Rivkin, and R. Yan (2014). Illusory gains from Chile’s targeted school
  voucher experiment. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper No. 23178.


                                            22
Figlio, D. and M. Lucas (2004). What’s in a grade? school report cards and house prices.
  American Economic Review 94 (3), 591–604.

Friedman, M. (1955). The role of government in education. In R. Solo (Ed.), Economics and
  the public interest. NJ: Trustees of Rutgers College.

Gallego, F. and A. Hernando (2009). School choice in chile: Looking at the demand side.
 Mimeo, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile.

Gibbons, S. and S. Machin (2003). Valuing english primary schools. Journal of Urban
  Economics (53), 197–219.

Gibbons, S. and S. Machin (2008). Valuing school quality, better transport and lower crime:
  evidence from house prices. Oxford Review of Economic Policy (24), 99–119.

Gilraine, M., U. Petronijevic, and J. D. Singleton (2019). Horizontal differentiation and the
  policy effect of charter schools. Mimeo, New York University.

Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology 78 (6),
  1360–1380.

Gundlach, E., L. Woessman, and J. Gmelin (2001). What parents want: School preferences
 and school choice. Economic Journal 471, C135–C147.

Hanushek, E. (1981). Throwing money at schools. Journal of Policy Analysis and Manage-
  ment 1 (1), 19–41.

Hanushek, E. (1997). The productivity collapse in schools. In W. Fowler (Ed.), Developments
  in school finance, pp. 183–195. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics.

Hanushek, E. A., J. F. Kain, S. G. Rivkin, and G. F. Branch (2007). Charter school quality
  and parental decision making with school choice. Journal of Public Economics 91, 823–848.

Hanushek, E. A. and L. Woessmann (2010). Education and economic growth. In D. J. Brewer
  and P. J. McEwan (Eds.), Economics of Education, pp. 60–67. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Hastings, J., T. Kane, and D. Staiger (2009). Heterogeneous preferences and the efficacy of
  public school choice. Mimeo, Brown University.

Hastings, J. and J. Weinstein (2008, November). Information, school choice, and academic
  achievement: Evidence from two experiments. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4),
  1373–1414.

Hoekstra, M. (2009). The effect of attending the flagship state university on earnings: A
 discontinuity-based approach. Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (4), 717–724.

Hoekstra, M., P. Mouganie, and Y. Wang (2018). Peer quality and the academic benefits to
 attending better schools. Journal of Labor Economics 36 (4).

                                             23
Hoxby, C. (2000). Does competition among public schools benefit students and taxpayers?
  American Economic Review 90 (5), 1209–1238.
Hoxby, C. (2002). How school choice affects the achievement of public school students. In
  P. Hill (Ed.), Choice with equity. Stanford: Hoover Press.
Hoxby, C. (2009). The changing selectivity of American colleges. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 23 (4), 95–118.
Hoxby, C. and C. Avery (2013). The missing ’one-offs’: The hidden supply of high-achieving,
  low income students. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring, 1–65.
Hoxby, C. and S. Turner (2013). Expanding college opportunities for high-achieving, low
  income students. Working Paper 12-014.
Hoxby, C. M. (2003). School choice and school productivity: Could school choice be a tide
  that lifts all boats?). In C. M. Hoxby (Ed.), The economics of school choice. Stanford:
  University of Chicago Press.
Hoxby, C. M. (2016). The productivity of U.S. postsecondary institutions. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 13875.
Hsieh, C.-T. and M. Urquiola (2003). When schools compete, how do they compete? an
  assessment of chile’s nationwide school voucher program. Mimeo, National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper No. 10008.
Hsieh, C.-T. and M. Urquiola (2006). The effects of generalized school choice on achieve-
  ment and stratification: Evidence from chile’s school voucher program. Journal of Public
  Economics 90, 1477–1503.
Imberman, S. and M. Lovenheim (2016). Does the market value value-added? evidence from
  housing prices after as public release of school and teacher value added. Journal of Urban
  Economics 91, 104–121.
Jackson, C. K. (2010). Do students benefit from attending better schools? Evidence from
  rule based student assignments in trinidad and tobago. The Economic Journal 120 (549),
  1399–1429.
Jackson, C. K., R. C. Johnson, and C. Persico (2016). The effects of school spending on
  educational and economic outcomes: Evidence from school finance reforms. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 131 (1), 157–218.
Kahn, S. R. (2011). Privilege: The Making of an Adolescent Elite at St. Paul’s School.
 Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Kaufmann, K. M., M. Messner, and A. Solis (2013).          Returns to elite higher educa-
 tion in the marriage market: Evidence from chile.         Mimeo, SSRN Working Paper
 http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2313369.

                                            24
Kraft, M. (2019). Teacher effects on complex cognitive skills and socio-emotional competen-
  cies. Journal of Human Resources 54 (1), 1–36.
Krueger, A. B. and L. H. Summers (1988, March). Efficiency wages and the inter-industry
  wage structure. Econometrica 56 (2), 259–294.
Lafortune, J., J. Rothstein, and D. Schanzenbach (2018). School finance reform and the dis-
  tribution of student achievement. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10 (2),
  1–26.
Lemieux, T. (2006). The mincer equation thirty years after schooling, experience, and
  earnings. In S. Grossbard (Ed.), Jacob Mincer, A pioneer of modern labor economics, pp.
  127–145. Springer Verlag.
Lucas, A. and I. Mbiti (2014). Effects of school quality on student achievement: Discontinuity
  evidence from kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6 (3), 234–263.
Machin, S. (2011). Houses and schools: Valuation of school quality through the housing
 market. Labour Economics 18, 723–729.
MacLeod, W. B., E. Riehl, J. E. Saavedra, and M. Urquiola (2017). The big sort: Col-
 lege reputation and labor market outcomes. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
 nomics 9 (3), 223–261.
MacLeod, W. B. and M. Urquiola (2015). Reputation and school competition. American
 Economic Review 105 (11), 3471–3488.
McEwan, P. (2004). The potential impact of vouchers. Peabody Journal of Education 79 (3),
 57–80.
McEwan, P., M. Urquiola, and E. Vegas (2008). School choice, stratification, and information
 on school performance. Economia 8 (2), 1–42.
McMillan, P. (2005). Competition, incentives, and public school productivity. Journal of
 Public Economics 89, 1131–1154.
Mincer, J. (1974). Schooling, Experience and Earnings. New York, NY: Columbia University
 Press.
Mizala, A., P. Romaguera, and M. Urquiola (2007). Socioeconomic status or noise? tradeoffs
 in the generation of school quality information. Journal of Development Economics 84 (1),
 61–75.
Mizala, A. and M. Urquiola (2013). Parental choice and school markets: The impact of
 information on school effectiveness. Journal of Development Economics 103, 313–335.
Moon, T. S. (2018). Access to local amenity and housing prices. Technical report, Princeton
 University.

                                             25
Moretti, E. (2004). Workers’ education, spillovers and productivity: Evidence from plant-
 level production functions. American Economic Review 94 (3), 656–690.

Moretti, E. (2010). Local labor markets. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook
 of Labor Economics. North Holland.

Moretti, E. (2011). Local labor markets. Volume 4, Part B of Handbook of Labor Economics,
 Chapter 14, pp. 1237–1313. Elsevier.

Muralidharan, K. and V. Sundararaman (2015). The aggregate effect of school choice: Evi-
 dence from a two-stage experiment in india. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (3),
 1011–1066.

Navarro-Palau, P. (2017). Effects of differentiated school vouchers: Evidence from a policy
  change and date of birth cutoffs. Economics of Education Review 58, 86–107.

Neckerman, K. and F. Torche (2007). Inequality: Causes and consequences. Annual Review
  of Sociology 33 (2), 263–283.

Neilson, C. (2017). Targeted vouchers, competition among schools, and the academic achieve-
  ment of poor students. Unpublished manuscript, Princeton University.

Oreopoulos, P., T. von Wachter, and A. Heisz (2012). The short-and long-term career effects
  of graduating in a recession. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (1), 1–29.

Park, A., X. Shi, C.-T. Hsieh, and X. An (2008). Does school quality matter?: Evidence
  from a natural experiment in rural china. Mimeo, University of Chicago.

Pop-Eleches, C. and M. Urquiola (2013). Going to a better school: Effects and behavioral
  responses. American Economic Review 103 (4), 1289–1324.

Pritchett, L. (2009). The policy irrelevance of the economics of education: Is ’normative as
  positive’ just useless, or is it worse? In J. Cohen and W. Easterly (Eds.), What works in
  Development? Thinking big and thinking small. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
  Press.

Riehl, E. (2018). Fairness in college admission exams: From test score gaps to earnings
  inequality. Mimeo, Cornell University.

Riehl, E., J. Saavedra, and M. Urquiola (2016). Learning and earning: College output, value
  added, and socioeconomic status. Mimeo, Columbia University.

Rivera, L. A. (2015). Pedigree. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Rockoff, J. E., B. A. Jacob, T. J. Kane, and D. O. Staiger (2011). Can you recognize an
  effective teacher when you recruit one? Education Finance and Policy 6 (1), 43–74.

Rosen, S. (1981). The economics of superstars. American Economic Review 71 (5), 845–858.

                                            26
Rosenthal, M. (2006). Nicholas Miraculous: The amazing career of the redoubtable Dr.
  Nicholas Murray Butler. New York: Farrar, Strauss, and Giroux.

Rothstein, J. (2006). Good principals or good peers: Parental valuation of school character-
  istics, tiebout equilibrium, and the incentive effects of competition among jurisdictions.
  American Economic Review 96 (4), 1333–1350.

Rothstein, J. (2007). Does competition among public schools benefit students and taxpayers?
  Comment. American Economic Review 95 (5), 2026–2037.

Rothstein, J. (2017). Measuring the impact of teachers: Comment. American Economic
  Review 107 (6), 1656–1684.

Rouse, C. E. and L. Barrow (2009). School vouchers and student achievement: Recent
  evidence and remaining questions. Annual Review of Economics, 17–42.

Saavedra, J. (2009). The learning and early labor market effects of college quality: A
  regression discontinuity analysis. Mimeo, Harvard University.

Tiebout, C. (1956). A pure theory of local expenditures. Journal of Political Economy 64 (5),
  416–424.

Urquiola, M. (2005). Does school choice lead to sorting? evidence from tiebout variation.
  American Economic Review 95 (4), 1310–1326.

Urquiola, M. (2016). Competition among schools: Traditional public and private schools.
  In E. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Woessmann (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of
  Education, Volume 5, Chapter 4, pp. 209–237. Elsevier.

Valenzuela, J., C. Bellei, and D. De Los Rios (2013). Socioeconomic school segregation in a
  market-oriented educational system. the case of chile. Journal of Education Policy, 1–24.

Van Reenen, J. (1996). The creation and capture of rents: Wages and innovation in a panel
  of U.K. companies. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (1), 195–226.

von Wachter, T. and S. Bender (2006). In the right place at the wrong time: The role of
  firms and luck in young workers’ careers. American Economic Review 96 (5), 1679–1705.

Walters, C. R. (2018). The demand for effective charter schools. Journal of Political Econ-
 omy.

Weinstein, R. (2017, December). Geography and employer recruiting. techreport 11224,
 IZA, Bonn, Germancy. 11.

Zimmerman, S. (2016). Making the one percent: The role of elite universities and elite peers.
  Mimeo, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 22900.



                                             27
A       Model Details and Results
This section provides the details for the model and results discussed in Section 3. The
model considers three parties: students, schools, and employers. Each student lives in one
of two jurisdictions, A or B, with the number of students in each normalized to 1. Each
jurisdiction runs a school, indexed by s ∈ {A, B}. Students are indexed by i ∈ Is = [0, 1],
where Is denotes the set of students in jurisdiction s. Individuals are of either low or high
ability denoted by α ∈ {αL , αH }, where αH > αL > 0. We assume that students can observe
their own ability.29 The fraction of high ability students in each jurisdiction is given by
ρs . In other words students i ∈ [0, 1 − ρs ) ⊂ Is are of low ability, and the rest are of high
ability. The index identifies specific individuals that we need when discussing who chooses
a particular school, however the relationship between index and ability is unknown to the
market.
     Each school s ∈ {A, B} provides value added vs to all its students.30 The skill of an
individual i who went to school s is thus given by αi + vs , i.e. value added augments innate
ability to produce skill. We assume that jurisdiction A has a higher proportion of high ability
students, ρA > ρB , but jurisdiction B has the school with higher value added: vB > vA > 0.
In practice one might expect that school A would have more resources and perhaps thus
have higher value added. But research suggests that better-resourced schools are not always
more productive, and we make these assumptions to show that the demand for school A is
not necessarily driven by value added.
     We also assume that schools close only a fraction of skills gaps; i.e., the difference in
ability is greater than that in value added:

                                            αH − αL > vB − vA .

This assumption is supported by the evidence that schools, even over several years, do not
easily close achievement gaps between salient groups (e.g. between blacks and whites in the
U.S., or between low and high socioeconomic status students in many countries).31 Thus
our setup has four student types t ∈ T = {H, L} × {A, B} with skill θks = αk + vs such that:

                                         θHB > θHA > θLB > θLA .                                            (A.1)
   To summarize, to make things interesting we rig the model such that school B has higher
value added but may produce graduates with lower absolute skill. The question will be
  29
      This can be realistic at higher educational levels. For instance, students applying to high school or college
often have access to imperfect but numerous signals of their own ability. These can include standardized
test results and grade point averages. For analyses that illustrate such settings at the high school level see
Pop-Eleches and Urquiola (2013) and Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2014); at the college level see Hoekstra (2009)
and Riehl (2018).
   30
      Supposing that value added is constant across students is consistent with the literature, which does not
find great evidence of heterogeneity in teacher and school effects, e.g., Chetty et al. (2014a).
   31
      The point is that extremely successful schooling interventions might close such gaps, but the fact that
there is concern regarding the intergenerational transmission of inequality suggests that such interventions
are the exception rather than the rule.


                                                        28
whether competition directs students to school B. We also note that there is empirical
support that school rankings by absolute achievement do not always correspond to rankings
by value added.32
    To introduce elements of competition we assume that students can attend the school
within their jurisdiction for free. If they enroll outside their jurisdiction, they must pay a
cost C. This could capture the cost of travel or fees imposed by one jurisdiction on students
from the other, as happens with state universities. A high enough C makes each school a
monopoly within its jurisdiction. Thus reductions in C correspond to increasing competition
between schools.
    We will assume that a set of firms hire graduates. We index these firms by their produc-
tivity, β, which we suppose is uniformly distributed on Γ:

                                          β ∈ [1 − γ, 1 + γ] = Γ,

with γ ∈ [0, 1]. Thus, γ measures the variation in firm quality. When γ = 0 all employers
have the same productivity, while γ = 1 corresponds to the case in which the worst firm has
productivity equal to zero, and the best firm’s productivity equals two.
   We suppose there is a return to skill that is greater at higher productivity firms. Formally,
the expected wage paid to an individual of type t hired by a firm of type β is:

                                                 wtβ = βθt ,                               (A.2)

   In words, all else equal firms prefer graduates with higher innate ability, and all else equal
they prefer graduates from schools with higher value added. Finally, we assume that the
sequence of decisions is as follows:

  1. Each student i chooses a school s (i) ∈ {A, B}. If he chooses the school outside his
     jurisdiction, he pays a cost C.

  2. Firm β ∈ Γ chooses the school from which to recruit one employee, s (β) ∈ {A, B}.

  3. Students and firms are matched, resulting in a match β (i) and a wage:
                                                                   
                                            wi = β (i) × αi + vs(i) .

We assume that once they recruit at a school, employers carry out interviews that ensure that
the better firms are matched with the better students. Since employers choose schools after
students do, students’ school choice is dependent upon their expectations regarding future
employment. This is important because it implies that the effect of increased competition
will depend upon expectations. We assume throughout that both students and employers
have correct expectations in equilibrium.
 32
      See for instance Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2014).




                                                       29
A.1      Full information case
As a benchmark, we begin with a full information case in which student ability is fully
observed by all agents.33 Suppose that the moving cost C is set sufficiently high such that
there is no movement between schools. Since school B has the highest value added, the
best employers will recruit there and pick up all the high ability individuals, {αH , B}, i.e.,
these firms will get the graduates with the highest skill levels. Next, employers will move
to school A and offer jobs to the high ability graduates from that school. Once all the
high ability individuals are employed, the next firms will return to school B and hire the
remaining students. Finally, the remaining students at school A will be hired. Proposition
1 summarizes this result.

Proposition 1. Suppose that student ability is perfectly observable, and there is no compe-
tition between schools. Then the equilibrium employer match is given by:

   1. The high ability students at school B are matched to highest productivity firms: β ∈
                                   β
      [1 + γ (1 − ρB ) , 1 + γ] = IHB .

   2. The high ability students at school A are matched to the next tier of firms with produc-
      tivity β ∈ [1 + γ (1 − ρB − ρA ) , 1 + γ (1 − ρB )].

   3. The low ability students at school B are matched next to firms with productivity β ∈
      [1 − γρA , 1 + γ (1 − ρB − ρA )] .

   4. Finally, the low ability students at school A are matched to firms with productivity
      β ∈ [1 − γ, 1 − γρA ].

   In short, when there is perfect information employers prefer the graduates of schools with
higher value added, although only the high ability among them. This also implies that if
the number of high ability students at school B is small, then the average wage of graduates
from school A may exceed that of students from school B. Observe that perfect associative
matching implies that all firms with β ∈ [βH , 1 + γ] , where βH = 1 + γ (1 − ρB − ρA ), are
matched with the high ability students.
   Now, still in the full information setting, consider the effect of increasing competition by
lowering C such that all students can choose schools. Consider first the high innate ability
students. Since school B has higher value added, and since it contains some high ability
students, they know that it will be targeted by the highest productivity firms.34 Thus, when
costs C are low enough, all the high ability students from jurisdiction A would cross over
and attend school B. The same reasoning holds for the low ability students. Thus we have:

Proposition 2. For sufficiently low costs of exerting choice, C, the unique equilibrium
entails all students going to school B, and all employers choosing employees from school B.
  33
     In general it is not the case that firms can observe everything about applicants. See MacLeod and
Urquiola (2015) for a discussion.
  34
     We further assume that students do not take into account any externalities generated by their choices.


                                                    30
   This result is the fundamental motivation for implementing school choice. In this case
both students and employers prefer education as provided by the high value added school.
Competition raises average school productivity and average wages. This implies Result 1 in
Section 3.2.1. We now show that the presence of perfect information is crucial to this result.
   Consider the case in which schools have a capacity of 1 - the number of students in
their district. In that case schools must have a method to select students when there is
excess demand from neighboring school districts. One method is for schools to use selective
admissions. When the education market is perfectly competitive then there is an equilibrium
at which all the high ability students attend school B. The question is whether or not it is
an equilibrium?

Proposition 3. Suppose schools are selective, and each have a capacity of 1. If the number
of high ability students is less than 1 then there exists a competitive equilibrium at which all
high ability students prefer school A over school B if and only if:
                            ρA + ρB                        ρA + ρB
                                                                 
                γ θHB                     − (vB − vA ) 1 −                ≥ vB − vA .
                               2                              2
Proof. Suppose all high ability students choose to attend school A, which given selec-
tive admissions, that are all accepted. This in turn implies that the firms with β ∈
[1 + γ(1 − ρA − ρB ), 1 + γ] recruit at school A, and the next group of firms recruit at school
B (since θLB > θLA ). Ex ante, high ability students do not know with which firm they will
match, and hence their expected return from choosing School A is:
                                                 ρA + ρB
                                                             
                          E {wHA } = 1 + γ 1 −               θHA ,
                                                     2
where wHA is the realized wage type H get at school A. If a high ability student chooses
school B she will be matched with the best firm available, then under the hypothesis that
firms can observe ability when the interview at a school the best student will be matched
with the best firm and we get:

                               wHB = (1 + γ (1 − ρA − ρB ))θHB .

A high ability student will choose school A over school B if and only if wHA ≥ wHB which
implies the inequality in Proposition 3.
    This result shows that if the variance of the returns to skill (γ) is sufficiently large, then
there can be a competitive equilibrium with school A having all the high ability students.
Necessary condition for this to hold is that school A can admit all the high ability students.
If not, then there will be some high ability students at school B, which in turn implies under
ex post perfect information the best firms recruit at B, which in turn implies that the best
students prefer B, leading to all the best students going to B.
    Finally, note that charter schools use random assignment to mitigate the effects of sorting.
This also may not work to direct demand towards school B. This is clear from a simple
example. Suppose that ρA + ρB = 1, and all the high ability students apply only to school

                                                  31
A while the low ability students apply only to school B. In this case students self-select into
schools and the random allocation system is not used. In addition, in this case, all the high
productivity firms recruit from school A, while the low productivity recruit from school B.
For this to be an equilibrium we just need that the students do not wish to swap schools.
For high ability students this requires that :

                                         (1 + γ/2) θHA ≥ θHB ,

or:
                                           2(vB − vA )
                                            γ≥         .                                              (A.3)
                                            αH + vA
In the case of the low ability students we need:

                                          (1 − γ/2) θLB ≥ θLA ,

or:
                                                  2(vB − vA )
                                            γ≤                .                                       (A.4)
                                                   αL + vB
There are γ that solve this if and only if:
                                       2(vB − vA )   2(vB − vA )
                                                   ≥             ,
                                        αL + vB       αA + vA
or:
                                          αH + vA ≥ αL + vB .
This latter condition is our maintained assumption that the variation in skill is greater than
the variation in value added, hence there are γ satisfying (A.3-A.4). In other words, there
exists a competitive equilibrium with complete sorting of the high ability students into the
low value added school, despite the existence of a lottery admission system. In particular,
this result implies that school choice mechanisms cannot be guaranteed to reward the high
value added school. Setting ρA + ρB = 1 implies Result 2 in Section 3.2.2.

A.2      Imperfect Information Case
In practice firms cannot perfectly observe workers’ skill or ability.35 Now suppose that
employers can only observe the average skill of students at a school, and cannot disentangle
value added from innate ability.36 To explore this setting, we will need to characterize the
equilibrium allocation of students between schools. To do so, it is useful to let nA
                                                                                   H and nL
                                                                                           A

  35
     This is the subject of the “employer learning” literature. See for instance Farber and Gibbons (1996)
and Altonji and Pierret (2001).
  36
     School value added is difficult for econometricians to isolate despite having access to large amounts
of data. Similarly, teacher value added turns out to be difficult to predict, even using rich observable
characteristics; see for instance Rockoff et al. (2011) and Araujo et al. (2016). In contrast and as reviewed
in Section 2, parents seem to generally be aware of schools’ absolute achievement, and to prefer those with
higher levels of achievement.

                                                     32
denote the number of high and low ability students at school A. The corresponding number
of students at school B is given by nB                  A        B                 A
                                       H = ρA + ρB − nH and nL = (1 − ρA − ρB ) − nL . Let
ns = nsH + nsL be the total number of students at each school
    Given this the average skill level of school A graduates is given by:
                                                             nA       A
                                                                H αH + nL αL
                                        θ̂A nA    A
                                             L , nH =                        + vA ,
                                                                    nA
                
with θ̂B nB     B
           L , nH analogously defined. Further supposing that the number of high ability
students in district A is sufficiently larger than in district B we have:

                                            θ̂A (1 − ρA , ρA ) > θ̂B (1 − ρA , ρA ) .                   (A.5)

We know this is possible since θHA > θLB . In this case, when a firm β hires a student at
school s ∈ {A, B} it expects payoff:

                                                         ŵ (β, s) = β θ̂s .                            (A.6)

This reflects the case in which the firm can no longer cherry-pick the most able graduates.
   The most productive firms will choose the school with the highest average skill, which in
turn determines the average productivity of firms that recruit at school s, β̂s . Students will
choose the school with the highest expected wage net of moving costs. Thus, if a student
with ability α from jurisdiction d ∈ {A, B} attends school s ∈ {A, B}, his payoff is:

                                                w (α, d, s) = β̂ s (α + vs ) − δds C,

where δds = 0 if d = s and 1 otherwise.
    We can now define an equilibrium. An allocation of employers and students is an equi-
librium if neither students nor firms can increase their payoff by switching schools. Let us
begin by exploring equilibria for which θ̂A > θ̂B . Since students prefer to work for higher
productivity firms, then when θ̂A > θ̂B , the top nA = nA      A
                                                         H + nL firms hire at school A, and
the rest at school
               h   B. Thus
                         i without loss of generality, an equilibrium allocation in this case
has firms β ∈ β A , 1 + γ hiring at school A, where
                                                             
                                                 β A nA    A             A
                                                      L , nH = 1 + γ − γn .

The average productivity of firms hiring at school A is therefore:
                                                                          
                                                    1 + γ + β A nA    A
                                                                 L , nH                nA
                                                                                                !
                                           
                          A
                     β̂           nA    A
                                   L , nH       =                              =1+γ 1−    .
                                                              2                         2
                                                                                               
The equivalent expression for school B is β̂ B nA    A
                                                L , nH = β
                                                           A
                                                             nA    A
                                                              L , nH + (1 − γ) /2 = 1 −
                         
γnA /2 = β̂ A nA    A
               L , nH − γ.



                                                                  33
    Students’ choice depends upon two factors: the cost of moving, C, and the difference in
payoffs. Given an allocation of students, define the utility from attending school A less the
utility from attending school B by:
                                                                       
               D α, nA    A
                     L , nH = β̂
                                 A
                                   nA    A
                                    L , nH (α + vA ) − β̂
                                                          B
                                                            nA    A
                                                             L , nH (α + vB )
                                                            
                                 = γ (α + vB ) − β̂ A nA    A
                                                       L , nH (vB − vA )

                                                             nA
                                                                       !!
                                 = γ (α + vB ) − 1 + γ 1 −        (vB − vA )
                                                              2
                                                nA
                                                             !
                                 = γ α + vA +      (vB − vA ) − (vB − vA ) .
                                                 2

Given that value added at school B is higher than at school A, this term can only be positive
when the diversity in the returns to skill, γ, is sufficiently high. In particular, if γ < 1 and
the value added of school B is sufficiently high, then this term is negative, and hence in the
absence of moving costs students would prefer school B.
   When variation in value added is small relative to variation in ability, then the fact that
employers sort across schools can lead to equilibria where the lower valued added school has
the best students. To illustrate this, let us begin with the autarky case, where there is no
mobility:

Proposition 4. Suppose the average skill of students living in jurisdiction A is higher than
that of students living in jurisdiction B, i.e. (θ̂A (1 − ρA , ρA ) > θ̂B (1 − ρB , ρB )). Suppose
also that mobility costs satisfy

                                     C > D (αH , 1 − ρA , ρA ) .                            (A.7)

Then it is an equilibrium for students to chose their local school, and for the high quality
firms β ∈ [1, 1 + γ] to recruit employees at school A.

Proof. Consider the allocation at which all students attend their local school. By assumption,
average skill is higher at school A, and therefore employers with β ∈ [1, 1 + γ] will choose
school A, with the rest choosing school B. Since C > D (αH , 1 − ρA , ρA ) this implies that
the high ability students at B prefer to stay at B. The monotonicity of D () with respect to
α implies that low ability students will not want to switch.
   Now consider increasing competition by lowering costs C. Further suppose that D (αH , 1 − ρA , ρA ) >
0. This will hold for vB sufficiently small (but still greater than vA ). This implies that when
C < D (αH , 1 − ρA , ρA ) high ability students at school B strictly prefer school A. Once they
move, the average skill at school A rises! This further reinforces the preference for school
A. Thus we have:

Proposition 5. Suppose that moving costs satisfy:

                   D (αH , 1 − ρA , ρA + ρB ) > C > D (αL , 1 − ρA , ρA + ρB ) ,            (A.8)

                                                   34
then it is an equilibrium for all high ability students to attend school A, while low ability
students attend their local school. Firms with β ∈ [1 + γ − γ (1 + ρB ) , 1 + γ] employ students
from school A, while the remaining firms recruit at school B.

Proof. Since
           n D () o  is increasing in α then we know there exists C satisfying (A.8). The
              A    A
allocation nH , nL = {ρA + ρB , 1 − ρA } corresponds to all high ability students going to
school A, while low ability students stay at their respective schools. Now condition (A.8)
implies that it is optimal for high ability students to leave B to attend A, while low ability
students strictly prefer to stay at their local school.
    Thus result provides conditions under which high ability students prefer school A, even
though school B has higher value added. We now show that competition does not solve this
situation.

Proposition 6. Suppose value added and the distribution of returns to skill satisfy:

                                 γ (αL + vB ) > vB − vA > 0,                              (A.9)

then for costs C satisfying:

                           D (αL , ρA + ρB , 2 − ρA − ρB ) > C ≥ 0,                      (A.10)

it is an equilibrium for all students to choose school A.

Proof. Condition (A.9) implies that D (αL , ρA + ρB , 2 − ρA − ρB ) > 0, and hence there exists
costs that satisfy (A.10). This condition implies that all types prefer school A over school
B, and hence all firms hire at school A.
    This result shows when the difference in value added is sufficiently small, then even
in the presence of perfect competition (C = 0) there can be an equilibrium at which all
students choose the school with lower value added. This implies Result 3 in the text. The
result depends upon a number of ingredients that can help us understand when we can expect
competition to work. First and foremost, is the assumption that employers use school identity
to set wages. When this is true, then employers will search for students at the schools that
have the highest skill—the sum of innate ability and value added. Second, we have supposed
that there are increasing returns to skill—this means that there is a match component to
compensation.
    The consequence is that we get interlocking decisions. If students expect the best em-
ployers to recruit at school A, then students will prefer school A, even when school B is
known to have higher value added. Moreover, the incentive to choose school A is highest for
the high ability students. The student of the lowest ability might prefer school B, while the
better students prefer school A. Of course, these results can be reinforced if students have
difficulty observing value added.
    This provides a number of insights regarding the impact of choice. First, if the distribu-
tion of ability is relatively uniform and schools are equally bad, then a new school with higher

                                              35
value added could enter. The problem is that if there exists a historically “good school,”
where there is a high proportion of high ability students, then increasing competition could
in fact result in increased demand at this school even if its value added is lower. This is
driven by high ability students elsewhere who would like the chance to be matched to high
productivity firms. The analysis also applies to high school, where one replaces employers
by colleges seeking the best applicants.
    Thus, the combination of legacy “good” schools, combined with more competition and
increased returns to skill can lead to more competition to enter into a legacy school, while
reducing incentives to increase value added.




                                            36
