                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE MINIMUM WAGE, EITC, AND CRIMINAL RECIDIVISM

                                      Amanda Y. Agan
                                    Michael D. Makowsky

                                      Working Paper 25116
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25116


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




We thank Jeff Clemens, Jennifer Doleac, Benjamin Hansen, Justin McCrary, Jonathan Meer, and
Kevin Schnepel for helpful comments. We have also benefited greatly from workshop and
conference participants at the 2017 ALEA Meetings, NBER Labor Studies and Summer Institute,
NYU Wagner, Princeton University, The Brookings Institution, UBC, UCSD, and UT Austin.
We owe a debt of gratitude to Crystal Yang for sharing her Stata code for cleaning the NCRP
data and for initial discussions about this project and to Steve Mello for help with the LEOKA
data. Yujie Deng, Shannon Graham, and Sarah Wilson provided valuable research assistance. The
authors have no outside funding to disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Amanda Y. Agan and Michael D. Makowsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Minimum Wage, EITC, and Criminal Recidivism
Amanda Y. Agan and Michael D. Makowsky
NBER Working Paper No. 25116
September 2018
JEL No. J08,J2,K31,K42

                                           ABSTRACT

For recently released prisoners, the minimum wage and the availability of state Earned Income
Tax Credits (EITCs) can influence both their ability to find employment and their potential legal
wages relative to illegal sources of income, in turn affecting the probability they return to prison.
Using administrative prison release records from nearly six million offenders released between
2000 and 2014, we use a difference-in-differences strategy to identify the effect of over two
hundred state and federal minimum wage increases, as well as 21 state EITC programs, on
recidivism. We find that the average minimum wage increase of $0.50 reduces the probability
that men and women return to prison within 1 year by 2.8%. This implies that on average the
effect of higher wages, drawing at least some released prisoners into the legal labor market,
dominates any reduced employment in this population due to the minimum wage. These
reductions in returns to incarcerations are observed for the potentially revenue generating crime
categories of property and drug crimes; prison reentry for violent crimes are unchanged,
supporting our framing that minimum wages affect crime that serves as a source of income. The
availability of state EITCs also reduces recidivism, but only for women.


Amanda Y. Agan
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
aagan@economics.rutgers.edu

Michael D. Makowsky
Clemson University
Office 220D, Sirrine Hall
101 Calhoun Dr
Clemson, SC 29634
mdmakow@clemson.edu
1    Introduction
Every year, more than 600,000 men and women are released from U.S. prisons; nearly one-
third will return to prison within three years (Yang 2017). The probability these individuals
return to prison is in part determined by the labor market opportunities they face upon
release (Raphael and Weiman 2007; Visher et al. 2008; Yang 2017; Galbiati et al. 2017;
Schnepel 2018). Recently released prisoners tend to have lower human capital and inter-
rupted work histories (Waldfogel 1994; Pager 2008); they also carry the stigma of a criminal
conviction and the associated risks to potential employers (Pager 2003; Agan and Starr 2018).
In the market for low-skilled labor, released prisoners are likely to be at the very margin,
their employment sensitive to even moderate changes in wage policies. Their outside op-
tion may also include criminal activity, implying recidivism may not just be influenced by
whether they can find a job, but whether they can find a job that pays better than crime.
    In this paper, we estimate how two major low-wage labor market policies, the minimum
wage and earned income tax credits (EITCs), impact the probability a recently released
prisoner returns to prison. We exploit variations in the implementation and levels of these
policies across states combined with microdata from nearly six million individual prison
release records from 2000 to 2014 across 43 states to understand how these policies impact
recidivism. A change in the minimum wage could impact the labor market prospects of
released prisoners, and thus recidivism, through two competing channels: the wage they can
expect to earn if they succeed (the wage effect) and their likelihood of finding employment
(the unemployment effect). Additional EITC benefits, on the other hand, serve to increase
available income and incentives to work in the legal labor market, both channels potentially
decreasing recidivism. Given the way EITCs are implemented, this is likely to have stronger
impacts for women.
    The wage effect of the minimum wage implies that higher minimum wages could reduce
recidivism. Minimum wages are a particularly salient indicator of the wage for legal work
available to released prisoners. Given that prior work estimating returns to remunerative
criminal activity has found earnings not far from typical minimum wages, there is an op-
portunity for higher minimum wages to succeed in pulling individuals out of illegal income
generating activities and into the legal job market (Viscusi 1986; Levitt and Venkatesh 2000;
McCarthy and Hagan 2001; Uggen and Thompson 2003). The existence of higher paying
jobs, if an individual is able to secure one, increases the opportunity cost of returning to
prison, presumably reducing the probability of recidivism. This is similar to the argument
that minimum wages increase high school dropouts as individuals exit education in favor of
higher wages available in the job market (Chaplin et al. 2003; Neumark and Wascher 2003).


                                             2
    The unemployment effect pushes in the opposite direction. The potential for unemploy-
ment induced by higher minimum wages is at the heart of most economic studies of the
minimum wage (e.g. Card and Krueger 1994; Allegretto et al. 2011; Neumark et al. 2014;
Meer and West 2015; Allegretto et al. 2017; Neumark and Wascher 2017; Jardim et al.
2018; see Neumark 2017 for a recent review). To the extent that employers reduce overall
labor demand or are able to substitute to more desirable labor pools due to higher minimum
wages, this may increase the likelihood of unemployment and reduce the opportunity cost of
further crime for recently released prisoners, increasing the probability of recidivism. Given
employers’ particular distaste for hiring individuals with criminal records and the potential
for labor-labor substitution (Pager 2003; Holzer et al. 2006; Agan and Starr 2018), released
prisoners are likely to be particularly vulnerable to any potential unemployment effects of
the minimum wage, even if higher minimum wages do not cause aggregate decreases in
employment.
    It is thus an empirical question whether, on net, the potential unemployment effects or
wage effects of the minimum wage will dominate for the population of returning prisoners.
Exploiting state and year variation in minimum wages over our time period, we find that
higher minimum wages are associated with a lower probability of returning to prison, with
no discernible difference in effect for men or women. That is, the increased incentive to
substitute legal employment for criminal market activity, on net, appears to be greater than
any unemployment effects of minimum wages for this group. However, our results do not
allow for separate identification of the magnitude of unemployment or wage effects, only that
wage effects dominate.
    The theoretical wage effect is not substantively different from what we might expect from
higher market wages or better labor market opportunities, as studied in the recent work of
Yang (2017), Galbiati et al. (2017), and Schnepel (2018)—all of which show that better local
labor market opportunities at the time of release decrease the probability of returning to
prison. It is the possibility of a coincident unemployment effect from higher minimum wages
that differentiates any predicted effects, and ensuing empirical content, of this question from
this recent literature.
    While direct employment effects of minimum wages have been the focus of much of the
literature on minimum wages, our research also adds to the growing literature on impacts
of minimum wages on other margins, which includes research on wage distributions and
inequality (DiNardo et al. 1996; Lee 1999; Autor et al. 2016), firm entry and exit (Luca and
Luca 2017), and fringe benefits (Clemens et al. 2018). There is also a line of research on the
broad relationship of minimum wages to crime (Hashimoto 1987; Beauchamp and Chan 2014;



                                              3
Braun 2017).1 We have reason, however, to be narrowly interested in the effects of minimum
wages on recidivism, which has not yet been studied in relation to minimum wages, rather
than crime rates in general. Individuals already bearing a criminal record are likely amongst
the most vulnerable to potential unemployment effects.2 For other participants in the low-
skill labor market, the next best alternative to legal employment is often leisure or school;
the prospect of a higher minimum wage pulling such individuals into employment is a private
outcome with little external consequence. For some released prisoners, on the other hand,
their next best alternative to legal employment may be criminal endeavor. As such, minimum
wages stand to have a previously unconsidered impact on private decisions to participate in
illegal labor markets and, in turn, criminal activities with potentially significant negative
impacts on others.
    The predicted effects of EITCs are less ambiguous, at least for those who are eligible
(Leigh 2010; Rothstein 2010; Nichols and Rothstein 2016). An EITC is a (usually) refundable
tax credit available to individuals with a job and low to moderate income (up to $53,505
depending on the number of children you have and whether you are married filing jointly or
single). The federal EITC is far more generous for people with minor children who live with
them at least half the year - in 2016 the maximum federal EITC benefit for a household with
no qualifying children was $506, whereas it was $3,373 for those with one qualifying child
and $6,269 for households with at least three children.3 In addition to the federal EITC,
some states also have their own additional EITCs—an additional percentage of the federal
EITC offered to filers in those states. As an explicit wage subsidy for individuals reporting
earned income, standard theory predicts that the wage and employment effects of the EITC
should move in the same direction, with both working towards reducing the probability an
individual returns to prison.
    Given that EITC magnitudes are strongly contingent on the number of children for which
an individual holds custodial responsibility, however, their impacts on recidivism are likely
   1
      Braun (2017) is the closest in spirit to our study; her calibrated model predicts national crime rates
initially decreasing with the federal minimum wage, but eventually generating a net increase via disemploy-
ment effects. While not explicitly criminal, Muravyev and Oshchepkov (2016) found that a doubling of the
Russian minimum wage in 2007 resulted in increased participation in the “informal” labor market.
    2
      Minimum wage studies have broadly emphasized identifying effects of higher minimum wages on groups
likely to be looking for low-skilled occupations, including (but not limited to) teenagers (Neumark and
Wascher 1995; Dube et al. 2010; Allegretto et al. 2011; Gorry 2013; Dube and Zipperer 2015; Liu et al.
2016; Slichter et al. 2016; Powell 2017), immigrants (Orrenius and Zavodny 2003), and high school drop-
outs (Deere et al. 1995). Released prisoners share attributes with all of these groups, including the limited
skill sets, education, and/or reference networks. They also have the additional stigma of a criminal record,
implying that few released prisoners are likely to enjoy the luxury of being inframarginal with regard to any
nontrivial low-skill wage policy.
    3
      https://www.irs.gov/credits-deductions/individuals/earned-income-tax-credit/eitc-income-limits-
maximum-credit-amounts



                                                     4
to be heterogenous across individuals, particularly with regards to gender. The Bureau
of Justice Statistics reports that 53% of men and women in prison are parents of minor
children before they entered prison; 41.7% of women reported being the single parent of
their household, compared to 19.2% of men (Glaze 2008). In a survey of recently released
prisoners in Chicago, Baltimore, and Cleveland performed by the Urban Institute, in the
2-4 months after release 28% of men and 49% of women report children under 18 living
with them.4 The EITC literature has shown that these subsidies tend to increase labor
force participation of single women (Eissa and Liebman 1996). That fact, combined with
the statistics on custodial responsibility, imply that EITCs may have stronger impacts on
female recidivism. The EITC is also likely to have stronger effects over time. While the
prospects of a higher future refund should have the immediate effect of increasing legal labor
force participation, an additional income effect should enter the following year upon filing
taxes when the individual reaps the benefit of the tax credit. Both of these are likely to have
the effect of reducing recidivism.
    Using state and year variation in the availability of state EITCs, we find some evidence
that the availability of state top-ups to the federal EITC corresponds to a lower rate of
longer-term (3-year) recidivism for women. This effect is stronger for 3-year recidivism rates
than 1-year; this delay in impact, relative to the minimum wage, is unsurprising. EITC
refunds are subject to the lag of tax filing and the issuing of government refunds, while any
increase in the minimum wage stands to appear in any individual’s next paycheck. State
EITCs have no discernible effect on men, and, if anything, our results point to these policies
corresponding to increases in returns to prison for some crimes.
    The research on the EITC also constitutes a deep literature, but its connection to re-
cidivism has similarly not been considered. Prior work has shown that, in terms of labor
market participation, single mothers are more responsive to the EITC than other compara-
ble groups (Eissa and Liebman 1996; Ellwood 2000; Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001), while the
observed net effects on married and childless men are insignificant (Hoffman and Seidman
2003; Eissa and Hoynes 2004). Further, prior research has offered evidence that the EITC
may have a sufficiently strong effect of pushing single mothers into the workforce that the
additional competition for low-skilled jobs may actually increase male unemployment (Eissa
and Liebman 1996; Ellwood 2000; Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001). Blank and Gelbach (2006)
test this “crowd-out” hypothesis. While they find no significant evidence of crowd-out, any
potential effects would nonetheless be predicted to be stronger for males with a criminal
record. These earlier findings are congruent with our conclusion that EITC benefits reduce
recidivism for women, but have null, if not criminogenic, effects for men.
  4
      Authors’ calculations from the “Returning Home Study” data provided by the Urban Institute.


                                                    5
    Our findings have important implications for both labor and crime policy. Nearly half
of the $125 million budget for the Second Chance Act Prisoner Reentry Initiative was ear-
marked for released prisoner employment programs (GAO 2011). Summarizing the “flurry
of community-based employment interventions, generally involving some combination of job
readiness, job training, and job placement services” implemented between 1971 and 1994,
Visher et al. (2005) identify eight programs for individuals with criminal records that were
designed with an eye towards testable outcomes. While these programs likely have a range
of genuine benefit to their participants, none produced statistically identifiable reductions
in recidivism rates. Further, the intent of these and similar policies not withstanding, the
balance of U.S. labor policy is very much against those with criminal records.5 Given the
limited efficacy of past policies, and the political obstacles to passing legislation targeted to
support individuals with criminal records, understanding the impact of broader labor poli-
cies is critical to efforts towards reintegrating released prisoners back into the workforce and
breaking the cycle of crime and imprisonment. We find evidence that minimum wages and
wage subsidies have socially beneficial second order effects on criminal recidivism.


2       A Conceptual Framework
In this section, we outline a simple conceptual framework that models the behavior of indi-
viduals released from prison as a choice between legal and illegal activities and considers how
low-wage labor market policies such as the minimum wage interact with this decision (Becker
1968; Ehrlich 1974; Grogger 1998).6 Consider a simple model where a released prisoner can
earn wi∗ in the legal market absent a minimum wage and wicrime in the criminal market.7
The effect of a minimum wage, wmin , will depend on its size relative to wi∗ and wicrime . If we
assume that the minimum wage is both salient in the market, i.e. that wi∗ < wmin , and that,
as such, the probability of finding a job is decreasing with the minimum wage, then the net
effect of the minimum wage on criminal activity (and recidivism) depends on the relative
    5
     As of 2016, there were 6,392 separate state restrictions on employment eligibility for those with felony
records (Fredericksen and Omli 2016). Criminal records as a major barrier to employment would appear, in
many ways, to be not just an outcome, but an explicit policy goal (Pager 2003; Agan and Starr 2018).
   6
     This framework only considers the individual’s choice between illegal and legal activities. Clearly, there
are other aspects of an individual’s life that could influence the probability they return to incarceration. As
the focus of our research is on low-wage labor market policies, however, we believe this focus is relevant for
us. We acknowledge, however, that it is not the only factor influencing recidivism.
   7
     In our model we will consider a greatly simplified version of criminal wages, where the returns are
reduced to a linear value inclusive of all associated uncertainty, risk aversion, or any non-pecuniary rewards
(e.g. thrills or social signaling). The “wages” of different types of crimes will, of course, bear different
compositions of these rewards, with some more akin to a black market occupation, while others a randomly
encountered opportunistic gamble (Cook 1980). While not explicitly modeled here, we will include in our
empirical analysis a breakdown of policy effects by different types of crime committed.


                                                      6
levels of wmin , w∗ , and wcrime .8
    If wcrime < w∗ < wmin , then this individual would prefer to work in the legal labor
market regardless of the minimum wage. Under these conditions, however, increases in the
minimum wage may make it harder for them to find legal sector employment. An increase
in the minimum wage will not induce any substitution of legal labor for crime at the margin
given that the uncontrolled market wage was already sufficient to dominate the criminal
wage. This increased unemployment, we posit, will increase the probability of recidivism.
In this case the probability of recidivism will increase with the minimum wage wmin .
    If w∗ < wcrime , then this individual would prefer to “work” in the illegal labor market
in the absence of a minimum wage. However, an increase in the minimum wage could push
their potential wages high enough to dominate, such that w∗ < wcrime < wmin . Recidivism is
now tied to the minimum wage and the premium it offers relative to the wages of crime. Any
increase in unemployment due to the minimum wage is irrelevant because the uncontrolled
market wage is insufficient to dominate criminal endeavor. Then the probability of recidivism
will decrease with wmin .9
    The net effect of increasing minimum wages on recidivism is ambiguous and will depend
on the underlying distributions of market and criminal wages. Increasing minimum wages
could lead employers to reduce hiring, and released prisoners may be particularly susceptible
to this loss, leading to increased recidivism. Higher minimum wages, however, could bring
legal wages above potential “criminal” wages for some offenders, enticing them into the legal
labor market. Given some probability of finding and securing this higher paid job, this
wage effect should lead to reductions in recidivism. In the context of our simple framework,
for individuals whose market wages are below the wages of crime (wL∗ ), the wage effect
will dominate. For individuals whose market wages are above the wages of crime (wU∗ ), the
employment effect will dominate. In estimating the impact of minimum wages on recidivism,
    8
      We could, alternatively, formalize our theoretical framework as an Ehrlich-Becker model of the market
for criminal offenses where demand can be construed as the “tolerance of crime” and supply the emergent
labor response to crime’s costs and benefits (Ehrlich 1996). We will here treat demand as exogenous, focusing
instead on supply and the net payoff to criminal activity, π, where π = WC − Ψ(WL , e, Wmin ) − pF . WC
and WL are the expected wages of criminal and legitimate labor, F is the punishment if caught engaging in
criminal labor, and p is the probability of being caught. Ψ(WL , e, Wmin ) is the distribution of legitimate wages
whose shape is a function of the the expected uncontrolled market wage, WL , the “natural” employment
rate within the hypothetically uncontrolled low-skill labor market, e, and the minimum wage, Wmin . The
minimum wage can affect both a released prisoner’s probability of being employed and their expected wage
if they find a job. As such, Ψ() is not a particularly well-behaved distribution - a portion of it is equal to
zero, and from these ”zeros” there is a discontinuous jump to the legal minimum wage. In much the same
way as our the minimalist conceptual framework, any predicted   R effect of the minimum wage on the expected
payoff, π, will be ambiguous. The values of Wmin for which Ψ(WL , e, Wmin ) > WC − pF will depend on
the underlying labor market conditions and the expected wages of crime.
    9
      If w∗ < wmin < wcrime , then the individual will opt for criminal activity, regardless of the market and
minimum wages.


                                                        7
we are in effect estimating the net of these two forces.10
    This model simplifies the decision to an all-or-nothing choice between legal or criminal
activities as the individual’s source of income. The decisions predicted in our model are
akin to the “first hour” of criminal income generation in the structural model in Grogger
(1998), where individuals optimize their portfolio of legal and criminal income generating
activities. Assuming monotonically decreasing benefits (and increasing costs, such as the
probability of being apprehended) to criminal income opportunities, an individual’s market
wage serves as the reservation wage the highest criminal income opportunity must exceed
for an individual to include any amount of criminal activity in their portfolio. Absent a
minimum wage, the market wage would serve as an identical threshold for criminal activity
in our model. The predicted unemployment and wage effects of the minimum wage in our
model are qualitatively identical, and similarly ambigious, to what would be predicted within
Grogger’s model: they depend on whether the marginal return to crime is ever equal to the
marginal return of work in the legal market.11
    Considered in this simple framework, the predicted impact of the EITC appears straight-
forward. The first order wage and employment effects of a pure wage subsidy push in the
same direction—with larger subsidies leading to higher wages and higher probability of em-
ployment. The EITC, however, is not a universal subsidy program, with benefits almost
entirely accruing to custodial parents of dependent children. This differential benefit to
released prisoners stands to correspond to differential impact, particularly with regards to
gender. Disproportionate accrual to single mothers is likely to be relevant to the 41.7% of
women that entered prison as the only parent living with their child. Further to this point,
in exit interviews with released prisoners, women were found to consistently place a higher
priority on maintaining and regaining custody of children than men (Spjeldnes and Good-
kind 2009). On net, our simple model unambiguously predicts that the EITC will reduce
criminal recidivism for women. With regards to male recidivism, however, the predicted
effect of the EITC is far weaker.
  10
     Braun (2017) builds a search-theoretic model of crime and employment under a minimum wage that is
broadly compatible with our framework.
  11
     While Grogger (1998) builds a structural model of portfolios of legal and illegal earnings observed in
the NLSY 1979 data, we only observe whether an individual returns to prison and, as such, we simplify our
conceptual framework to the individual’s decision to earn her income legally or illegally.




                                                    8
3      Data
3.1     National Corrections Reporting Program
Data on prison spells were obtained from the National Corrections Reporting Program
(NCRP).12 The data were constructed using administrative data voluntarily provided by
states to the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) on prison admissions and releases from 2000-
2014. 44 states have provided data into this system at some point during this time period.
The BJS data are linked using inmate ID numbers, allowing the matching of individuals
across prison spells within a state.13
    The data include the admission and release month for each prison spell. Observed de-
mographics for each offender include age, race, Hispanic ethnicity, education (highest grade
completed), gender, and whether the individual has previously been convicted of and in-
carcerated for a felony. For each prison spell, we observe the type of facility the prisoner
was placed into, the reason why the offender entered into the custody of the correctional
facility, as well as why the prisoner was released. For each prison spell we also observe up to
3 conviction offenses, the sentence imposed for each offense, and the total sentence imposed.
Because we observe the prison admission and release date for each period of incarceration,
we can calculate the total time served for each period of incarceration. Actual time served
can differ from the sentence imposed because of early release via parole or time credited.
    The data do not include specific information on state or county of residence after in-
carceration. They do include the state that incarcerated the offender, and the state (and
county) of conviction. For the most part, recently released offenders are released into the
state and county of most recent legal residence prior to incarceration. For most of our anal-
yses we will use the state of conviction as a proxy for the state the offender was living in
after release. The most recent iteration of the data implies that upwards of 95% of offenders
are living in the state of conviction prior to incarceration and thus are most likely to be
returned there barring exceptional circumstances. In some robustness checks, we will also
use information on the county of conviction as a proxy for the county the offender lived in
after release, however we have less confidence in this as a proxy.14 For complete details and
background on this decision see Appendix B.
  12
     United States Department of Justice. Office of Justice Programs. Bureau of Justice Statistics 2016
  13
     For a description of how prison term records were created, see http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/files/
NACJD/ncrp/white-paper-computing-code.pdf.
  14
     The 2015 NCRP data include, for some offenders, the last known state and county for the offender.
Amongst those with the requisite data, 95% lived in the state of conviction prior to incarceration, however
only 70% lived in the county of conviction prior to incarceration. Since individuals are most likely to be
returned to the county of incarceration upon release, we choose not to rely on this variable for most of our
analyses.


                                                     9
    From the 2000-2014 NCRP data we drop individuals who have not yet been released,
which is 13% of the sample; who are missing gender, as this is a major component of our
analysis (0.03% of the sample); or those who were “released” from prison because of death
(0.4% of the sample). We also drop individuals who have a different state of conviction than
state that incarcerated them—these are cases where it appears the offender was sent out of
state to serve their sentence, though no reason is given why. In these cases, we are less clear
about the state the prisoners will return to (0.04% of the sample).
    The broadest exclusion of data from our analysis comes from the state of California. In
2011, California enacted the Public Safety Realignment Act (PSRA), an attempt to reduce
overcrowding in CA prisons and as a result many convicts served their time in county jail
rather than state prison post-PSRA. Given our data’s reliance on state prison records (county
jail admissions are unobserved), for the purposes of our analysis this completely changes the
definition of recidivism in CA in 2011 and after. This can be seen clearly in Figure 2 where
CA recidivism rates drop precipitously around 2011, a far outlier from other large states
or the state with the largest drop in recidivism around that time, Utah. Taking what we
believe to be the most conservative approach, we opt to entirely exclude California from our
analysis.15
    After all restrictions are imposed, including the exclusion of California, our sample in-
cludes nearly 5.8 million prison releases from 4 million unique offenders in 43 states when
1-year recidivism rates are the outcome. When 3-year recidivism rates are the outcome, the
sample includes nearly 4.8 million prison releases from 3 million individuals.
    There are two main limitations to the data for our purposes. First, the NCRP data only
link prison spells within a state, so any reoffending in a different state is not captured and
is indistinguishable from an individual who is not recommitted in the same state.16 Second,
the data only capture a return to custody in state prison, not rearrest or prosecution.
    Our sample of prisoner data is summarized in Tables 1 and 2. Table 1 gives demographic
characteristics of the sample and Table 2 shows recidivism rates. As expected, a vast majority
of our sample, 88.1% are male. Minorities make up a larger share of our sample of prisoners
than in the U.S. population (54.4% of our sample are black or Hispanic). The average
  15
     The data from California prior to 2011 are compromised as well. In 2006, California declared a “Prison
Overcrowding State of Emergency”, authorizing the involuntary transfer of thousands of prisoners to out of
state prisons. This state of emergency was not repealed until 2013, at which point 8,900 prisoners sentenced
in California were still serving their sentences in out of state prisons. https://www.gov.ca.gov/news.php?
id=4278
  16
     One condition of parole is often that one stays within a small geographic area after release. In addition,
according to data collected by the Bureau of Justice Statistics on prisoners released from prison into 30
states in 2005, 3% were arrested out of state within one year and 7% were arrested out of state within 3
years (Durose et al. 2015). So while out of state migration could clearly be an issue, we believe it will not
have large effects on our results.


                                                      10
prisoner is in their mid-thirties on release, which makes sense as our data concern prisons
and not local or county jails, and thus most people are incarcerated for a relatively serious
crime. In addition, almost 30% have a previous incarceration for a felony. In Table 2 we see
that just over 17% of offenders in our dataset are returned to prison within 1 year, and 35%
are returned within 3 years. Men recidivate at a higher rate than women (18% versus 14%
in the first year). Property and drug crimes constitute the most common returning offenses.


3.2     Minimum Wage and EITC Data
We combine the NCRP data with data on minimum wages and the availability of state EITC
top-ups. The minimum wage data are from Vaghul and Zipperer (2016), which include state
and sub-state minimum wages for the entire period of our study from May 1974 to present.17
Table 3 and Figure 1 summarize state minimum wage and minimum wage changes during
these years. The average state had 4 changes in their minimum wage during our time
period, with no state changing less than twice. Many of these changes stemmed from the
2007 amendments to the Fair Labor Standard Act which implemented federal minimum
wage increases in 2007, 2008, and 2009 ($5.85 effective July 24, 2007; $6.55 effective July
24, 2008; and $7.25 effective July 24, 2009).18 On average, states increased their minimum
wage $0.50 (about 8% of the previous minimum wage), ranging from $0.05 to $1.70. At any
given point in our window of study, as many as 31 states had minimum wages above the
federal minimum. A number of substate minimum wage changes take place in our window
of observation. These changes are mostly at the city level, which limits our opportunities for
integrating substate minimum wages into our analysis because the lowest geographic level of
identification in our data is at the county level, and our county proxy (courthouse of prison
admittance) is less reliable than our state identifier. In light of these limitations, our main
analyses focus only on state minimum wages, but county level analysis of substate minimum
wage changes is included as a supplemental robustness check.
    The state EITC data come from the Tax Policy Center.19 As of 2016, 25 states and D.C.
offer EITCs on top of the federal EITC, worth an additional 3.5-40% of the federal benefit.
These EITC state top-ups were introduced in different states at different times, and many
have expanded or contracted their EITC benefits over time, giving us both within-state and
  17
     In one specification we use the minimum wage at admission as well. We have some individuals admitted
before May 1974, to fill in pre-1974 minimum wages we uses data from David Neumark for January 1960-
April 1974 available here: http://www.economics.uci.edu/~dneumark/datasets.html. For pre-1960 we
assign the prevailing federal minimum wage at the month and year of admission.
  18
      If a state already had a minimum wage at or above these federal increases then it would not register as
having a minimum wage change, hence the number changed in those years is not 51.
  19
     Downloaded from: http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/statistics/state-eitc-based-federal-eitc



                                                     11
across-state variation in state EITC generosity and availability.
   In Figure 3, we map the overlapping presence of state minimum wages and EITC pro-
grams at the beginning (2000) and end (2014) of the window within which we are able to
observe prison release. The variation across states and over time in both the minimum wage
and the EITC allows us to employ a difference-in-differences identification strategy in our
analysis of the effect of low-wage labor market policies on individual recidivism. All mini-
mum wage changes, state EITC provision, and state EITC top-up amounts for each state in
our sample period (2000 - 2014) can be found in Appendix Table A.1.


4      Empirical Model and Estimation
To estimate the effect of low-wage labor market policies on whether a released prisoner
recidivates within a certain time period, we employ a difference-in-differences design. This
design exploits the panel nature of our data and the fact that minimum wage changes and
EITC top-ups were enacted and changed in different years and months across many states
between 2000 and 2014. Our baseline specification is:


    Recidivateist = α + β1 M Wst + β2 M Wst × F emalei + β3 EIT Cst + β4 EIT Cst × F emale
                                                           +β5 Xit + β6 Kts + γy + δs + ist
                                                                                           (1)

where Recidivateist is an indicator variable for whether an offender i, imprisoned by state s,
released in year-month t, returned to prison in the same state within a certain time period
(1 or 3 years depending on the specification). M Wst is the minimum wage in the state
and year-month into which the offender was released. EIT Cst is either the existence of a
state top-up to the EITC or the percentage amount of the state top-up in the state and
year-month into which the offender was released. Given that the EITC is mainly claimed by
single mothers, we also interact our labor market policies with gender to see whether policy
impact differs for men and women. There is a trade-off in using 1- or 3-year recidivism rates.
The longer the recidivism period, the fewer observations we can use in our analysis. 3-year
recidivism rates may more fully capture recidivism probabilities, however, as criminal cases
often take a while to wind through the court system and into the prisons. In Equation 1, we
identify the effect of the low-wage labor market policy at the time the offender was released.
For that reason, we mostly focus on recidivism within 1 year, although we also show results
for a 3 year window.


                                             12
    Xit is a vector of characteristics about the individual offender, both time invariant and
specific to the particular prison spell that ends in year-month t: race/ethnicity, gender,
highest grade completed (at entry), age at release and its square, time served for this spell
and its square, offense committed for this spell, number of counts convicted of for this spell,
prior felony incarceration indicator, prison admission type (parole violation, new offense,
etc...), and indicators for missing values for each of these variables. Kts are time-varying
state characteristics: the housing price index, the number of sworn police officers per 1000
in the population, the percent of the state legislature that are Democrats, whether drug
felons are banned from TANF benefits, and whether voting rights are restored after parole.20
These variables are meant to pick up other state policies that may interact with recidivism
or employment for offenders and macroeconomic trends in the state. In robustness checks,
we also add the county unemployment rate as an additional control, though of course this
may be directly impacted by the minimum wage. γy are year fixed effects and δs are state
fixed effects.
    Standard errors are clustered at the state level. There are 43 states in our data during
this time period, leaving us with 43 clusters. While there is some debate on the minimum
number of clusters necessary to use standard clustering techniques, 30 is often cited as a
threshold under which adjustment to standard cluster-robust standard errors are necessary
to avoid over-rejection (Cameron et al. 2008). While we are over this arbitrary threshold, it
is nevertheless sufficiently close to warrant additional caution. As such, for all coefficients,
we report cluster-robust standard errors with their respective stars to indicate statistical
significance. For the main impacts of interest, β1 (on M Wst ) and (β3 + β4 ) (the total effect
of the EITC for women), we also present p-values from the Wild-cluster bootstrap procedure
suggested by Cameron et al. (2008), which tend to be more conservative. The table notes
for Table 4 provide more details.
    Our identification of the impact of the minimum wage or the EITC compares observ-
ably similar offenders, released into the same state, but who happen to be released under
  20
     Housing price index is the all-transactions quarterly index from the Federal Housing Finance Agency.
This is the same control used in Clemens and Wither (2016) to control for time-varying macroeconomics
conditions across states without controlling for unemployment, which could be a direct result of minimum
wage and EITC policies. Sworn police officers per 1000 are from the FBI’s Law Enforcement Officers Killed
or Assaulted (LEOKA) data. State legislature data is from the National Conference of State Legislatures (for
Washington DC we use percent of the U.S. Congress that are Democrats; Nebraska’s unicameral legislature
is technically non-partisan, however one can determine the political affiliation of its members by voter regis-
tration, party endorsements, or reporting in media or by non-profits, which we did). TANF felony drug bans
come from the Urban Institute’s Welfare Rules Database. Felon disenfranchisement comes from The Sen-
tencing Project: Research and Advocacy for Reform https://www.sentencingproject.org/wp-content/
uploads/2015/12/Felony-Disenfranchisement-Laws-in-the-US.pdf and The Brennan Center for Jus-
tice https://www.brennancenter.org/criminal-disenfranchisement-laws-across-united-states.



                                                      13
different minimum wages or EITC policy regimes. The coefficients of principal interest are
identified off of the random variation in the month of release, whether that release occurred
before or after a raise in the minimum wage or EITC, and how an individual’s probability
of recidivism compares to other prisoners with similar characteristics. These policies can
obviously change after the offender is released, and this may affect their employment, wages,
and potential recidivism. To account for this we also consider the average minimum wage in
6 months and 12 months following release. In the robustness checks, we also consider several
alternative specifications to deal with potential endogeneity of minimum wage changes to
trends in employment or other macroeconomic conditions in the state. We test specifications
addressing state-specific macroeconomic time trends, closer geographic controls, exogenous
shifts caused by the federal minimum wage changes, and potential dynamic effects.


5    Results
We start by presenting the basic relationship between minimum wages or EITC top-up
percentages and the probability of recidivism as binned scatterplots, controlling only for
state and year fixed effects with a bivariate regression line fit to the plotted bins. Figure 4
is for the state minimum wages. We see a distinct downward trend: high minimum wages
appear to be associated with a reduced risk of returning to prison, and while there are
clear level differences, the slopes are almost identical for men and women. The relationship
between recidivism and state EITC top-up percentages is similarly plotted in Figure 5. Here
we see a slightly different story, there is a negative association for women, but for men
the slope of the relationship between the EITC top-up and recidivism is not so strong.
While these relationships will be explored with more rigor and controls in later regression
analysis, we see the initial story start to emerge: higher minimum wages are associated with
reduced recidivism for both men and women, and EITC top-ups are associated with reduced
recidivism for women but not for men.
    Table 4 presents our main results from Equation 1 for the minimum wage and state
EITC. All specifications include state and year fixed effects and a vector of controls for both
offender and state of release characteristics. In Columns 1 and 2, EITC is defined as a
binary variable for whether the state has a top-up available; in Columns 3 and 4 we use the
magnitude of the state top-up as a percent of the federal EITC. We show results for both
1-year and 3-year recidivism rates. The results from Column 1 show that a $1.00 increase in
the minimum wage is associated with a 0.97 percentage point decrease in the probability an
individual returns to prison within one year. The mean probability of returning to prison in
1 year is 17.3%, and the average minimum wage increase is $0.50, implying that the average

                                              14
minimum wage increase is associated with a 2.8% decrease in the probability of returning to
prison in 1 year. Consistent with the results from the binned scatter plots, we find that the
effect of the minimum wage does not differ significantly for women versus men. Results are
very similar in magnitude for 3-year recidivism rates, with a $1.00 increase in the minimum
wage reducing the probability of return to prison within 3 years by 1.53pp (implying the
average minimum wage increase decreases the probability of return to prison in 3 years by
2.25%). The main minimum wage results are statistically significant at the 5% level with
the cluster-robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Using the more conservative
wild bootstrap p-values, reported at the bottom of the table, both coefficients are, however,
significant at the 10% level.
    Columns 1 and 2 also consider the availability of a state top-up to the federal EITC.
The results imply some evidence that for women the existence of a state EITC decreases
recidivism, though this total effect is only significant for 3-year recidivism. For 3-year re-
cidivism, the results indicate that the availability of a state top-up to the federal EITC
decreases the probability a woman returns to prison in 3 years by about 3 percentage points
(11%). Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4 substitute the magnitude of the state EITC top-up into
Equation 1 instead of simply whether a state top-up exists. The results indicate that a 1pp
increase in the EITC top-up reduces 3-year recidivism by 0.2pp for women (0.6%). Within
the context of our sample (mean state top-up = 5.2%, Std. Dev. = 9.3), a one standard
deviation increase in the state EITC corresponds to a 6.6% reduction in the expected recidi-
vism rate for women. It is important to note, however, that this result is only marginally
significant with the cluster-robust standard errors, and the wild bootstrap p-value is 0.26.21


5.1     Robustness of Main Result
One concern for our identification strategy is that there are unobserved trends in recidivism
rates that are correlated with the implementation of a minimum wage that could bias our
results. We employ a variety of specifications to assess potential bias and the sensitivity of
our results. We present results here using 1-year recidivism rates as an outcome; for space,
results using 3-year recidivism rates as an outcome are in Appendix E.
    For example, if states that implement minimum wage increases are also states that are
experiencing decreases in recidivism rates, then this could explain our negative result. If
this were the case, this would imply that that future minimum wage changes would appear
to have a significant association with current recidivism rates (Meer and West 2015). In
  21
    While there is the possibility of complementarity between minimum wages and EITC policies (Neumark
and Wascher 2011), we do not observe a statistically significant interaction effect between minimum wages
and the existence of a state EITC top-up on recidivism in our analysis. Results are available on request.


                                                   15
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 we test this idea by adding in leading values of the minimum
wage 1 and 2 years in advance. We see that the coefficients on the leading values are negative,
though small and not statistically significant, and the coefficient on the current minimum
wage is qualitatively unchanged when adding in the leading minimum wages.
    Minimum wage changes could also be endogenous to state-specific trends that could also
affect recidivism, i.e. if states tend to change their minimum wages when economic conditions
are are on an up- or a downswing, this could bias our results. The potential for time varying
state or local geography-specific differential trends in economic conditions and how to control
for them is the thrust of much of the recent debate in the minimum wage and employment
literature (see, for example, Dube et al. 2010; Neumark et al. 2014; Allegretto et al. 2017;
Neumark and Wascher 2017).
    In Columns 3-5 of Table 5, as in much of the applied microeconomic literature concerned
about differential trends in unobservables across states, we add in state-specific time trends.
We consider linear trends, as well as trends with higher-order polynomials. The higher-order
polynomials follow the suggestion of Neumark et al. (2014), who note that recessionary
periods can lead to cross-state deviations in employment and labor market conditions that
could cause linear time trends to be biased, and that higher-order polynomials may pick
up this variation better.22 Columns 3-5 of Table 5 add in first- through third-order state-
specific polynomial time trends.23 With linear time trends, the coefficient is smaller and not
statistically significant. However, accounting for the potential non-linear time trends via
second and third order state-specific time trend polynomials, the coefficients are statistically
significant and imply that the average minimum wage increase is associated with about a 2%
decrease in recidivism, slightly smaller than the main results (2.8%), but still economically
significant. These coefficients are statistically significant even when using wild bootstrap
p-values to account for the potential for too few clusters. The period under study saw two
recessionary periods: one very early in the period in 2001 and the Great Recession, which
implies that non-linear trends may be necessary to pick employment and labor-market trends
appropriately.
    In Column 6 we we attempt to control for potential unobserved regional heterogeneity
by including Census-Division-by-year fixed effects, as is common in the panel difference-
in-differences literature. This specification implies that geographically close states may be
better controls as they are (potentially) hit by similar shocks. Our results with these division-
  22
      There is particular debate in the minimum wage and employment literature about the correct specifica-
tion for the state-specific time trends; as such we report several versions (Dube et al. 2010; Neumark et al.
2014; Allegretto et al. 2017; Neumark and Wascher 2017).
   23
      Adding in the interactions with female does not change the conclusion and is not presented in the interest
of space.



                                                      16
by-year fixed effects are very similar in magnitude. They are only significant at the 10% level
however, and the wild bootstrap p-value is 0.12.
    The general concerns addressed above are that the minimum wage changes we see are not
exogenous to conditions that may also be affecting recidivism. However, the federal minimum
wage changes in 2007, 2008, and 2009 are more plausibly exogenous to state-specific trends
and policies. As such, we take a nod from Clemens and Wither (2016) and focus on these
federal changes. Some states were bound by these minimum wage increases by virtue of
having minimum wages below the new federal levels and others were not (by having minimum
wages already at or above the new federal minimums).24 While our variable of interest
(individual recidivism rates) does not permit an identical triple difference design, we can
similarly treat the the binding status of federal minimum wage laws as a source of variation
in state minimum wages that are exogenous to the macroeconomic conditions, trends, and
policies in any particular state. We identify state-years that experienced minimum wage
increases caused by the federal increases and compare those to other changes via the following
specification:


         Recidivateist = α + β1 M inW agest + β2 Boundst + β3 M inW agest × Boundst
                                                                                                       (2)
                                                            +β4 Xip + β5 Kts + γy + δs + ist

Appendix D describes how we define Bound and identifies the states and years that are
bound by the federal increases. In Column 7 of Table 5 we show that states that experienced
bound and unbound minimum wage changes experienced similar decreases in recidivism. The
coefficient on the interaction term (M inW agest × Boundst ) is small and not statistically-
significant (-0.0011, cluster-robust se=0.0054). This indicates that states that experienced
plausibly exogenous increases in their minimum wages also experienced similar, if not slightly
larger, decreases in recidivism.
    Table 6 employs some additional robustness checks on our results. For our main analy-
ses, we controlled for the general macroeconomic conditions in a state via the housing price
index. A more natural control might be state unemployment rates, however this could be
directly impacted by the minimum wage. Nevertheless, in Table 6, Column 1, we add the
state unemployment rate to our main specification, and see that this does not change our
conclusions about the association of minimum wage changes with reduced recidivism. Indi-
  24
    These changes happened during the Great Recession, which also differentially affected states. While
state minimum wage increases tend to be correlated with weak economic conditions, the federally bound
states in this window, on average, were less negatively impacted by the Great Recession (Clemens and Wither
2016). They control for these differences using an index of housing market prices, a control variable which
we employ as well.


                                                    17
viduals may have different probabilities of committing a crime conditional on the minimum
wage when they committed the crime associated with their first observed incarceration. Fur-
ther, minimum wage changes may be correlated across time. This opens the possibility of
selection into who we see in prison based on initial minimum wages that we are picking
up as an effect of minimum wages at release. Instead, to test, and better control for, this
possibility, in Column 2 of Table 6 we control for the minimum wage at prison entry and
the minimum wage one year before prison entry.25 The coefficients on the minimum wages
at admission and the year before admission are small and statistically insignificant, while
the coefficients on the minimum wage and EITC at time of release remain qualitatively un-
changed. Finally, in Columns 3 and 4 of Table 6 we consider average minimum wages 6- and
12- months after release to account for the fact that the minimum wage can change after an
offender is released. We see qualitatively similar if not slightly larger coefficients when using
this alternative independent variable.
    Concerns over the potential endogeneity of minimum wages to trends or policies have
been the focus of the recent minimum wage and employment research agenda, and are
germane to our analysis as well. Our minimum wage variable demonstrates broad robustness
to a variety of specifications meant to deal with similar omitted variables that could also
be impacting recidivism. The total EITC effects for women are also broadly qualitatively
similar to our main results across these specifications. Our main results for 1-year recidivism
implied potentially negative associations between state EITCs and recidivism for women, but
were not statistically significant; for 3-year recidivism our main results showed statistically
significant negative associations, implying that the existence of a state EITC top-up was
associated with an 11% decrease in recidivism. The robustness results in Tables 5 and 6, as
well as the 3-year recidivism results in Appendix E, broadly echo this. For 3-year recidivism
rates, all the total EITC effects for women are negative, of a similar magnitude, and are
significant at the 10% level across specifications, with many significant at 5% even with the
more conservative wild bootstrap p-values.

5.1.1   Dynamic Labor Market Effects

While focusing on recidivism relieves our model of some of the difficulties of precisely measur-
ing the elasticities of labor demand, there are considerations in the minimum wage literature
that merit attention. In addressing the dynamics of low skill labor markets, Meer and West
(2015) note that the disemployment effects of minimum wage policies are less likely to show
up immediately in the form of job separations, more likely to show up as foregone growth,
  25
     Unfortunately, the data do not have the date the crime was committed. So these dates are used to
proxy the date the crime was committed.


                                                 18
and that narrow post-policy change treatment windows can obfuscate underlying disemploy-
ment effects. To address this, we include a set of one-, two-, and three-year lags of the state
minimum wages to the model specification in Table 7. When included as singular right-hand
side variables, the coefficients on the 1-, 2-, and 3-year lags are also negative, though not
statistically significant. When all three lags are include with the concurrent minimum wage,
the coefficient on the concurrent minimum wage remains negative and of a similar magni-
tude (p < 0.10), consistent with our primary analysis. While simple inclusion of lagged
minimum wage covariates does not replicate the nuance of the Meer-West model, it does
suggest that our observed dominance of wage effects over unemployment effects is unlikely
to be an artifact of unaccounted for future growth stagnation.

5.1.2    Additional County-Level Analysis

While we feel that county of conviction is a less precise proxy for county of residence post-
incarceration than state of conviction is for state of residence, it is nonetheless sufficiently
reliable to merit use in additional robustness tests that leverage this proxy (see Appendix B
for details). Results for these additional robustness test are in Appendix Tables C.1 and
C.2 showing 1- and 3-year recidivism results respectively. In Column 1 we recreate our main
results from Table 4 with only observations that are not missing county of conviction (96.4%
of the sample), which look broadly similar. In Column 2 we add in the county unemployment
rate as a way of controlling for local economic conditions at the time of release, and in Column
3 we add in county fixed effects, both showing broadly similar results.
    Between 2000 and 2014 there are 18 municipalities that have a minimum wage that is
above the state’s minimum wage.26 Using counties rather than simply states could allow us
to leverage these variations. However, this represents only 0.2% of our data, about 14,000
observations.27 And also recall that we have data at the county level, while some of these
are sub-county municipalities and thus not everyone in the county is subject to them. In
Tables C.1 and C.2 we try two different strategies for dealing with this. Column 5 drops
any jurisdiction with a substate minimum wage. In Column 6 the substate minimum wage
is assigned to everyone in the county, even if only one city within the county had this. The
resulting coefficients are unchanged from our primary specification, perhaps unsurprisingly
given how few observations these localities represent.
  26
     Data on substate minimum wages are also from Vaghul and Zipperer (2016): data only available from
2004-2015 as 2004 is the earliest substate minimum wage above a state that the authors documents. These
localities are: Albuquerque, NM; Bangor, ME; Berkeley, CA; Fayette County, KY; Jefferson county, KY;
Johnson County, IA; Las Cruces, NM; Montgomery County, MD; Portland, ME; Prince George’s County,
MD; San Francisco County, CA; San Jose, CA; Santa Fe, NM; Seatac, WA; Seattle, WA; Tacoma, WA
  27
     Note also that several of these municipalities are in CA which is not included in our results.



                                                  19
5.2    Subcategories: Returning Offense, Education, and Race
One potential mechanism for the reduction in recidivism is that increased wages lead return-
ing prisoners to commit fewer crimes associated with income generation—such as property
crimes or selling illegal drugs. Table 8 reports results by the type of crime an offender was
returned to prison for: violent, property, drug, or other crime for both 1- and 3-year recidi-
vism.28 We see here that higher minimum wages are significantly associated with decreases
in property and drug crimes, but not violent and other crimes. These results continue to
support the conclusion that the wage effects of the minimum wage dominate any employment
effects—high minimum wages do not reduce “crimes of passion” but do reduce potentially
income-generating crimes.
    The EITC results are more mixed. If anything, the EITC is associated with an in-
crease in violent and drug crimes for men. It is significantly associated with a decline in
violent crimes for women in 3-years. This has less of a direct connection to our theoretical
framework. The decrease in violent crime for women could be related to domestic violence.
Van Wormer and Bartollas (2000) suggest that the growing rate of female incarceration for
violent crimes (Spjeldnes and Goodkind 2009) is a result of domestic violence mandatory
arrest laws. Combined with prior evidence that married couples are less likely to remain
married under large increases in the EITC (Dickert-Conlin and Houser 2002), these small
violent crime effects may be an unexpected byproduct of domestic violence arrests that,
within our data, cannot be distinguished from assault and other violent offenses. The as-
sociation with increased violent and drug crimes for men could be a byproduct of the same
marriage effects, or could represent a labor market crowd-out effect from increased female
participation (Eissa and Liebman 1996; Ellwood 2000; Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001). Our
data do not contain sufficient information to tease out a mechanism behind these results.
    Given that minimum wages and EITCs affect mainly low-skill labor, we may expect these
results to be stronger for returning prisoners with less education. Table 9 reports results
from different subsamples based on the highest level of education completed by the released
prisoner, for both 1- and 3-year recidivism rates. We find that the observed reduction in
recidivism under higher minimum wages is similar across education subsamples, though the
effect is not statistically significant for those with more than a high school education (who
constitute a much smaller subsample). The negative impacts of the EITC on recidivism for
women are similarly present across education levels. This may not be surprising—returning
prisoners with higher education are still entering the labor market with limited or interrupted
work experience, and their educational credentials may not carry the same strong labor
  28
    Other crimes are primarily composed of weapons violations and DUI/DWI as well as missing offenses
and various other types of crimes.


                                                 20
market signal value.
    Finally, we consider whether our results vary by race. Table 10 shows results that are
qualitatively similar to our base results, but with some variation by race and ethnicity. The
negative impact of the minimum wage on returns to prison exists across race and ethnicity,
though is not statsitically significant at conventional levels for Hispanic released prisoners
when considering 1-year recidivism rates. The negative impact of the EITC for women when
considering 3-year recidivism rates is broadly consistent across race and ethnicity as well.
While the coefficient on M Wst ×F emalei is statistically signficant and considerably larger for
Hispanics, the cumulative effect of the EITC for female released prisoners is only statistically
significant for white female prisoners. This pattern may be simply a product of differing
sample sizes: our sample includes 380,130 white women versus only 53,340 Hispanic women.
Similar to our observation about violent crime earlier, we observe a positive relationship
between state EITC top-ups and 1-year returns to prison for black and Hispanic male released
prisoners, though the effect drops out for 3-year returns of black males.


6    Conclusion
In this paper, we exploit changes in minimum wage laws and state EITCs to estimate the
impact of these wage policies on the probability recently released prisoners return to prison.
Using records on nearly six million offenders released between 2000 to 2013, and admissions
through the end of 2014, we find that, on net, higher minimum wages decrease recidivism.
These results suggest that while increases in the minimum wage may potentially reduce labor
demand among the population of individuals with criminal records, negative employment
effects are dominated by the labor-crime substitution effects of increased wages relative to
potential criminal earnings. This observed reduction, within our theoretical framework,
implies that, on net, there are more individuals for whom their wages of crime are higher
than their uncontrolled market wage—the higher minimum wage draws them into the legal
labor market, a phenomenon determined on the supply side of the labor market.
    We find some evidence that EITC wage subsidies reduce recidivism, as well, but only
for women. In light of the uniform effects of minimum wages across gender, we believe this
gender-specificity of the EITC is a byproduct of its emphasis on subsidizing the wages of
custodial parents, an outcome analogous to the marked salience of the EITC to single mothers
(Eissa and Liebman 1996; Ellwood 2000; Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001). The exclusion of
men without children (and fathers without custody) serves as a mechanism to exclude the
bulk of men released from prison from the predicted positive (recidivism reducing) wage
and employment effects. Disaggregating the underlying employment and wage effects of the

                                              21
EITC for men and women, as well as parents and non-parents, leaving prison will require
future research and, likely, more detailed data on the familial standing of released prisoners.
    Our main results from Table 4 allow us to make some back of the envelope policy com-
parisons between the EITC and the minimum wage, at least for predicted reductions in
female recidivism rates. Our models estimate that a $0.50 increase in the minimum wage
corresponds to the same reduction in the rate of female 3-year recidivism as a 5 percentage
point increase in the state EITC top-up. While the typical minimum wage employee is both
young and engaged in part-time employment, for the sake of comparison, a full-time employee
working 2,000 hours per year would earn an additional $1,000 after a $0.50 wage increase.
In 2015, a married couple with children and yearly household income between $14,000 and
$23,750 could receive the maximum EITC benefit of $5,572, while the mean EITC recipient
household received $3,186 (Center on Budget and Policy Priorities 2016). Given that it
is awarded as a percent of the federal credit, a state top-up of 5 percentage points would
provide the average household with an additional $159 a year, up to a maximum of $279.
In other words, $159 per year in additional income via a 5 percentage point increase in a
state EITC corresponds to the same expected reduction in female 3-year recidivism as $1,000
worth of additional (full-time) income via a $0.50 increase in the minimum wage.29 Note,
however, that the EITC operates through both an increase in available income (after filing
taxes) but also as an incentive to join the legal labor market to reap these rewards. We can
do little more than speculate on the differing wage policy effects on male recidivism.
    Our analysis and results are, of course, characterized by several important limitations.
Importantly, we cannot actually link released prisoners to their labor market outcomes,
hence we can only posit that our results reflect impacts of labor market opportunities. In
particular, we are unable to connect our results to characteristics of an individual’s house-
hold, family, or social network. Minimum wages and EITCs offer the possibility for higher
earnings for a subset of a household or community members, which, even if corresponding to
a net decrease in aggregate income, could allow for greater household specialization. Such
household production effects, and associated positive externalities within a community, are
a potential mechanism operating in parallel to our simple income model that is unobservable
within our data. In addition, our inability to connect convictions to prior prison time served
in different states means that a portion of recidivating crimes are incorrectly identified as
first time incarcerations in our data. Finally, a limitation of growing importance is the 2000
to 2014 window of our data. Our highest observed minimum wage is $9.50. In recent years,
  29
     This, of course, does not imply that the EITC is necessarily the more efficient policy. The deadweight
losses of the two policies are beyond the scope of this analysis. Rather, it implies that given a fixed household
income policy target, the comparable EITC increase corresponds to a larger expected decrease in female
recidivism.


                                                       22
a number of states and localities have adopted far higher minimum wages, several with the
ambition of moving to $15 an hour. It is difficult to project from our results what the net
effect of such policies will be.
     The balance of U.S. labor policy is very much against those with criminal records, with
little reason to believe reducing their labor market opportunities will lead to anything other
than greater criminal activity (Pager 2003; Agan and Starr 2018). As of 2016, there were
6,392 separate state restrictions on employment eligibility for those with felony records, led
by Louisiana’s 389 and no state carrying fewer than 41 (Fredericksen and Omli 2016). Our
results raise the possibility of significant second-order welfare benefits of broad wage policies.
The minimum wage may serve as something of an efficiency wage that, while paying more
than the market estimate of released prisoners’ marginal products, provides a public good
in the form of reduced criminal activity. Similarly, the EITC can serve to push wages above
those available from criminal activity, increasing the opportunity cost of crime without the
potential disemployment effects associated with minimum wages.




                                               23
References
Agan, A. Y. and S. B. Starr (2018). Ban the box, criminal records, and racial discrimination:
  A field experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (1), 191–235.

Allegretto, S., A. Dube, M. Reich, and B. Zipperer (2017). Credible research designs for
  minimum wage studies. ILR Review 70, 559–592.

Allegretto, S. A., A. Dube, and M. Reich (2011). Do minimum wages really reduce teen
  employment? Accounting for heterogeneity and selectivity in state panel data. ILR Re-
  view 50 (2), 205–240.

Autor, D., A. Manning, and C. L. Smith (2016). The contribution of the minimum wage
 to us wage inequality over three decades: A reassessment. American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics 8 (1), 58–99.

Beauchamp, A. and S. Chan (2014). The minimum wage and crime. The BE Journal of
  Economic Analysis & Policy 14 (3), 1213–1235.

Becker, G. S. (1968). Crime and punishment: An economic approach. The Journal of
  Political Economy 76 (2), 169–217.

Blank, R., J. Gelbach, and G. R Ford (2006). Are less skilled women crowding out labor
  market participation among less skilled men? In R. B. Macy (Ed.), Black Males Left
  Behind. Urban Institute Press.

Braun, C. (2017). Crime and the minimum wage. Working paper, UCSB.

Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2008). Bootstrap-based improvements for
  inference with clustered errors. The Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (3), 414–427.

Card, D. and A. B. Krueger (1994). Minimum wages and employment: A case study of the
  fast-food industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania. American Economic Review 84 (4),
  772–793.

Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (2016). The Earned Income Tax Credit.

Chaplin, D. D., M. D. Turner, and A. D. Paper (2003). Minimum wages and school enroll-
 ment of teenagers: a look at the 1990s. Economics of Education Review 22 (1), 11–21.

Clemens, J., L. Kahn, and J. Meer (2018). The minimum wage, fringe benefits, and worker
  welfare. Working Paper 24635, National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                             24
Clemens, J. and M. Wither (2016). The minimum wage and the great recession: Evidence of
  effects on the employment and income trajectories of low-skilled workers. Working Paper
  20724, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cook, P. J. (1980). Research in criminal deterrence: Laying the groundwork for the second
  decade. Crime and justice 2, 211–268.

Deere, D., K. M. Murphy, and F. Welch (1995). Employment and the 1990-1991 minimum-
  wage hike. The American Economic Review 85 (2), 232–237.

Dickert-Conlin, S. and S. Houser (2002). EITC and marriage. National Tax Journal 55,
  25–40.

DiNardo, J., N. M. Fortin, and T. Lemieux (1996). Labor market institutions and the
  distribution of wages, 1973-1992: A semiparametric approach. Econometrica 64 (5), 1001–
  1044.

Dube, A., T. W. Lester, and M. Reich (2010). Minimum wage effects across state borders:
 Estimates using contiguous counties. The Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (4), 945–
 964.

Dube, A. and B. Zipperer (2015). Pooling multiple case studies using synthetic controls: An
 application to minimum wage policies. IZA Discussion Paper 8944, IZA.

Durose, M. R., H. N. Sniyder, and A. D. Cooper (September 2015). Multistate criminal
 history patterns of prisoners released in 30 states. Report NCJ 248942, Office of Justice
 Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics.

Ehrlich, I. (1974). Participation in illegitimate activities: An economic analysis. In G. S.
  Becker and W. M. Landes (Eds.), Essays in the Economics of Crime and Punishment, pp.
  68–134. NBER.

Ehrlich, I. (1996). Crime, punishment, and the market for offenses. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 10 (1), 43–67.

Eissa, N. and H. W. Hoynes (2004). Taxes and the labor market participation of married
  couples: the earned income tax credit. Journal of Public Economics 88 (9), 1931–1958.

Eissa, N. and J. B. Liebman (1996). Labor supply response to the earned income tax credit.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2), 605–637.



                                            25
Ellwood, D. T. (2000). The impact of the earned income tax credit and social policy reforms
  on work, marriage, and living arrangements. National Tax Journal 53, 1063–1105.

Fredericksen, A. and D. Omli (2016). Jobs after jail: Ending the prison to poverty pipeline.
  Report, Alliance for a Just Society.

Galbiati, R., A. Ouss, and A. Philippe (2017). Jobs, news, and re-offending after incarcera-
 tion. Journal article.

GAO (2011). Multiple employment and training programs. Washington, DC: US. Govern-
 ment Printing Office.

Glaze, L. E. (2008). Parents in prison and their minor children. Technical Report NCJ
  222984, Bureau of Justice Statistics.

Gorry, A. (2013). Minimum wages and youth unemployment. European Economic Review 64,
 57–75.

Grogger, J. (1998). Market wages and youth crime. Journal of Labor Economics 16 (4),
  756–791.

Hashimoto, M. (1987). The minimum wage law and youth crimes: Time-series evidence.
  The Journal of Law & Econonomics 30, 443.

Hoffman, S. D. and L. S. Seidman (2003). Helping working families: The earned income tax
  credit. WE Upjohn Institute.

Holzer, H. J., S. Raphael, and M. A. Stoll (2006). Perceived criminality, criminal back-
  ground checks, and the racial hiring practices of employers. The Journal of Law & Eco-
  nomics 49 (2), 451–480.

Jardim, E., M. C. Long, R. Plotnick, E. van Inwegen, J. Vigdor, and H. Wething (2018). Min-
  imum wage increases, wages, and low-wage employment: Evidence from seattle. Working
  Paper 23532, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lee, D. S. (1999). Wage inequality in the united states during the 1980s: Rising dispersion
  or falling minimum wage? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (3), 977–1023.

Leigh, A. (2010). Who benefits from the earned income tax credit? Incidence among re-
  cipients, coworkers and firms. The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 10 (1),
  1–43.


                                            26
Levitt, S. D. and S. A. Venkatesh (2000). An economic analysis of a drug-selling gang’s
  finances. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (3), 755–789.

Liu, S., T. J. Hyclak, and K. Regmi (2016). Impact of the minimum wage on youth labor
  markets. Labour 30 (1), 18–37.

Luca, D. L. and M. Luca (2017). Survival of the fittest: the impact of the minimum wage
  on firm exit. Working Paper 17-088, Harvard Business School NOM Unit.

McCarthy, B. and J. Hagan (2001). When crime pays: Capital, competence, and criminal
 success. Social forces 79 (3), 1035–1060.

Meer, J. and J. West (2015). Effects of the minimum wage on employment dynamics. Journal
 of Human Resources 51, 500–522.

Meyer, B. D. and D. T. Rosenbaum (2001). Welfare, the earned income tax credit, and the
 labor supply of single mothers. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (3), 1063–1114.

Muravyev, A. and A. Oshchepkov (2016). The effect of doubling the minimum wage on
 employment: evidence from russia. IZA Journal of Labor & Development 5 (1), 6.

Neumark, D. (2017). The employment effects of minimum wages: Some questions we need
  to answer. Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Neumark, D., J. I. Salas, and W. Wascher (2014). Revisiting the minimum wage-employment
  debate: Throwing out the baby with the bathwater? ILR Review 67 (3), 608–648.

Neumark, D. and W. Wascher (1995). Minimum wage effects on employment and school
  enrollment. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 13 (2), 199–206.

Neumark, D. and W. Wascher (2003). Minimum wages and skill acquisition: another look
  at schooling effects. Economics of Education Review 22 (1), 1–10.

Neumark, D. and W. Wascher (2011). Does a higher minimum wage enhance the effectiveness
  of the earned income tax credit? Industrial and Labor Relations Review 64 (4), 712–746.

Neumark, D. and W. Wascher (2017). Reply to “credible research designs for minimum wage
  studies”. ILR Review 70 (3), 593–609.

Nichols, A. and J. Rothstein (2016). The earned income tax credit. Economics of Means-
  Tested Transfer Programs in the United States 1, 137.



                                           27
Orrenius, P. M. and M. Zavodny (2003). The effect of minimum wages on immigrants’
  employment and earnings. American Journal of Sociology 108 (5), 937–975.

Pager, D. (2003). The mark of a criminal record. American Journal of Sociology 108 (5),
  937–975.

Pager, D. (2008). Marked: Race, crime, and finding work in an era of mass incarceration.
  University of Chicago Press.

Powell, D. (2017). Synthetic control estimation beyond case studies: Does the minimum
  wage reduce employment? Working Paper WR-1142, RAND.

Raphael, S. and D. F. Weiman (2007). The impact of local labor-market conditions on
  the likelihood that parolees are returned to custody. In S. D. Bushway, M. Stoll, and
  D. Weiman (Eds.), Barriers to Reentry? The Labor Market for Released Prisoners in
  Post-Industrial America. Russel Sage Foundation.

Rothstein, J. (2010). Is the eitc as good as an nit? conditional cash transfers and tax
  incidence. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (1), 177–208.

Schnepel, K. T. (2018). Good jobs and recidivism. The Economic Journal 128, 447–469.

Slichter, D. et al. (2016). The employment effects of the minimum wage: A selection ra-
   tio approach to measuring treatment effects. Unpublished paper. Accessed at http://bit.
   ly/1kLgpGT .

Spjeldnes, S. and S. Goodkind (2009). Gender differences and offender reentry: A review of
  the literature. Journal of Offender Rehabilitation 48 (4), 314–335.

Uggen, C. and M. Thompson (2003). The socioeconomic determinants of ill-gotten gains:
  Within-person changes in drug use and illegal earnings. American Journal of Sociol-
  ogy 109 (1), 146–185.

United States Department of Justice. Office of Justice Programs. Bureau of Justice Statistics
 (2016). National corrections reporting program, 2000-2014. http://dx.doi.org/10.
 3886/ICPSR36373.v1.

Vaghul, K. and B. Zipperer (2016). Historical state and sub-state minimum wage data.
  Technical Report 2016-09, Washington Center for Equitable Growth.

Van Wormer, K. S. and C. Bartollas (2000). Women and the criminal justice system. Allyn
  and Bacon Boston.

                                             28
Viscusi, W. K. (1986). The risks and rewards of criminal activity: a comprehensive test of
  criminal deterrence. Journal of Labor Economics 4 (3, Part 1), 317–340.

Visher, C. A., S. Debus, and J. Yahner (2008). Employment after prison: A longitudinal
  study of releases in three states. Urban Institute, Justice Policy Center.

Visher, C. A., L. Winterfield, and M. B. Coggeshall (2005). Ex-offender employment pro-
  grams and recidivism: A meta-analysis. Journal of Experimental Criminology 1 (3), 295–
  316.

Waldfogel, J. (1994). Does conviction have a persistent effect on income and employment?
 International Review of Law and Economics 14 (1), 103–119.

Yang, C. S. (2017). Local labor markets and criminal recidivism. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 147, 16–29.




                                           29
                                                       Figure 1: Number of States Changing Minimum Wage by Year
                                                  50
           Number of States Changing Minimum Wage
              10        20      030        40

                                                        00

                                                              01

                                                                    02

                                                                          03

                                                                                04

                                                                                      05

                                                                                            06

                                                                                                  07

                                                                                                        08

                                                                                                              09

                                                                                                                    10

                                                                                                                          11

                                                                                                                                12

                                                                                                                                      13

                                                                                                                                            14
                                                                                                                         20
                                                       20

                                                             20

                                                                   20

                                                                         20

                                                                               20

                                                                                     20

                                                                                           20

                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                   20



                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                           20




Note: A 2007 amendment enacted federal minimum changes in 2007, 2008, and 2009 ($5.85 effective July
24, 2007; $6.55 effective July 24, 2008; and $7.25 effective July 24, 2009). If a state already had a minimum
wage at or above these federal increases then it would not register as having a minimum wage change, hence
the number changed in those years is not 51.




                                                                                                 30
                       Figure 2: 1 Year Recidivism Rates for CA versus Other States
          .5      .4
1 Year Recid Rate
    .2     .3
          .1
          0




                       2000                    2005                   2010            2013
                                                        Year

                                         California                   New York
                                         Illinois                     Utah
                                         Average of All Not CA




                                                      31
Figure 3: States with Minimum Wages Above Federal and EITC top-ups in January 2000
and January 2014


                       2000                                               2014




                                   State MW and EITC > Federal
                                   State EITC > Federal
                                   State MW > Federal
                                   No State MW or EITC
                                   Out of Sample


Note: This map reports state Minimum Wage and EITC programs at the beginning and end of our sample.
States not included in our sample are reported as “out of sample”.




                                                32
                                 Figure 4: Correlation between Minimum Wage and Recidivism
                .4         .35
       Recidivate in 3 Year
    .25         .3
                .2




                                  5.5                   6                    6.5                     7
                                                            Minimum Wage

                                                        Males      Females



Note: To construct the binned scatter plots we plot the mean offender probability of recidivism within
3-years of release (y-axis) over the minimum wage (x-axis) for each of the 442 state-year combinations in
the data, demeaning for state and year fixed effects. The observed state-year residual rates of recidivism are
divided into fifty equal-sized bins and plotted over the mean minimum wage for each bin. Fifty bins were
chosen for symmetry with the subsequent plot of EITC state topups (Figure 5). The figure is qualitatively
identical plotted with twenty bins. The line shows the best linear fit.




                                                              33
                            Figure 5: Correlation between State EITC Top-Ups and Recidivism
              .4
    Recidivate in 3 Years
      .3      .25    .35




                            0                     5                         10                       15
                                                      EITC State Top-up %

                                                       Males     Females



Note: To construct the binned scatter plots we plot the mean offender probability of recidivism within
3-years of release (y-axis) over the state EITC top-up percent (x-axis), for the 442 state-year combinations
in the data, demeaning for state and year fixed effects. The observed state-year residual rates of recidivism
are divided into fifty equal-sized bins and plotted over the mean EITC from each bin. Fifty bins were chosen
to so that the states without a state top-up (i.e. zeros) were not over-represented as bins. The figure is
qualitatively identical plotted with twenty bins, but far sparser. The line shows the best linear fit.




                                                           34
                    Table 1: Summary Statistics: Characteristics of Sample

                                            All       Recidivate 1 Year       Recidivate 3 Years
       Male                                 0.882             0.903                  0.905
       White (Not Hisp)                     0.427            0.415                   0.402
       Black (Not Hisp)                     0.425            0.438                   0.464
       Hispanic                             0.120             0.109                  0.103
       Less than HS Degree                 0.388              0.401                  0.421
       HS Degree                           0.315              0.325                  0.312
       College Degree                      0.007              0.005                  0.005
       Prior Felony Incarceration           0.290             0.334                  0.330
       Age at Release                      35.063            33.642                 33.507
       Time Served (Days)                 655.543           485.335                 540.696
       Prior Off. - Violent                 0.216            0.192                   0.189
       Prior Off. - Property               0.289              0.341                  0.334
       Prio Off. - Drug                     0.294             0.273                  0.293
       Min Wage                            6.405              6.313                  6.093
       State EITC                           0.357            0.393                   0.374
       State EITC Perc                     5.229              5.962                  5.532
       Observations                       5786062           999321                  1645055

Note: “Recidivate 1 Year” indicates those released prisoners who returned to prison within 1 year of their
release (analogous for “Recidivate 3 Year”). Violent, Property, Drug are indicators for the offense for which
the offender initially went to prison. The final 3 rows represent the average value of those policy variables
for the state and month in which the offender was released. State EITC is a dummy for whether the State
had it’s own EITC, and thus that row represents a proportion; State EITC Perc is the average percent of
the federal EITC that the top-up represents.




                                                     35
                        Table 2: Summary Statistics: Recidivism Rates

                                                     (1)                    (2)
                                              Recidivate 1 Year      Recidivate 3 Years
             Overall                                 0.173                   0.346
             Men                                     0.177                   0.355
             Women                                   0.142                   0.284
             Black (Not Hisp)                        0.178                   0.370
             White (Not Hisp)                        0.168                   0.331
             Hispanic                                0.156                   0.303
             Less Than HS                            0.179                   0.363
             HS                                      0.178                   0.349
             More Than HS                            0.148                   0.299
             Returning Off. - Violent                0.032                   0.062
             Returning Off. - Property               0.057                   0.113
             Returning Off. - Drug                   0.047                   0.103
             Observations                          5786062                 4749284

Note:“Recidivate 1 Year” indicates those released prisoners who returned to prison within 1 year of their
release (analogous for “Recidivate 3 Year”). Column 2 has fewer observations to allow everyone to have 3
years of post-release data, where as Column 1 only requires 1 year of post-release data.




Table 3: Summary Statistics on Minimum Wages and EITCs by State-Year-Month 2000-2014



                                                     mean       sd     min    max
                   Minimum Wage                         6.43    1.10 5.15 9.50
                   Number of MW Changes                 4.73    2.54 2.00 13.00
                   Size of MW Change                    0.51    0.33 0.04 1.80
                   Size of MW Change (Perc)             0.08    0.06 0.01 0.35
                   Has State EITC                       0.39    0.49 0.00 1.00
                   State EITC Perc                      6.39   10.22 0.00 40.00

Note: Each observation is a state-year-month, hence there are 9180 observations (51 states including DC x
15 years x 12 months). A change in the state minimum wage could come from a state-level law or a federal
minimum wage change. Minimum wages are measured in real 2011 dollars. Note: 17 States had no changes
other than the federal minimum wage increases. State EITC Perc is the percent of the federal EITC that
the State EITC represents.




                                                   36
         Table 4: Minimum Wage and State EITC Availability on Recidivism Rates

                                            Any State EITC              State EITC Percent
                                            (1)              (2)          (3)            (4)
                                          1 year           3 year       1 year         3 year
            Min Wage                    -0.0097** -0.0153***          -0.0096**      -0.0152***
                                         (0.0042)  (0.0048)            (0.0042)       (0.0048)
            Min Wage x Female             0.0022         0.0029         0.0020         0.0026
                                         (0.0024)       (0.0038)       (0.0025)       (0.0038)
            State EITC                   0.0100*         0.0003         0.0009         -0.0002
                                         (0.0059)       (0.0070)       (0.0007)       (0.0008)
            State EITC x Female          -0.0225*      -0.0316*** -0.0009**          -0.0015***
                                         (0.0115)       (0.0105)   (0.0004)           (0.0005)
            Min Wage Coef:
            wild bootstrap p               0.070           0.010         0.052          0.018

            Female EITC Effect:
            Total                         -0.0125          -0.0313      0.0000         -0.0017
            cluster-robust p               0.284            0.014        0.973          0.065
            wild bootstrap p               0.345            0.044        0.978          0.263

            Mean Recid Rate:
            All                            0.173           0.346         0.173          0.346
            Male                           0.177           0.355         0.177          0.355
            Female                         0.142           0.284         0.142          0.284

            Observations                 5786062        4749284        5786062        4749284

Note: The dependent variable is return to prison in the same state within 1 or 3 years of release (indicated
in the column heading). Minimum wage is measured in dollars, State EITC is an indicator for the existence
of a state top-up in Columns 1 and 2 and is the percent of the federal EITC available to those in that state
in Columns 3 and 4, measured in percentage points; all are measured in the state and month the offender
was released. A female indicator is included in all regressions but not shown for space. All specifications
include state- and year-fixed effects, as well as the individual and time-varying state level controls outlined
in Section 4. Total Female EITC Effect=β3 (on EITC) + β4 (on EITC × Female) is the total impact of the
EITC for women. Mean recidivism rates are the mean of the dependent variable for the respective column.
Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in parentheses (43 clusters). p-values from
1000 wild-cluster bootstrap iterations are shown for the main minimum wage coefficient and the total Female
EITC effect, as suggested by Cameron et al. (2008) in cases with a small number of clusters, typically ≤ 30
(our analysis is near but not below this threshold).
***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10 (based on cluster-robust standard errors)




                                                      37
                        Table 5: Trend Analysis - 1 Year Recidivism Rates

                                                      State-Specific Time Trend Division X Binding
                               Leading MWs                   Polynomials         Year FE Changes
                                (1)         (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
                               t+1         t+2       Linear        2nd          3rd
Min Wage                   -0.0085** -0.0093** -0.0044 -0.0069** -0.0064** -0.0091* -0.0096**
                            (0.0040) (0.0040) (0.0038) (0.0029) (0.0028) (0.0046) (0.0047)
Min Wage x Female            0.0022   0.0023 0.0022 0.0022       0.0023                    0.0026
                            (0.0024) (0.0024) (0.0024) (0.0024) (0.0024)                  (0.0024)
State EITC                   0.0099   0.0096 0.0009 0.0065       -0.0088                  0.0103**
                            (0.0060) (0.0061) (0.0057) (0.0052) (0.0085)                  (0.0049)
State EITC x Female -0.0225* -0.0226* -0.0234* -0.0232* -0.0233*                          -0.0227*
                    (0.0115) (0.0115) (0.0117) (0.0116) (0.0116)                          (0.0116)
Min Wage Lead                -0.0023 -0.0045
                            (0.0062) (0.0054)
Bound MW                                                                                                0.0048
                                                                                                       (0.0342)
Min Wage X Bound                                                                                        -0.0011
                                                                                                       (0.0054)
Min Wage Coef:
wild bootstrap p              0.063       0.041       0.300       0.026       0.031         0.118        0.068

Female EITC Effect:
Total                        -0.0126     -0.0129     -0.0225     -0.0167     -0.0321       -0.0124
cluster-robust p              0.282       0.275       0.095       0.235       0.058         0.270
wild bootstrap p              0.359       0.382       0.126       0.335       0.114         0.378

Observations                5786062 5786062 5786062 5786062 5786062                       5786062      5786062

Note: The dependent variable is return to prison in the same state within 1-year of release. Minimum wage
is measured in dollars. State EITC is an indicator for the existence of a state top-up. A female indicator is
included in all regressions but not shown for space. All specifications include state- and year-fixed effects,
as well as the individual and time-varying state level controls outlined in Section 4. Total Female EITC
Effect=β3 (on EITC) + β4 (on EITC × Female) is the total impact of the EITC for women. For baseline
means, see Table 4. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in parentheses (43 clusters).
p-values from 1000 wild-cluster bootstrap iterations are shown for the main minimum wage coefficient and
the total Female EITC effect, as suggested by Cameron et al. (2008) in cases with a small number of clusters,
typically ≤ 30 (our analysis is near but not below this threshold). Results are based off of Table 4 Column
1, with additions as indicated in the column headers. Bound MW is an indicator for a state-year that was
bound by one of the 3 federal changes in 2007, 2008, or 2009 - that is had a state minimum wage below the
new federal level at the beginning of the year. Results with 3-year recidivism as dependent variable can be
found in Appendix E Table E.1.
***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10 (based on cluster-robust standard errors)

                                                      38
         Table 6: Robustness - Unemployment Rate and Substate Minimum Wages

                                             (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)
                                            State          MW at      Avg MW         Avg MW
                                           Unemp           Admit      6 Months      12 Months
            Min Wage                     -0.0109**     -0.0088**      -0.0123**      -0.0121*
                                          (0.0044)      (0.0040)       (0.0054)      (0.0063)
            Min Wage x Female              0.0023        0.0023        0.0020         0.0017
                                          (0.0024)      (0.0025)      (0.0025)       (0.0025)
            State EITC                     0.0089       0.0101*       0.0100*         0.0098
                                          (0.0054)      (0.0059)      (0.0059)       (0.0061)
            State EITC x Female           -0.0225*      -0.0225*      -0.0225*       -0.0225*
                                          (0.0115)      (0.0115)      (0.0115)       (0.0115)
            State Unemp Rate              0.0035**
                                          (0.0016)
            MW Admit                                     -0.0005
                                                        (0.0021)
            MW 1 Yr Bef Admit                            -0.0016
                                                        (0.0023)
            Min Wage Coef:
            wild bootstrap p                0.038          0.075        0.064          0.125

            Female EITC Effect:
            Total                          -0.0137         -0.0125     -0.0125        -0.0126
            cluster-robust p                0.237           0.287       0.283          0.283
            wild bootstrap p                0.311           0.329       0.385          0.363

            Observations                  5786062       5786036        5786062       5786062

Note: The dependent variable is return to prison in the same state within 1-year of release. Minimum wage
is measured in dollars. State EITC is an indicator for the existence of a state top-up. A female indicator is
included in all regressions but not shown for space. All specifications include state- and year-fixed effects,
as well as the individual and time-varying state level controls outlined in Section 4. Total Female EITC
Effect=β3 (on EITC) + β4 (on EITC × Female) is the total impact of the EITC for women. For baseline
means, see Table 4. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in parentheses (43 clusters).
p-values from 1000 wild-cluster bootstrap iterations are shown for the main minimum wage coefficient and
the total Female EITC effect, as suggested by Cameron et al. (2008) in cases with a small number of clusters,
typically ≤ 30 (our analysis is near but not below this threshold). Results are based off of Table 4 Column 1,
with additions as indicated in the column headers. MW at Admit includes controls for the minimum wage
in the state-year of admission or 1-year before. Columns 3-4 use the average minimum wage 6- or 12-months
after release, respectively, as the main independent variable. Results with 3-year recidivism as dependent
variable can be found in Appendix E Table E.2.
***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10 (based on cluster-robust standard errors)



                                                      39
                  Table 7: Lagged Minimum Wages - 1 Year Recidivism Rates

                                       (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)
                                                                                          0,
                                        -1             -2              -3         (incl t= -1,-2,-3)
        Min Wage at t=               -0.0067         -0.0050        -0.0025            -0.0088*
                                    (0.0047)        (0.0045)       (0.0049)            (0.0046)
        Min Wage x Female            0.0024          0.0037         0.0040              -0.0042
                                    (0.0024)        (0.0026)       (0.0027)            (0.0043)
        Female                     -0.0494***     -0.0564***      -0.0572***         -0.0517***
                                    (0.0141)       (0.0153)        (0.0155)           (0.0164)
        Min Wage Coef:
        wild bootstrap p              0.287          0.406           0.726              0.109

        Observations                5786062         5786062        5786062             5786062

Note: The dependent variable is return to prison in the same state within 1-year of release. This table
estimates the impact of lagged minimum wages on probability of returning to p in an effort to identify po-
tential disemployment effects through slower economic growth. Columns 1-3 use 1-, 2-, and 3-year lags of the
minimum wage respectively as the main independent variable of interest. Column (4) includes contempora-
neous minimum wage at release, as in previous specifications, and all 3 lags. All specifications include state-
and year-fixed effects, as well as the individual and time-varying state level controls outlined in Section 4.
Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in parentheses (43 clusters). p-values from
1000 wild-cluster bootstrap iterations are shown for the main minimum wage coefficients, as suggested by
Cameron et al. (2008) for analysis of a small number of clusters, typically ≤ 30 (our analysis is near, but
never below this threshold).
***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10 (based on cluster-robust standard errors)




                                                      40
                              Table 8: Minimum Wage and State EITCs on Recidivism: by Return Crime Type

                                                            1 Year                                                   3 Year
                                        (1)           (2)              (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)              (7)          (8)
                                      Violent       Property          Drug        Other        Violent       Property          Drug         Other
         Min Wage                      -0.0007     -0.0051***      -0.0033**      -0.0007      -0.0013      -0.0064***      -0.0056**       -0.0020
                                      (0.0011)      (0.0012)        (0.0016)     (0.0014)     (0.0016)       (0.0017)        (0.0021)      (0.0018)
         Min Wage x Female            0.0018*        0.0006         0.0009        -0.0011     0.0039***        -0.0008        0.0008        -0.0010
                                      (0.0010)      (0.0006)       (0.0009)      (0.0016)      (0.0014)       (0.0015)       (0.0012)      (0.0025)
         State EITC                   0.0040**       0.0025       0.0064*** -0.0028            0.0008          0.0006       0.0076***     -0.0088**
                                      (0.0018)      (0.0037)       (0.0018) (0.0021)          (0.0021)        (0.0052)       (0.0025)      (0.0043)
         State EITC x Female         -0.0080**       -0.0033        -0.0087       -0.0025    -0.0124***        -0.0012      -0.0142**       -0.0038
                                      (0.0034)      (0.0035)       (0.0055)      (0.0042)     (0.0044)        (0.0034)       (0.0065)      (0.0065)
         Min Wage Coef:
         wild bootstrap p               0.538         0.001          0.093        0.700         0.476          0.003          0.039         0.312
41




         Female EITC Effect:
         Total                        -0.0041        -0.0008         -0.0024     -0.0053       -0.0116        -0.0006         -0.0065      -0.0126
         cluster-robust p              0.276          0.879           0.597       0.203         0.016          0.922           0.233        0.096
         wild bootstrap p              0.327          0.904           0.821       0.283         0.048          0.935           0.338        0.194

         Mean Recid Rate:
         All                            0.032         0.057          0.047        0.036         0.062          0.113          0.103         0.069
         Male                           0.034         0.058          0.047        0.037         0.067          0.114          0.103         0.071
         Female                         0.013         0.051          0.047        0.031         0.025          0.105          0.098         0.055

         Observations                 5786062        5786062       5786062       5786062       4749284        4749284        4749284       4749284

     Note: The dependent variable is return to prison for a certain crime type within 1- or 3-years of release (as indicated in column headers). Minimum
     wage is measured in dollars. State EITC is an indicator for the existence of a state top-up. A female indicator is included in all regressions but not
     shown for space. All specifications include state- and year-fixed effects, as well as the individual and time-varying state level controls outlined in
     Section 4. Total Female EITC Effect=β3 (on EITC) + β4 (on EITC × Female) is the total impact of the EITC for women. Mean recidivism rates
     are the mean of the dependent variable for the respective column. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in parentheses (43
     clusters). p-values from 1000 wild-cluster bootstrap iterations are shown for the main minimum wage coefficient and the total Female EITC effect, as
     suggested by Cameron et al. (2008) in cases with a small number of clusters, typically ≤ 30 (our analysis is near but not below this threshold).
     ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10 (based on cluster-robust standard errors)
                                    Table 9: Minimum Wage and State EITCs on Recidivism: by Education

                                                                    1 Year                                      3 Year
                                                       (1)             (2)          (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)
                                                      < HS             HS          > HS           < HS             HS           > HS
                       Min Wage                    -0.0154***      -0.0107**       -0.0116     -0.0212***     -0.0177***        -0.0149
                                                    (0.0051)        (0.0052)      (0.0081)      (0.0058)       (0.0062)        (0.0091)
                       Min Wage x Female              0.0011        0.0035*      0.0076**        0.0001         0.0058*         0.0050
                                                     (0.0020)       (0.0018)     (0.0032)       (0.0042)        (0.0032)       (0.0034)
                       State EITC                    0.0105*         0.0066        0.0088        -0.0006         -0.0026        -0.0005
                                                     (0.0053)       (0.0066)      (0.0079)      (0.0056)        (0.0084)       (0.0060)
                       State EITC x Female            -0.0304       -0.0226*     -0.0326**      -0.0361**     -0.0347***      -0.0345**
                                                     (0.0181)       (0.0124)      (0.0148)       (0.0150)      (0.0121)        (0.0133)
                       Min Wage Coef:
                       wild bootstrap p                0.028         0.114         0.301          0.008           0.035         0.223
42




                       Female EITC Effect:
                       Total                         -0.0199        -0.0160       -0.0238        -0.0367         -0.0373       -0.0350
                       cluster-robust p               0.227          0.248         0.158          0.021           0.020         0.013
                       wild bootstrap p               0.442          0.291         0.298          0.078           0.057         0.043

                       Mean Recid Rate:
                       All                             0.179         0.178         0.148          0.363           0.349         0.299
                       Male                            0.182         0.183         0.154          0.370           0.358         0.309
                       Female                          0.151         0.137         0.115          0.303           0.275         0.241

                       Observations                  2245904        1824652       317609         1907947        1472633        258196

     Note: The dependent variable is return to prison in the same state within 1 or 3 years of release by education level at prison entry (indicated in the
     column heading). Minimum wage is measured in dollars. State EITC is an indicator for the existence of a state top-up in Columns 1 and 2 and is
     the percent of the federal EITC available to those in that state in Columns 3 and 4 (measured in percentage points); all are measured in the state
     and month the offender was released. A female indicator is included in all regressions but not shown for space. All specifications include state- and
     year-fixed effects, as well as the individual and time-varying state level controls outlined in Section 4. Total Female EITC Effect=β3 (on EITC) +
     β4 (on EITC × Female) is the total impact of the EITC for women. Mean recidivism rates are the mean of the dependent variable for the respective
     column. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in parentheses (43 clusters). p-values from 1000 wild-cluster bootstrap iterations
     are shown for the main minimum wage coefficient and the total Female EITC effect, as suggested by Cameron et al. (2008) in cases with a small
     number of clusters, typically ≤ 30 (our analysis is near but not below this threshold).
     ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10 (based on cluster-robust standard errors)
                                 Table 10: Minimum Wage and State EITCs on Recidivism: by Race/Ethnicity

                                                                      1 Year                                       3 Year
                                                         (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
                                                        Black        White        Hispanic         Black          White         Hispanic
                        Min Wage                     -0.0125**      -0.0087*        -0.0053      -0.0155**      -0.0127**        -0.0132*
                                                      (0.0056)      (0.0043)       (0.0052)       (0.0070)       (0.0050)        (0.0071)
                        Min Wage x Female              0.0025        0.0014         -0.0008        0.0011         -0.0002         0.0068
                                                      (0.0039)      (0.0019)       (0.0023)       (0.0067)       (0.0033)        (0.0047)
                        State EITC                   0.0171***       0.0051       0.0202**         0.0052         -0.0051       0.0240***
                                                      (0.0060)      (0.0070)      (0.0077)        (0.0076)       (0.0087)        (0.0087)
                        State EITC x Female          -0.0335**       -0.0124     -0.0305***       -0.0266*     -0.0243***      -0.0573***
                                                      (0.0163)      (0.0081)      (0.0088)        (0.0146)      (0.0085)        (0.0126)
                        Min Wage Coef:
                        wild bootstrap p                0.095         0.079         0.536           0.054          0.048           0.215
43




                        Female EITC Effect:
                        Total                          -0.0163       -0.0073       -0.0103        -0.0214        -0.0295         -0.0334
                        cluster-robust p                0.278         0.466         0.476          0.145          0.027           0.073
                        wild bootstrap p                0.456         0.498         0.557          0.241          0.065           0.229

                        Mean Recid Rate:
                        All                             0.178         0.168         0.156           0.370          0.331           0.303
                        Male                            0.182         0.173         0.157           0.379          0.340           0.304
                        Female                          0.135         0.141         0.149           0.284          0.278           0.289

                        Observations                  2457794       2471327        696338         2062432        1998305          561803

     Note: The dependent variable is return to prison in the same state within 1 or 3 years of release by race/ethnicity (indicated in the column heading).
     The three categories are mutually exclusive: Black is non-Hispanic Black, White is non-Hispanic White. Minimum wage is measured in dollars. State
     EITC is an indicator for the existence of a state top-up in Columns 1 and 2 and is the percent of the federal EITC available to those in that state in
     Columns 3 and 4 - measured in percentage points; all are measured in the state and month the offender was released. A female indicator is included
     in all regressions but not shown for space. All specifications include state- and year-fixed effects, as well as the individual and time-varying state level
     controls outlined in Section 4. Total Female EITC Effect=β3 (on EITC) + β4 (on EITC × Female) is the total impact of the EITC for women. Mean
     recidivism rates are the mean of the dependent variable for the respective column. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in
     parentheses (43 clusters). p-values from 1000 wild-cluster bootstrap iterations are shown for the main minimum wage coefficient and the total Female
     EITC effect, as suggested by Cameron et al. (2008) in cases with a small number of clusters, typically ≤ 30 (our analysis is near but not below this
     threshold).
     ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10 (based on cluster-robust standard errors)
     A   Minimum Wages and EITC Values by State

                    Table A.1: Minimum Wages and EITC Top-Ups by State: 2000-2014
44
45




     Notes: Minimum wages shown are the average for the year, in the actual analysis we have the year AND month and thus can be more exact. EITC
     is represented as the percent of the federal EITC.
     a
       MN’s EITC is not structured as a percentage of the federal. Depending on income it represents 25-45%, what is shown is the average
     b
       WI’s EITC varies based on number of children, shown are for 1/2/3 children
B      State and County Identification
The NCRP data, unfortunately, do not include information on the state or county the
individual lived in after incarceration.
   Our research into processes for different jurisdictions indicates that individuals, for the
most part, are released into:

    1. the county they lived in prior to incarceration or

    2. the county that convicted them (if no prior address can be established)

unless there are pressing safety or rehabilitation reasons not to do either of the above.30 The
offender can also petition to be released into a different county/state - usually because they
can show that they have family there that can support them, they have proof of employment
in that area, or because they need treatment that is only available in that county.31
    The 2000-2014 NCRP data do not contain address of residence prior to incarceration.
They do, however contain state and county of conviction. Using data from California,
Raphael and Weiman (2007) show that 90% of parolees are returned to the county they
were convicted in. Thus, both Raphael and Weiman (2007) and Schnepel (2018), which also
analyzes NCRP data from California, use the county of conviction as an approximation of
the county they are released into.
    Starting in 2015, the NCRP has begun to collect data on State and County of last
known address. We obtained this data, initially for the purposes of expanding our analysis.
Unfortunately, in this version of the data, according to the codebook: “Due to a data-
processing error, all county codes for [12 states] are set to missing” (National Corrections
Reporting Program, 2000-2015 Codebook p. 122).32 However, these data include 37,312
prison releases that include both the last state of known address and the state of conviction;
  30
     In the Federal Prison system: “In most instances, a parolee will be released to the Judicial District
in which he or she was convicted or the Judicial District of legal residence” (https://www.justice.gov/
uspc/frequently-asked-questions). In California,“an inmate who is released on parole shall be returned
to the county that was the last legal residence of the inmate prior to his or her incarceration” (https:
//www.cdcr.ca.gov/Parole/Parole_Requirements/index.html). In New York State, if a family member
does not pick up a recently released prisoner and they don’t have transportation available, a bus ticket
will be provided to the county where they were convicted. For example, if the conviction occurred in
Nassau County, a bus ticket will be provided to Nassau County (http://www.doccs.ny.gov/FamilyGuide/
cominghomebrochure.html). In Oregon: “the board shall order as a condition of parole that the person
reside for the first six months in the county where the person resided at the time of the offense that resulted
in the imprisonment, and if no identifiable address is found then they are returned to county where offense
occurred” (https://www.oregon.gov/doc/CC/docs/pdf/County_of_Record.pdf).
  31
     See for example documents from Wisconsin: https://appsdoc.wi.gov/public/faq and Oregon: https:
//www.oregon.gov/doc/CC/docs/pdf/County_of_Record.pdf).
  32
     E-mail correspondence with NACJD and the BJS did not clarify what the error was, and thus we decided
not to rely on the 2000-2015 version of the data but use the 2000-2014 in our analysis.


                                                      46
and 31,840 that include both last known county of address and county of conviction. Using
these data, we see that 94.5% of offenders lived in the same state they were convicted in.
This makes us pretty confident that state of conviction is a good proxy for state of previous
residence, which by the above is a good proxy for state of release. However, only 69.6% of
releasees for whom we have the requisite data lived in the same county they were convicted
in. So while that is still a majority, there is significantly more measurement error when
trying to approximate county of release with county of convicted if most people are actually
sent back to county of previous residence. Therefore, for a majority of our analysis, we rely
on the state of conviction variable to define state of release and focus on state variation. In
one table, we use the county of conviction as a proxy for county of release to allow us finer
geographic variation but with less reliability.
     Approximately 2% of our observations are missing county/state of conviction. Amongst
the observations not missing county/state of conviction, the state of conviction is the same
as the state providing the data for 99.9% of the sample. The few thousand observations
where this variable differs seem to be cases where the person was sent out of state to serve
their sentence (the reason is not given). This could be due to prison overcrowding in the
state of conviction, request by the prisoner to be imprisoned in a different state, request of
either state system to house the prisoner in a different state—we have no way of knowing.
In those cases, we are less clear about the state the prisoner will return to. If anything, it
seems more likely to be the state of conviction rather than the state that imprisoned them.
However, our recidivism variable indicates if there is a return to prison in the same state
that imprisoned an individual, so if they are more likely to return to the state of conviction,
it is unlikely we will see them recidivating even if they did. Thus, due to higher uncertainty
about return state for these individuals and the issue with defining recidivism for them, we
drop this 0.01% of our sample in our analysis. Because the state of conviction and the state
providing the data are so highly correlated, for the 2% of the sample missing county/state
of conviction, we impute state of conviction with the state that provided the data to the
NCRP.




                                              47
C     County Level Analysis
As outlined in Appendix B, our main analyses focus on the state of incarceration as a proxy
for state of residence post-release. We also have county of conviction which we can use
as a proxy for county of residence post-release, though this is less reliable as it appears
empirically some fraction of individuals are likely to live in a different county. They may
even make a choice of which county to live in based on local labor market conditions, making
the measurement error not purely selection-free. Still, focusing on county allows us a finer
set of controls for the local experience of the individual, so below we present results using
the county data.




                                             48
                               Table C.1: County - 1 Year Recidivism

                                     (1)             (2)              (3)    (4)                (5)
                                  Baseline          County                   No               Substate
                                 With County        Unemp        County FE Substate             All
     Min Wage                      -0.0083**       -0.0080**      -0.0077**     -0.0083** -0.0083**
                                    (0.0040)        (0.0040)       (0.0037)      (0.0040) (0.0040)
     Min Wage x Female               0.0023          0.0023        0.0022         0.0023       0.0023
                                    (0.0025)        (0.0025)      (0.0025)       (0.0025)     (0.0025)
     State EITC                      0.0091          0.0093        0.0103         0.0091       0.0091
                                    (0.0059)        (0.0060)      (0.0064)       (0.0059)     (0.0059)
     State EITC x Female            -0.0235*        -0.0235*      -0.0233**      -0.0235*     -0.0235*
                                    (0.0118)        (0.0118)       (0.0115)      (0.0118)     (0.0118)
     Female                        -0.0415**       -0.0415** -0.0423*** -0.0414** -0.0415**
                                    (0.0154)        (0.0154)  (0.0154)   (0.0154) (0.0154)
     Min Wage Coef:
     wild bootstrap p                 0.076           0.091         0.072          0.062        0.078

     Female EITC Effect:
     Total                           -0.0143         -0.0141       -0.0130        -0.0144      -0.0143
     cluster-robust p                 0.231           0.244         0.271          0.230        0.231
     wild bootstrap p                 0.304           0.305         0.349          0.302        0.323

     Observations                   5579060         5579060        5579060       5565953       5579060

Note: The dependent variable is return to prison in the same state within 1-year of release. Column
1 recreates Column 1 of Table 4, for the sample of individuals for whom we have County of conviction.
Column 2 adds in the county unemployment rate. Column 3 adds in County fixed effects in addition to
state- and year- fixed effects. Minimum wage is measured in dollars. State EITC is an indicator for the
existence of a state top-up. All specifications include state- and year-fixed effects, as well as the individual
and time-varying state level controls outlined in Section 4. Total Female EITC Effect=β3 (on EITC) + β4
(on EITC × Female) is the total impact of the EITC for women. For baseline means, see Table 4. Robust
standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in parentheses (43 clusters). p-values from 1000 wild-
cluster bootstrap iterations are shown for the main minimum wage coefficient and the total Female EITC
effect, as suggested by Cameron et al. (2008) in cases with a small number of clusters, typically ≤ 30 (our
analysis is near but not below this threshold).




                                                      49
                              Table C.2: County - 3 Year Recidivism

                                  (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)
                               Baseline           County                         No          Substate
                              With County         Unemp       County FE        Substate        All
   Min Wage                     -0.0137***      -0.0130*** -0.0128*** -0.0139*** -0.0137***
                                 (0.0046)        (0.0043)   (0.0043)   (0.0046)   (0.0046)
   Min Wage x Female              0.0032          0.0032         0.0032         0.0033        0.0032
                                 (0.0039)        (0.0039)       (0.0039)       (0.0039)      (0.0039)
   State EITC                     -0.0007         -0.0000        -0.0002        -0.0007       -0.0007
                                 (0.0070)        (0.0069)       (0.0070)      ( (0.0069)     (0.0070)
   State EITC x Female          -0.0323***      -0.0323*** -0.0318*** -0.0325*** -0.0323***
                                 (0.0107)        (0.0107)   (0.0103)   (0.0107)   (0.0107)
   Female                       -0.0774***      -0.0775*** -0.0792*** -0.0780*** -0.0774***
                                 (0.0235)        (0.0235)   (0.0233)   (0.0235)   (0.0235)
   Min Wage Coef:
   wild bootstrap p                0.019           0.021          0.019          0.014         0.009

   Female EITC Effect:
   Total                          -0.0330         -0.0324        -0.0320       -0.0332        -0.0330
   cluster-robust p                0.012           0.014          0.013         0.012          0.012
   wild bootstrap p                0.049           0.049          0.043         0.034          0.048

   Observations                  4580355         4580355        4580355        4569953       4580355

Note: The dependent variable is return to prison in the same state within 3-year of release. Column 1
recreates of Column 2Table 4 for the sample of individuals for whom we have County of conviction. Column
2 adds in the county unemployment rate. Column 3 adds in County fixed effects in addition to state- and
year- fixed effects. Minimum wage is measured in dollars. State EITC is an indicator for the existence of
a state top-up. All specifications include state- and year-fixed effects, as well as the individual and time-
varying state level controls outlined in Section 4. Total Female EITC Effect=β3 (on EITC) + β4 (on EITC
× Female) is the total impact of the EITC for women. For baseline means, see Table 4. Robust standard
errors clustered at the state level are shown in parentheses (43 clusters). p-values from 1000 wild-cluster
bootstrap iterations are shown for the main minimum wage coefficient and the total Female EITC effect, as
suggested by Cameron et al. (2008) in cases with a small number of clusters, typically ≤ 30 (our analysis is
near but not below this threshold).




                                                     50
D     Defining Bound Minimum Wage Changes
Taking a cue from Clemens and Wither (2016), we focus some of our analysis on states
that were bound by federal minimum wage increases. There were 3 increases in the federal
minimum wage during our time period: from $5.15 to $5.85 on 7/24/2007, to $6.55 on
7/24/2008, and to $7.25 on 7/24/2009. We define a state-year pair as being bound by these
federal minimum wage changes if, as of January 1 of that year, the state had a minimum
wage below what would become the federal level in July of that year.
   Table D.1 below lists the states considered bound for each of the federal minimum wage
change years: 2007, 2008, and 2009.




                                           51
                              Table D.1: States Bound by Federal Changes

                       2007                            2008                            2009
              State           Jan 1 MW        State           Jan 1 MW         State          Jan 1 MW
                                                                         Alaska               $7.15
         Alabama              N/A        Alabama              N/A        Alabama              N/A
                                         Arkansas             $6.25      Arkansas             $6.25
                                                                         Delaware             $7.15
                                                                         Florida              $7.21
         Georgia              $5.15      Georgia              $5.15      Georgia              $5.15
         Idaho                $5.15      Idaho                $5.85      Idaho                $6.55
         Indiana              $5.15      Indiana              $5.85      Indiana              $6.55
          Iowa                $5.15
         Kansas               $2.65      Kansas               $2.65      Kansas               $2.65
         Kentucky             $5.15      Kentucky             $5.85      Kentucky             $6.55
         Louisiana            N/A        Louisiana            N/A        Louisiana            $6.55
                                         Maryland             $6.15      Maryland             $6.55
                                         Minnesota            $6.15      Minnesota            $6.15
         Mississippi          N/A        Mississippi          N/A        Mississippi          $6.55
                                                                         Missouri             $7.05
                                         Montana              $6.25      Montana              $6.90
         Nebraska             $5.15      Nebraska             $5.85      Nebraska             $6.55
                                         Nevada               $6.33      Nevada               $6.85
                                                                         New Jersey           $7.15
                                                                         New York             $7.15
         New Hampshire $5.15             New Hampshire        $6.50
         New Mexico    $5.15             New Mexico           $6.50
                                         North Carolina       $6.15      North Carolina       $6.55
         North Dakota         $5.15      North Dakota         $5.85      North Dakota         $6.55
         Oklahoma             $5.15      Oklahoma             $5.85      Oklahoma             $6.55
                                                                         Pennsylvania         $7.15
         South Carolina       N/A        South Carolina       N/A        South Carolina       $6.55
         South Dakota         $5.15      South Dakota         $5.85      South Dakota         $6.55
         Tennessee            N/A        Tennessee            N/A        Tennessee            $6.55
         Texas                $5.15      Texas                $5.85      Texas                $6.55
         Utah                 $5.15      Utah                 $5.85      Utah                 $6.55
         Virginia             $5.15      Virginia             $5.85      Virginia             $6.55
                                         Wisconsin            $6.50      Wisconsin            $6.50
         Wyoming              $5.15      Wyoming              $5.15      Wyoming              $5.15


Note: Data on state minimum wages from the U.S. Department of Labor “Changes in Basic Minimum Wages
in Non-Farm Employment Under State Law: Selected Years 1968-2016” available at: https://www.dol.
gov/whd/state/stateMinWageHis.htm. Federal minimum wages increased on July 24 of 2007 (to $5.85),
of 2008 (to $6.55), and of 2009 (to $7.25). N/A indicates the state did not set a minimum wage, and thus
minimum wages in that state are dictated by prevailing federal minimums.




                                                          52
E   Additional Tables - 3 Year Results




                          53
                                               Table E.1: Trend Analysis - 3 Year Recidivism Rates

                                                                             State-Specific Time Trend              Division X    Binding
                                              Leading MWs                           Polynomials                      Year FE      Changes
                                              (1)            (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)               (6)      (7)
                                             t+1            t+2          Linear           2nd            3rd
             Min Wage                    -0.0114**      -0.0142***       -0.0058        -0.0055       -0.0078**     -0.0161***   -0.0163***
                                          (0.0044)       (0.0045)       (0.0038)       (0.0036)        (0.0032)      (0.0054)     (0.0044)
             Min Wage x Female             0.0030         0.0031         0.0032         0.0033         0.0034          0.0035
                                          (0.0038)       (0.0037)       (0.0037)       (0.0037)       (0.0037)        (0.0037)
             State EITC                    0.0001         -0.0006        0.0049        0.0141**        0.0052          0.0033
                                          (0.0070)       (0.0071)       (0.0065)       (0.0067)       (0.0083)        (0.0083)
             State EITC x Female         -0.0316***     -0.0316***     -0.0323***     -0.0322***     -0.0323***     -0.0315***
                                          (0.0106)       (0.0106)       (0.0106)       (0.0106)       (0.0106)       (0.0105)
54




             Min Wage Lead                 -0.0076       -0.0110*
                                          (0.0054)       (0.0062)
             Bound MW                                                                                                              -0.0248
                                                                                                                                  (0.0342)
             Min Wage X Bound                                                                                                      0.0038
                                                                                                                                  (0.0051)
             Min Wage Coef:
             wild bootstrap p               0.030          0.008          0.141          0.136          0.035          0.023       0.001

             Female EITC Effect:
             Total                         -0.0315        -0.0322        -0.0273        -0.0180        -0.0271        -0.0282
             cluster-robust p               0.014          0.013          0.032          0.157          0.040          0.044
             wild bootstrap p               0.038          0.036          0.074          0.227          0.063          0.087

             Observations                 4749284        4749284        4749284        4749284         4749284        4749284     4749284

     Note: The dependent variable is return to prison in the same state within 3 years of release. See notes to Table 5.
     ***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10 (based on cluster-robust standard errors)
        Table E.2: Robustness - Unemployment Rate and Substate Minimum Wages

                                         (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)
                                        State           MW at       Avg MW         Avg MW
                                       Unemp            Admit       6 Months      12 Months
          Min Wage                   -0.0145***     -0.0153***     -0.0195***     -0.0206***
                                      (0.0047)       (0.0044)       (0.0058)       (0.0066)
          Min Wage x Female             0.0029         0.0029         0.0025         0.0020
                                       (0.0038)       (0.0038)       (0.0038)       (0.0038)
          State EITC                    0.0010         0.0003         0.0003         0.0001
                                       (0.0066)       (0.0070)       (0.0069)       (0.0069)
          State EITC x Female        -0.0316***     -0.0316***     -0.0315***     -0.0315***
                                      (0.0105)       (0.0105)       (0.0105)       (0.0105)
          State Unemp Rate              -0.0016
                                       (0.0018)
          MW Admit                                     0.0006
                                                      (0.0031)
          MW 1 Yr Bef Admit                            -0.0007
                                                      (0.0031)
          Min Wage Coef:
          wild bootstrap p              0.013           0.010         0.011          0.021

          Female EITC Effect:
          Total                        -0.0306          -0.0313      -0.0312        -0.0313
          cluster-robust p              0.017            0.015        0.014          0.014
          wild bootstrap p              0.049            0.043        0.048          0.039

          Observations                 4749284        4749259        4749284        4749284

Note: The dependent variable is return to prison in the same state within 3 years of release. See notes to
Table 6.
***p < 0.01,**p < 0.05 ,*p < 0.10 (based on cluster-robust standard errors)




                                                   55
