                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  VACANCY DURATIONS AND ENTRY WAGES:
         EVIDENCE FROM LINKED VACANCY-EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE DATA

                                       Andreas I. Mueller
                                       Damian Osterwalder
                                        Josef Zweimüller
                                       Andreas Kettemann

                                       Working Paper 25118
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25118


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            October 2018, Revised July 2020


A previous version of this paper circulated under the title "Wages, Workers and Vacancy
Durations: Evidence from Linked Data". We thank Jake Bradley, Carlos Carrillo-Tudela, Leland
Crane, Steven Davis, Jan Eeckhout, Jason Faberman, Leo Kaas, Philipp Kircher, Simon Mongey,
Chris Moser, Robert Shimer, Gianluca Violante, David Wiczer and participants at seminars or
presentations at Aarhus University, the Board of Governors, CEMFI Madrid, CESifo Munich,
Columbia Business School, ETH Zurich, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Goethe University
Frankfurt, the NBER Summer Institute, Sciences Po, UC Berkeley, the University at Buffalo, the
University of Essex, and IAB Nürnberg for useful comments and suggestions. We are grateful to
Dominik Egloff for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25118.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Andreas I. Mueller, Damian Osterwalder, Josef Zweimüller, and Andreas Kettemann.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Vacancy Durations and Entry Wages: Evidence from Linked Vacancy-Employer-Employee
Data
Andreas I. Mueller, Damian Osterwalder, Josef Zweimüller, and Andreas Kettemann
NBER Working Paper No. 25118
October 2018, Revised July 2020
JEL No. E24,J31,J63

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper explores the relationship between the duration of a vacancy and the starting wage of a
new job, using linked data on vacancies, the posting establishments and the workers eventually
filling the vacancies. The unique combination of large-scale, administrative worker-,
establishment- and vacancy-data is critical for separating establishment- and job-level
determinants of vacancy duration from worker-level heterogeneity. Conditional on worker
observables, we find that vacancy duration is negatively correlated with the starting wage and its
establishment component, with precisely estimated elasticities of -0.04 and -0.10, respectively.
While the negative relationship is qualitatively consistent with models of wage posting, these
elasticities are small, suggesting that firms’ wage policies can account only for a small fraction of
the variation in vacancy filling across establishments.

Andreas I. Mueller                                Josef Zweimüller
The University of Texas at Austin                 Department of Economics
Department of Economics                           University of Zurich
2225 Speedway                                     Schoenberggasse 1
Austin, TX 78712                                  8001, Zurich
and NBER                                          Switzerland
andimueller@utexas.edu                            josef.zweimueller@econ.uzh.ch

Damian Osterwalder                                Andreas Kettemann
University of Zurich                              Department of Economics, University of Zurich
Department of Economics                           Schoenberggasse 1
Schönberggasse 1, Room SOF-E21                    8001 Zurich
Zurich 8001                                       Switzerland
Switzerland                                       andreas.kettemann@uzh.ch
1       Introduction
A central question in search-theoretic models of the labor market is how firms and workers form
employment relationships. The canonical search and matching model posits the existence of a
matching function, which randomly matches workers and firms, given the number of vacancies
and job seekers in the labor market. However, recent evidence by Davis, Faberman and Halti-
wanger (2013) – henceforth DFH – shows that the number of vacancies as measured in JOLTS
survey data is an imperfect predictor of hiring outcomes across U.S. establishments. Their ev-
idence suggests that firms rely heavily on additional instruments to recruit workers, which has
important implications for aggregate labor market dynamics (Kaas and Kircher, 2015; Gavazza,
Mongey and Violante, 2018). Despite this important contribution, many aspects of vacancy posting
and filling are still poorly understood, mainly due to the lack of detailed micro data.
    The aim of this paper is to explore the empirical relation between the duration of a vacancy and
the entry wage of a filled position. Despite the central role of the vacancy-filling rate in search and
matching models of the labor market, our empirical knowledge about the determinants of vacancy
durations and their relation to entry wages (and other labor market outcomes) is very limited.
This gap in knowledge is striking given the large body of empirical evidence on unemployment
durations and workers’ re-employment wages and, more generally, on the role of worker search
behavior in the formation of new employment relationships. To understand the matching process
in the labor market, it seems important to understand both the role of worker and employer
behavior. In this paper, we aim to fill this gap by shedding light on the role of employer behavior
for the creation of – and wages paid in – new job matches.
    To study the relationship between vacancy durations and entry wages, we use a linked dataset
comprising information on (i) characteristics and durations of posted vacancies, (ii) employment
of and wages paid by the establishment posting the vacancy, and (iii) the earnings history of the
worker eventually filling the vacancy. The vacancy data come from the Austrian public labor
market administration (“Arbeitsmarktservice”, AMS), which contains the universe of vacancies
posted through the AMS platform. The AMS is by far the most important platform of vacancy
posting by Austrian establishments and covers almost 60% (!) of all vacancies posted by Austrian
establishments.1 The AMS vacancy dataset contains an (anonymized) employer-identifier which
allows us to link the posting establishment to the Austrian Social Security Database (ASSD). The
link at the establishment level allows us to study AMS vacancy posting by Austrian establishments
in a very similar way as DFH did for all US vacancies using JOLTS data. For vacancies that
were filled through direct mediation of the AMS, the information on vacancy durations and -
characteristics can be linked to the earnings history of the worker eventually filling the vacancy.
    1
    Statistics Austria runs a large quarterly vacancy survey (“Offene Stellen Erhebung (OStE)”) providing evidence
on vacancy posting by Austrian establishment on all platforms. The survey asks, for each single vacancy reported
by the sampled establishment, whether the vacancy was posted on the AMS platform. On average, 57% of vacancies
were posted at the AMS. During the period 2009 to 2017 the AMS coverage rate was 57% and fluctuated between 53%
(2009) and 61% (2013) without showing a trend.

                                                        2
We exploit the link at the worker level to study the association between vacancy durations and
entry wages.2
    The rich information contained in this dataset allows us to study in detail the vacancy filling
patterns and their relation to wages in newly filled jobs. Our main empirical analysis proceeds in
two steps. First, we relate the duration of a vacancy to the starting wage. We find that – conditional
on worker observables – vacancy durations are negatively correlated with the starting wage, with
an elasticity of -0.04 for our preferred specification. Given the large-scale, administrative nature
of our data, this elasticity is precisely estimated, with a standard error of 0.01. The negative
relationship is masked in the raw data, where we find an positive correlation between vacancy
duration and starting wages. The evidence that emerges thus from our empirical analysis is that,
with sufficient controls for worker heterogeneity, the correlation between vacancy durations and
starting wages turns from positive to negative. This is particularly evident when we control for
worker fixed effects in the regression analysis, comparing the outcomes of the matching process
for the same individual across different unemployment spells.
    Second, we go one step further by decomposing starting wages into fixed worker- and
establishment-characteristics using the technique proposed by Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis
(1999) (AKM). This allows us to look directly at the association between the vacancy duration and
the establishment-, worker- and residual-components of the starting wage. Our results confirm
important worker-level heterogeneity in vacancy durations, with AKM worker fixed effects being
strongly positively correlated with vacancy duration and thus accounting for the overall positive
association between vacancy duration and starting wages in the raw data. At the same time, we
find that the establishment and residual component of the starting wage are negatively correlated
with the starting wage, with an elasticity of -0.10 and -0.03, respectively, for our preferred spec-
ification. Again, these elasticities are precisely estimated, with standard errors of 0.02 and 0.01,
respectively.
    In summary, our analysis reveals the importance of using matched data to distinguish the effect
of establishments and matches from worker-level heterogeneity in the analysis of the determinants
of vacancy duration. Conditional on observables, vacancy durations are negatively correlated with
the starting wage and its establishment component. We perform a broad set of empirical checks
and find our main result to be very robust.
    The evidence presented in this paper allows to shed new light on the predictions of search-
theoretic models of the labor market. The canonical search and matching model with random
   2
    The Austrian vacancy database has so far not been extensively used for academic research. Among the few studies
exploiting these data is the study of Lalive, Landais and Zweimüller (2015) on market externalities of UI (and who
use the AMS vacancy data to determine which workers are competing for the same vacancies); and work in progress
by Card, Colella and Lalive (2018) on gender discrimination in vacancy posting and -filling. See also Riese and
Bruckbauer (1987) for an early descriptive study using individual vacancy data from the Austrian public employment
service. The ASSD has been extensively used in previous studies (see e.g. Lalive, van Ours and Zweimüller (2006);
Card, Chetty and Weber (2007); Card, Lee, Pei and Weber (2015); Alvarez, Borovickova and Shimer (2016); Borovickova
and Shimer (2019)). For a detailed description of the ASSD, see Zweimüller, Winter-Ebmer, Lalive, Kuhn, Wuellrich,
Ruf and Büchi (2009).

                                                        3
search and wage bargaining cannot account for the empirical observations that high-wage firms
face shorter vacancy durations, as it predicts that firms that face tighter labor markets pay higher
wages but also experience longer vacancy durations. Instead, our evidence is consistent with
theories of wage posting where firms face a trade-off between the wage they pay the worker
and how long they have to search until the vacancy is filled. This includes both theories of
directed search (Moen, 1997), where high-wage vacancies attract more applications, and theories
of random search (Burdett and Mortensen, 1998), where high-wage offers face a higher probability
of acceptance by the worker.
    While our results are qualitatively consistent with models of wage posting, it is important to
shed light on the quantitative implications of our findings. A key question is whether firms’ wage
policies can account for the sharp rise in vacancy filling for growing firms, as documented by
DFH. Their findings have been interpreted as evidence for the importance of recruiting effort in
hiring, including firms’ wage policies. Our measured elasticities, however, imply that starting
wages predict only a small amount of variation in vacancy durations by establishment growth and
hiring. We find that starting wages are increasing in the establishment hires rate, with an elasticity
of 0.05 or less. Combined with our estimated elasticity of vacancy duration to the starting wage, this
implies that the vacancy-filling rate is predicted to increase by one percent or less for establishments
with a hires rate of 0.9 compared to establishments with a hires rate of 0.1. In stark contrast,
we replicate the DFH-type evidence with the Austrian data and find that the vacancy-filling rate
actually is 47 percent higher for establishments with a hires rate of 0.9 compared to establishments
with a hires rate of 0.1. This back-of-the-envelope calculation thus suggests that starting wages can
account only for a very small fraction of the variation in vacancy filling by hires rates. We conclude
that firms’ wage policies are unlikely to serve as an important recruiting instrument, as in Kaas
and Kircher (2015), at least not in a manner that is quantitatively important and could account for
the patterns in vacancy filling by firm growth and hiring.3 We discuss potential caveats to this
conclusion, such as wage-tenure contracts or non-wage amenities, but find that these are unlikely
to bridge the large gap that exists between the actual patterns of vacancy filling by hires rates and
the patterns predicted by starting wages. Overall, our evidence thus points to the importance of
theories that allow for alternative measures of recruiting effort or hiring standards, as in Sedlacek
(2014), Gavazza, Mongey and Violante (2018) and Carrillo-Tudela, Gartner and Kaas (2020).
    We argue that our analysis is interesting not only for the Austrian labor market, but also for
a better understanding of vacancy-posting and -filling behavior of firms more generally. First,
the information content and quality of our data is very high. The linking of information on
vacancy durations and -characteristics to information on the wage of the worker filling the vacancy
for a large administrative data set is unique. Additionally, the Austrian vacancy data provide
information, on a daily basis, on the vacancy-posting date, the desired start date of the job (= date
   3
    In the model of Kaas and Kircher (2015), the posted wage acts as the main recruiting mechanism to expand
firm-level employment. We calibrate their model to the patterns of vacancy filling and job finding in Austria and
show that it predicts a wage-duration elasticity that is two orders of magnitude larger than in our data.

                                                       4
when the job become available), and the vacancy-filling date, allowing us to precisely estimate
the vacancy-filling rate. AMS staff frequently checks with the posting establishment on inactive
vacancies and documents in the data when a vacancy lapses. Hence the AMS job posting site
is not plagued with inactive (“phantom”) vacancies that have been found important in privately
operated job posting sites (Albrecht, Decreuse and Vroman, 2019).
    Second, the patterns of vacancy posting and hiring by Austrian establishments are similar to
those in other countries, even in countries with quite different labor market institutions. In fact,
comparing vacancy patterns in the Austrian data to US evidence by DFH shows a surprising degree
of similarity. For instance, hiring and separations rates of Austrian establishments are of a similar
order of magnitude as those of the US. Similar to DFH we find: (i) growing establishments do not
only generate more hires per vacancies but also fill their vacancies more quickly, (ii) vacancy rates
and vacancy yields (= hires per vacancy) vary strongly with the establishments’ industry, size and
employment turnover, (iii) more than 30% of workers are employed in establishments that do not
hire any worker in a given month, (iv) a large fraction of establishments posting no vacancy at the
end of the previous month hire workers in the subsequent month and (v) the majority of vacancies
are posted by establishments that post more than one vacancy in the same month. In sum, this
suggests that our results highlight mechanisms that are likely at work also in other settings and
can contribute to a better understanding of employer search on the labor market.
    Our paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 discusses the related empirical literature and Section
3 discusses the institutional background. Section 4 introduces the data, discusses the vacancy
duration concepts, and discusses the procedure linking vacancy data to employer-employee data.
Section 5 replicates previous evidence on vacancy posting, hiring, and employment growth in our
linked data set. Section 6 conducts the main analysis in our paper by analyzing the relationship
between vacancy duration and entry wages. Section 7 discusses the implications of our findings
and Section 8 concludes.


2    Related Empirical Literature
Our paper aims at a better understanding of the role of entry wages in vacancy filling and hiring
outcomes across firms. While search models with wage posting have become important theoretical
frameworks in labor and macroeconomics, evidence on predictions of these theories in general
– and the trade-off between vacancy durations and entry wages in particular – is very scarce.
Faberman and Menzio (2018) is the only paper we are aware of that has studied this trade-off.
They find a positive correlation in data from the Earnings and Opportunities Pilot Project (EOPP)
in the U.S. in the early 1980s.4 Our research builds on theirs and assesses the extent to which
the positive correlation is confounded by the presence of worker heterogeneity. Our analysis is
   4
     Interestingly, Holzer, Katz and Krueger (1991) find in the same data set that vacancies from firms in high-wage
industries and larger firms attract a higher number of job applications.

                                                         5
particularly well suited to address this issue because we observe the entire labor market history of
the workers matched to a vacancy and thus can use wage and employment histories as additional
controls. Moreover, for a subset of workers in our data, we observe multiple unemployment spells
and thus we can assess the within-person correlation of starting wages and vacancy durations
faced by the establishments hiring the worker.
    A few recent studies provide interesting findings on the relationship between number of
applications and the posted wage. Banfi and Villena-Roldan (2019) and Marinescu and Wolthoff
(2020) document a positive association of posted wages and job applications using data from a
Chilean and U.S. online job boards, respectively. Belot, Kircher and Muller (2018) provide similar
evidence from a field experiment that assigned wages randomly to pairs of otherwise similar
vacancies. The positive relationship between wages and applications is interesting because, in
models of directed search, a higher number of applications is the channel through which firms
are able to fill vacancies more quickly. Unlike our dataset, the above empirical analyses do not
directly observe the duration of a vacancy, which is the key variable entering the firm’s posting
and recruiting decisions. The fact that our data contain precise information on the duration of a
vacancy allows for a much more straightforward mapping from entry wages to hiring outcomes
and the quantitative predictions of search-theoretic models with wage posting. We find that entry
wages can account for only a small fraction of the variation in vacancy filling across firms.
    Our contribution also relates to a number of studies of vacancy-posting and -filling behavior.
Most prominently, DFH show with data from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS)
for the US that faster growing establishments not only post more vacancies but also exhibit a higher
vacancy yield, i.e. a higher number of realized hires per vacancy. More recently, Mongey and
Violante (2019) extend the analysis of DFH in the JOLTS data and show that their results hold
within establishment size, age and wage groups.5 DFH’s findings have attracted considerable
attention as it suggests that firms use other channels to recruit workers if they quickly expand
their workforce, and a reduction in aggregate recruiting intensity may be responsible for the shift
of the U.S. Beveridge Curve during the Great Recession. We replicate the findings of DFH in our
vacancy data from Austria. We find that the relationship between firm growth and the vacancy
yield is surprisingly similar to the one documented by DFH in the JOLTS data.
    Since the JOLTS started in December 2000, earlier studies focused on the Help Wanted Index
(Abraham (1983); Abraham (1987); Blanchard and Diamond (1989)). While Shimer (2005) and
Barnichon (2010) note that the Help Wanted Index tracks the movements in the JOLTS well, it
does not allow for an analysis at the micro level. Micro studies of vacancy-posting behavior are
mainly based on surveys (e.g. DFH; van Ours and Ridder (1991); van Ours and Ridder (1992);
Holzer (1994); Gorter, Nijkamp and Rietveld (1996); Burdett and Cunningham (1998); Dickerson
(2003); Davis, Röttger, Warning and Weber (2014); Ehrenfried and Holzner (2019); Faberman and
Menzio (2018)) or online job board data (e.g. Barron, Berger and Black (1999); Banfi and Villena-
   5
    See also Bagger, Fontaine, Galenianos and Trapeznikova (2020) for an analysis of vacancy posting and firm growth
based on Danish vacancy data.
                                                         6
Roldan (2019); Marinescu (2017); Marinescu and Wolthoff (2020); Modestino, Shoag and Ballance
(Forthcoming); Hershbein and Kahn (2018); see also Kuhn (2014) for a general discussion of internet
job search). A few earlier studies are based on administrative vacancy data (e.g., Coles and Smith
(1996); Berman (1997); Yashiv (2000); Andrews, Bradley, Stott and Upward (2008); Sunde (2007)).
    Compared to existing datasets on vacancies that we are aware of, our data have several ad-
vantages: First and foremost, none of the studies match the individual-level vacancy data to the
employment history of the matched worker. An exception is the recent paper by Carrillo-Tudela,
Gartner and Kaas (2020), which does, however, not analyze the connection between vacancy dura-
tions and entry wages. Second, while most of the mentioned studies were mainly based on survey
or career services data, we have administrative data, which should decrease the extent of measure-
ment error due both to more accurate data and a larger sample size. The mentioned studies that
do use administrative data are mostly based on aggregated data, except for Andrews et al. (2008)
who cover the labor market for teenagers in the UK. Third, datasets usually record repeated stocks
of vacancies, such as the most prominent example, the JOLTS, which records the stock of vacancies
at the end of the month. This poses the problem that vacancies with short durations (opened
and closed between two survey rounds) are under-sampled (length-biased sampling/aggregation
bias), which is especially severe as vacancies with very short durations are quantitatively relevant.
This problem does not arise in our data as every vacancy is recorded, irrespective of its length.


3     Institutional Background
In this section, we discuss the institutional background relevant for our analysis of vacancy dura-
tions and entry wages. Since we are looking at vacancies posted at the Austrian public employment
service (“Arbeitsmarktservice”, AMS) we start with a brief discussion of the role of the AMS as a
player on the Austrian labor market. We then discuss institutions and relevant features of the
wage setting process in Austria.


3.1   The AMS on the Austrian Labor Market
The AMS is by far the most important job-matching platform in Austria, comprising almost 60%
of all vacancies posted by Austrian firms. The mission of the AMS is bringing together job seekers
and employers and reducing search frictions on the labor market to a minimum. Targeted workers
include both employed or unemployed workers looking for a job as well firms with open vacancies
of all kinds. AMS services are free of charge, both for workers and for firms.
    The AMS is organized in one federal, nine state and 104 local (labor market district) offices.
Social partners (employer federations and worker organizations) are involved at all levels and
instrumental in monitoring the organization’s corporate governance. Social partners are also
involved in designing labor market policies, including measures to improve the efficiency of the
matching process (such as “eAMS,” the implementation and improvement of online services).
                                                  7
   Besides its central role as a mediator between workers and employers on the Austrian labor
market, the AMS administers income support programs (UI benefits, unemployment assistance,
and related transfers) and is in charge of providing and organizing active labor market policies.6 In
2017, the AMS employed 6,284 (5,606 full-time equivalent) workers and managed income support
payments of about 6.2 billion Euros and active labor market policy subsidies (for 364,000 job
seekers) of about 1.3 billion Euros (see AMS (2018)).


3.2     The Wage Setting Process in Austria
Wage setting in Austria is subject to collective bargaining agreements that cover about 95% of
Austrian workers. These agreements are the outcome of negotiations between unions and em-
ployer associations at the industry level. Importantly for our purpose, these collective bargaining
agreements only set wage floors. Ultimately, wages are determined by supplementary establish-
ment bargaining as well as bilaterally between workers and firms.7 As a consequence most wages
are substantially above the wage floor. For instance, Leoni and Pollan (2011) study “overpay-
ments” (the ratio of effective wages over collectively bargained wages). They find that, in the
years when the regional extended benefit program was in place in the late 1980s and early 1990s,
effective wages of blue collar workers were, on average, between 20 to 25% above the collectively
bargained minimum wages.


4       Data and Conceptual Issues
Here we start with describing the AMS vacancy database, focusing in particular on the information
on the timing and characteristics of AMS vacancies. The rich information on vacancy timing
raises conceptual issues relating to the measurement of the vacancy duration of a vacancy, which
we discuss in the following subsection. Finally, we describe how we link AMS vacancies to
establishment- and worker information from the social security register (ASSD). This link will
eventually allow us to analyze the association between vacancy durations and entry wages.


4.1     The AMS Vacancy Database
The AMS vacancy register database contains information on all vacancies posted through the
AMS and covers the years 1987-2014. The data quality has been initially low but has substantially
    6
      An additional task of the AMS is the economy-wide management of the admission process of immigrants to the
Austrian labor market.
    7
      Moreover, Austrian collective bargaining agreements typically feature clauses that require wages in ongoing
employment relationships (“Istlöhne”) to rise in lockstep with the wage growth of the wage floors (“Kollektivver-
tragslöhne”), although those clauses sometimes specify lower wage growth. In the context of the present analysis this
is less relevant because we concentrate on entry wages in newly formed job matches rather than on wages (and wages
changes) in ongoing employment relationships.

                                                         8
improved over time. In what follows, our analysis focuses on the period 1997-2014, as for these
years all the variables of interest for our analysis are available, including industry codes and
worker-level identifiers that allow matching to the ASSD.
    A particular advantage of the AMS vacancy register is the detailed (daily) information on
vacancy timing. More precisely, the data contain: (i) the date when the vacancy is posted, (ii) the
desired start date of the job, and (iii) the date when the vacancy is filled. In addition to the timing
and duration of a vacancy, the data report job characteristics and skill requirements, as well as
characteristics of the posting firm such as the region, industry, and firm size.
    The information on timing and duration of a vacancy corresponds to three different outcomes.
First, a vacancy posted at the AMS can either result in a hiring directly mediated by the AMS. In
this case, a personal worker identifier is recorded in the data. The information on the identity of
the worker allows to link the vacancy information in the social security data on both worker’s
earnings and employment history and the hiring firm’s (past and present) employment and wage
dynamics. A second outcome is that the firm ends up hiring a worker outside the AMS system.
This will happen if the firm does not only rely exclusively on the AMS as a search platform but also
employs other search channels (other internet platforms, newspaper ads, etc.). In the latter case,
the personal identifier for the worker who fills the vacancy is unknown, but the vacancy duration
is reported in the vacancy data. The third possibility is that the vacancy lapses, either because it
has become obsolete or because the firm cannot be contacted any longer. In correspondence with
the AMS, we verified that the AMS frequently follows up with the posting firm – at least once
every two weeks. This suggests that the AMS job posting site is plagued much less with issues
related to inactive vacancies than in many privately operated job-posting sites.8
    Table A1 in the Appendix gives an overview of the AMS vacancy data. The AMS vacancy
dataset provides information on 5,291,897 vacancies (with completed durations) posted by 267,122
firms over the period 1997-2014. Among these vacancies, 86% got filled and 14% never resulted
in a hire. Among the filled vacancies, 27% got filled through direct mediation of the AMS system,
while the remaining 73% were filled through a different channel. A further strength of the AMS
vacancy data is that it separately records outcomes for vacancies for multiple workers. It turns
out that the majority of vacancies comes from firms posting at least one other vacancy, and that
many (though not all) of the multiple vacancies have identical characteristics and job requirements.
Vacancies with at least one other identical vacancy account for one third of all vacancies in the
AMS vacancy data base, see panel B of Table A1 and Figure A1 in the Appendix.
    We can also compare the number of vacancies filled through the AMS system to the number of
hires in the ASSD database. We find that AMS hires (those filed through the AMS system) account
for about 19 percent of total hires from unemployment in the ASSD universe over the same sample
    8
      On private job boards, vacancies often continue to be advertised even though the vacancy has already been
filled. Albrecht, Decreuse and Vroman (2019) study such “phantom vacancies” in a model of directed search and find
that phantom vacancies create sizable negative informational externalities that are a quantitatively important part of
overall search frictions in the labor market.

                                                          9
                       Figure 1: AMS Vacancy Data vs. Representative Vacancy Survey




                                                                 60




                                                                                                                                          90
                                                                                                                                               Number of vacancies in OStE data (in 1'000)
                    Number of vacancies in AMS data (in 1'000)
                                                                                                      Correlation coefficient: 0.88




                                                                                                                                          80
                                                                 55




                                                                                                                                          70
                                                                 50




                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                 45




                                                                                                                                          50
                                                                 40




                                                                  2009q1   2010q1      2011q1         2012q1        2013q1            2014q1
                                                                                         Quarterly Date

                                                                                AMS data (LHS)                 OStE data (RHS)

                             Notes: Comparison of the number of AMS vacancies with the number of
                             vacancies in a representative vacancy survey (Offene Stellenerhebung, OStE)
                             2009q1–2014q1.

period and 31 percent when we exclude recalls to the previous employer (see Figure A2 in the
Appendix). This shows that hiring through the AMS system covers a sizeable share of total hiring
out of unemployment in Austria.
    One obvious concern is that the vacancies posted on the AMS platform are not a representative
window of the universe of vacancies posted by Austrian firms. To assess this potential concern,
we compare the number of vacancies in the vacancy register with the total number of vacancies
based on a representative vacancy survey (“Offene-Stellen-Erhebung” OStE, akin to the JOLTS) and
conducted by Statistik Austria since 2009. Figure 1 shows that the AMS and OStE vacancy stocks
co-move very closely, with a correlation coefficient of 0.89. While the similarity of the two time-
series is reassuring, calculating an AMS coverage rate (= AMS-stock / OStE-stock) is problematic
because the underlying vacancy concepts are different.9
    Fortunately, the OStE survey asks firms whether a particular open vacancy is actually posted on
the AMS platform. It turns out that the AMS platform has a very high coverage: Over the period
2009-2019, when data from the OStE are available, as many as 57% of all vacancies by Austrian firms
were posted on the AMS platform (see Table A5 in the Appendix). It is important to note, however,
that the coverage rate differs across labor market segments. For instance, the AMS coverage rate
is 63% and 68% in the manufacturing and construction industries, respectively, while it is only
   9
    The vacancy concept underlying the OStE survey is more vague than the vacancy concept underlying AMS stock.
The AMS stock displayed in Figure 1 includes all posted vacancies, including those that are not immediately available.
In contrast, the OStE stock includes vacancies that are “available within a certain period”. This implies that the latter
stock is based on a more narrow definition than the former, thus overestimating the AMS coverage rate.
                                                                                                 10
36%, 40% and 50% in finance, education, and health, respectively. In these latter industries, firms
are typically looking for workers with specific skills more likely to find on occupation-specific
job boards rather than on a general platform like the AMS. This conjecture is supported by the
education gradient of AMS posting: Among vacancies requiring apprenticeship training or less,
two out of three vacancies are posted on AMS platform. In contrast, only one in three vacancies is
posted on the AMS platform when the open job requires a tertiary education. Interestingly, there is
not much difference in AMS posting behavior between small and large firms, except for very large
firms with 5000 employees or more where the AMS coverage rate is just below 50%. Appendix
Figure A3 also shows that the AMS coverage rate does not vary systematically by employment
growth. Growing firms appear to have a similar coverage rate compared to stable or shrinking
firms.10


4.2    Measuring the Duration of AMS Vacancies
A first issue to be clarified is the definition of a vacancy and how we measure a vacancy’s duration.
Our starting point is the BLS definition of an open position, which is applied in the collection of
the JOLTS data and according to which a job is open only if the following criteria are met: (1) A
specific job exists and there is work available for that position, (2) the job could start within 30
days, and (3) there is active recruiting for workers from outside the establishment. These criteria
were set in analogy to how the BLS and the ILO define and measure unemployment.
    Applying the BLS definition to the AMS vacancy data is not straightforward. The AMS vacancy
data contains a measure of vacancy duration, measured in days, defined as the difference between
the date the vacancy is filled and the desired start date of the job (= the date when the job becomes
available). In what follows, we refer to this concept as the AMS duration. This is similar to the
concepts of a vacancy in JOLTS, except that the job must be immediately available rather than
within the next 30 days. To gain a more comprehensive view of vacancy filling, we define two
alternative vacancy durations: the JOLTS duration, which measures the duration since posting, but
at most 30 days in advance of the date of availability; and the Posting duration, which measures the
(unrestricted) duration since posting. To be precise, the three vacancy concepts translate into the
following duration measures:
                                      n                   o
   1. AMS duration: dAMS ≡ max t f illed − tavailable , 0
                                        n                                         o
   2. JOLTS duration: d JOLTS ≡ max t f illed − max{tposted , tavailable − 30}, 0

   3. Posting duration: dPosting ≡ t f illed − tposted
  10
    For a comparison of AMS vacancies to all vacancies as captured by the OStE survey, see also Edelhofer and Knittler
(2013). Their evidence shows that, compared to the representative OStE survey, AMS vacancies are more concentrated
on occupations in the middle of the skill spectrum and have somewhat lower education requirements than vacancies
not posted via the AMS. This is consistent with the education gradient of AMS posting reported in Appendix Table
A5.

                                                         11
               Table 1: Summary Statistics for Different Measures of Vacancy Duration


                                                                Vacancy Duration Concept


                                                                  AMS          JOLTS       Posting

                 A. All Filled Vacancies
                 Mean days                                         30.5          40.2          49.4
                 Median days                                       15.0          27.0          33.0

                 Percent with duration = 0 days                    24.3           3.0           0.9
                 Percent with duration = 1-7 days                  13.1          16.7          10.7
                 Percent with duration = 8-30 days                 30.9          35.7          36.3
                 Percent with duration = 31-90 days                24.4          35.2          38.7
                 Percent with duration > 90 days                    7.4           9.4          13.5

                 Observations                                 4,574,340     4,574,340     4,574,340


                 B. AMS Filled Vacancies
                 Mean days                                         18.8          28.5          37.4
                 Median days                                        7.0          18.0          21.0

                 Percent with duration = 0 days                    33.5           1.9           0.8
                 Percent with duration = 1-7 days                  19.7          25.8          19.3
                 Percent with duration = 8-30 days                 29.4          43.2          44.1
                 Percent with duration = 31-90 days                13.8          24.4          27.5
                 Percent with duration > 90 days                    3.7           4.7           8.3

                 Observations                                 1,234,556     1,234,556     1,234,556

                Notes: Authors’ tabulations of different vacancy duration measures using filled va-
               cancy outflows for the years 1997–2014 in the AMS universe.

where tposted is the date when the vacancy is posted in the AMS system, tavailable is the date when the
job becomes available and t f illed is the date when the vacancy is filled. The AMS data contain dAMS
for the entire sample period, measured in days. However, the exact (daily) date of tposted , tavailable ,
and t f illed is available not before 2007. Before 2007, we know tposted , tavailable , and t f illed only at monthly
precision. To have a comparable measure for the full length of the sample period, we approximate
these dates for the earlier period by the 15th of each month and compute the JOLTS and posting
vacancy duration measures accordingly.11
    Note that it is not a priori clear, which vacancy concept should be applied for our analysis.
Ideally, vacancy duration (just like unemployment duration) should measure the duration of the
recruiting (search) spell. Thus, if a firm posts a vacancy but does not actively try to fill it or cannot
  11
      We checked whether this approximation may lead to biased estimates of vacancy durations. It turns out that there
is little difference between the exact and proxied JOLTS- and the Posting duration measures for the period 2007-2014,
where the relevant dates are observed at daily precision (see Appendix Figure A4). See also Elsby, Michaels and
Ratner (2015) for a more detailed discussion of the concept of a vacancy in the JOLTS.
                                                         12
                  Figure 2: Comparison of Different Measures of Vacancy Duration




                                            75
                                            60
                       Duration (in days)
                                            45
                                            30
                                            15
                                            0




                                             1997q1   2001q1     2005q1         2009q1           2013q1
                                                                  Quarter

                                                           AMS        Posting            JOLTS

                      Notes: Comparison of different measures of vacancy duration for filled
                      vacancy outflows in the AMS universe 1997–2014.

fill it because it is posted too far in advance of the date of availability, it should not be counted
as part of the vacancy stock. However, it is difficult to draw the line in practice since recruiting
effort is not directly observable. Our analysis below uses all three vacancy duration measures. A
key advantage of our data is that we can accurately calculate the daily vacancy-filling rate without
imposing any assumptions. This is different from previous studies (such as DFH) relying on
repeated observations of the vacancy stock, which cannot observe the vacancy-filling rate directly
but have to impose assumptions to infer this rate from stock samples and total hires.
     Table 1 shows summary statistics for the three different vacancy duration concepts among the
set of vacancies that are eventually filled (i.e., do not lapse).12 Panel A of the table looks at all filled
vacancies, while Panel B looks at vacancies filled through mediation of the AMS. For the universe
of AMS vacancies, it turns out the average AMS duration is 30.5 days, the average JOLTS duration
is 40.2 days, and the average Posting duration is 49.4 days. Panel B looks at the same indicators
when only vacancies eventually filled through mediation of the AMS are considered. It turns
out that, irrespective of the particular vacancy measure, vacancies filled with AMS mediation last
substantially shorter.
     An important reason for the shorter duration of vacancies filled through mediation of the AMS
is delayed reporting. Vacancies filled through the AMS system are tracked in real time and the
recorded filling date typically corresponds to the true filling date. Information on vacancies filled
outside the AMS system is collected by AMS staff who frequently checks up with the posting
establishment. Since AMS staff only checks whether the vacancy is still active or not (rather
  12
    The statistics look very similar when we restrict the sample to the years 2007 and later, where the JOLTS and
Posting duration is measured in exact days.

                                                                 13
                Figure 3: Vacancy-Filling Hazard, Relative to Date of Availability of Job




                                                 .05
                                                 .04
                         Weekly Filling Hazard
                                                 .03
                                                 .02
                                                 .01
                                                 0




                                                       -52   -39   -26   -13      0     13     26    39     52       65   78   91   104
                                                                               Weeks relative to Availability Date

                         Notes: Vacancy-filling hazard relative to date of availability of job in
                         the AMS universe based on exact dates for the years 2007–2014.

than the filling or lapsing date), the recorded filling date is typically later than the true filling
date, leading to systematically longer vacancy durations for vacancies filled outside the system.13
Another potential reason why durations are shorter for vacancies mediated through the AMS
is that firms post vacancies at the AMS and only turn to other recruiting channels if the search
through the AMS was not successful, though it seems just as plausible that the opposite holds true.
     The three vacancy concepts show a very strong correlation over time, both at seasonal and
business-cycle frequency. This is shown in Figure 2. The correlation coefficient of the quarterly
average of the AMS vacancy duration and the Posting duration is 0.81 and the correlation coefficient
of the AMS vacancy duration and the JOLTS duration is 0.97.14
     The vacancy timing information in the AMS data allows us to explore how vacancy filling
varies with the duration of a vacancy. To shed light on this question, Figure 3 draws the vacancy-
filling hazard against “time to job availability”, which is defined as d˜ = t f illed − tavailable . Notice that
d˜ coincides with AMS duration for positive values of d,˜ but counts a duration as negative when it
is filled prior to the date of availability (when AMS duration is zero). d˜ is zero for vacancies posted
and filled at the desired start date.15 Figure 3 shows how the weekly filling rate varies with d.˜ The
  13
      Comparing Panels A and B of Table 1 shows that the difference is larger for JOLTS and Posting durations than
for AMS duration. This is consistent with AMS staff following up immediately available vacancies more frequently
than vacancies that are not yet available, leading to larger reporting delay for not immediately available vacancies.
Delayed reporting can also explain why the discrepancy is smaller for JOLTS duration than for Posting duration, as the
latter measure is based on a broader vacancy stock (with a larger fraction of not immediately available vacancies).
   14
      In the Appendix Figure A6, we also show that he vacancy-filling rate observed in our data exhibits realistic
business-cycle patterns, with an elasticity with respect to the labor market tightness of between -0.37 and -0.47, which
is consistent with estimates of the matching function.
   15
      When calculating the filling rate as in Figure 3, we have to take into account that different vacancies start out at
different points in time. Specifically, the vacancy-filling hazard after τ periods relative to the desired start date is given

                                                                                          14
 Figure 4: Cumulative Fraction Posted, Filled and Lapsed, Relative to Date of Availability of Job
                    1
                                (a) Cumulative fraction posted                                   (b) Cum. fraction filled (solid) and lapsed (dashed)




                                                                                                                         1
                    .8




                                                                                                                         .8
                                                                                            Fraction Filled and Lapsed
  Fraction Posted
                    .6




                                                                                                                         .6
                    .4




                                                                                                                         .4
                    .2




                                                                                                                         .2
                    0




                                                                                                                         0
                         -180    -150   -120           -90           -60     -30   0                                          -180 -150 -120   -90    -60    -30     0     30     60      90   120   150   180
                                        Days relative to Availability Date                                                                           Days relative to Availability Date



Notes: Cumulative fraction of posted, filled, and lapsed vacancies in the AMS universe based on exact dates for the
years 2007–2014.


graph reveals that the filling rate gradually increases before, peaks at, and gradually falls after
the desired start date.16 Clearly, these dynamic patterns reflect both duration dependence and
heterogeneity and it is not possible to disentangle these two factors.17
    Figure 4 plots the cumulative fraction of posted vacancies (Panel a) and the cumulative fraction
of filled and lapsed vacancies (Panel b) against d.˜ Panel (a) reveals that two thirds of AMS vacancies
are posted before the desired start date, and roughly one quarter are posted earlier than one month
before that date. Panel (b) shows that a non-negligible fraction of AMS vacancies are filled (while
very few lapse) before the desired start date. The vast majority (86%) of AMS vacancies gets
eventually filled. In sum, Figures 3 and 4 show that early posting and filling are quantitatively
relevant. This is interesting per se and points to a margin of employment adjustment that has so
far not been recognized.

by λ(τ) = limh→0 [Pr(τ ≤ d˜ ≤ τ + h)/h]/[Pr(tposted − tavailable ≤ τ ≤ d)],
                                                                        ˜ where we only count vacancies after they were
posted, i.e. τ ≥ tposted − tavailable , at any given time τ.
  16
     Appendix Figure A5 shows similar patterns for the vacancy lapse hazard.
  17
     True negative duration dependence in vacancy-filling rates may arise in the presence of stock-flow matching
(Coles and Smith, 1998), in the presence of phantom vacancies (Albrecht, Decreuse and Vroman, 2019) or due to non-
sequential search where employers select a pool of applicants and then make a job offer (Davis and Samaniego de la
Parra, 2017). Dynamic selection due to unobserved heterogeneity arises when there are vacancies with an intrinsically
high filling rate that leave the sample early while the “surviving” vacancies at longer duration exhibit low filling rates.
For examples of models with heterogeneous filling rates, see Davis (2001), where vacancies for high-productivity jobs
exhibit higher filling rates, or Kaas and Kircher (2015), where fast-growing firms post higher wages to attract more
applicants. There could also be positive dynamic selection before the desired start date as firms expecting a low filling
rate could increase the probability of filling their vacancy by the desired start date by posting early, which could
explain part of the upward slope to the left of the desired start date. See also Ehrenfried and Holzner (2019) for similar
patterns in duration dependence of the vacancy-filling hazard in German data.




                                                                                       15
4.3    Linking AMS vacancies to the ASSD
In the empirical analysis below, we will primarily focus on the empirical association of vacancy
durations and entry wages. This is based on a dataset linking AMS vacancies to information
on workers and establishments from the Austrian social security database (ASSD). The ASSD,
explained in detail in Zweimüller et al. (2009), is a linked employer-employee dataset and covers
the universe of all private sector workers (about 80% of the total workforce) from 1972 onwards.
The ASSD collects all information necessary to verify old-age pension claims. For this purpose,
it records the complete earnings- and employment history for each worker. Moreover, the ASSD
provides information on unemployment insurance spells, and spells on other social insurance pro-
grams (e.g., disability) and also includes a limited set of worker and establishment characteristics.
     We exploit AMS information on the identity of the establishment posting the vacancy and
the worker eventually filling the vacancy to construct two linked vacancy-employer-employee
datasets: (i) a “firm sample”, which links AMS vacancy information to ASSD information on the
establishments’ employment dynamics (employment, hirings, separations, etc.); and (ii) a “worker
sample”, which links AMS vacancy information to the ASSD earnings- and employment history of
the worker filling a vacancy. We use the firm sample for our analysis of the relationship between
vacancy filling and firm growth in Section 5 and the worker sample for our main analysis in the
paper of the relationship between vacancy durations and entry wages in Section 6. Note that
we exclude vacancies for part-time jobs from our firm and worker samples to limit any issues
regarding the hours margin in our wage analysis, since the ASSD only measures daily but not
hourly wages.
     To construct the firm sample, we use the information on establishment identifiers both in the
ASSD and AMS vacancy data, and the mapping translating them based on a firm cross-walk
provided by the Bundesministerium fuer Arbeit, Soziales und Konsumentenschutz in Austria.
Unfortunately, the mapping is not unambiguous, so we confine the analysis to the set of firms that
can be unambiguously matched based on the firm cross-walk, covering around 52% of the firm
identifiers recorded in the vacancy data.18 Note that we calculated this matching rate by excluding
vacancies for part-time jobs from both the AMS universe and the firm sample.
     To construct the worker sample, we exploit information in the AMS vacancy data on the identity
(= the anonymized social security number) of the worker filling the vacancy. This information is
available for hires mediated through the AMS, which happens to be the case for about 27% of all
filled AMS vacancies (see Table A1). These AMS vacancies can be linked to ASSD information on
earnings and employment of the worker filling the vacancy. In the worker sample, we establish
a link at the establishment-level to the ASSD data, using the same cross-walk as for the firm
sample. In addition, in cases where the cross-walk is ambiguous, we link the establishment based
  18
    The main reason for the non-uniqueness of the matching is that the vacancy register and the ASSD use a different
firm/establishment logic, which is a not an uncommon problem with data sources stemming from different data
providers.


                                                        16
              Table 2: Vacancy Characteristics: AMS Universe vs. Matched Subsamples


                                                                                  Sample


                                                                        AMS              Firm         Worker

          Vacancy Characteristics
          At least apprenticeship (%)                                    50.2            54.5             46.7
          Permanent contract (%)                                         78.3            75.0             80.9
          Hired through system (%)                                       23.3            24.0            100.0
          Fixed working time (%)                                         21.3            23.7             27.3
          Full time (%)                                                  75.5           100.0            100.0
          Small firm (%)                                                 44.5            38.2             40.4
          Vienna (%)                                                     17.0            13.3             10.2


          Selected Industries
          Manufacturing, Mining, and Quarrying (%)                       10.3             14.1            17.1
          Construction (%)                                                7.1              9.2            10.6
          Wholesale and Retail (%)                                       14.8             11.1            14.1
          Tourism, Hotels, and Restaurants (%)                           23.4             26.9            18.5
          Other Services (%)                                             32.2             30.6            29.8


          Number of Vacancies                                       5,291,897       2,820,511         802,966
          Number of Establishments                                    267,122         109,855         119,030

         Notes: Authors’ tabulations of vacancy characteristics using all vacancy outflows for the years
        1997-2014 in different samples. A small firm is defined as a firm with 1-10 employees.

on the employment history of the worker matched to the vacancy. More precisely, we identify the
establishment in the ASSD data by the (unique) employment spell that starts within 31 days of
the vacancy-filling date. This additional step in the merging procedure substantially increases the
number of vacancies in the worker sample to which we can assign a unique firm identifier in the
ASSD data, matching 93% of the firm identifiers. For the same reason the worker sample is not a
strict sub-sample of the firm sample because of this additional step in the merging procedure that
is based on workers’ employment history.
    To check the quality of the linking procedure, we compare vacancy characteristics in the linked
firm- and worker samples to the AMS universe to vacancy characteristics in the AMS universe. This
checks whether the linkable vacancies are a representative subset of the AMS universe. In Table 2,
we report summary statistics, comparing the universe of vacancies to our matched subsamples.19
In moving from the AMS universe to the firm sample, we exclude non-linkable firms leaving us
  19
    In line with published statistics of Statistik Austria, we exclude vacancies for apprenticeships, vacancies from firms
in agriculture and fishing, and extraterritorial organizations from the data. The data with these sample restrictions
closely replicates the official time series on AMS vacancies published by Statistik Austria.

                                                           17
            Figure 5: Distribution of Firm Wage Effects: ASSD Universe vs. Matched Samples
                                               (a) Firm Sample                                                                            (b) Worker Sample
          .2




                                                                                                           .2
          .15




                                                                                                           .15
       Fraction




                                                                                                        Fraction
          .1




                                                                                                           .1
          .05




                                                                                                           .05
          0




                                                                                                           0
                  -1.5                    -1                         -.5             0        .5                   -1.5                    -1                     -.5               0         .5
                                                      AKM Firm Fixed Effect                                                                           AKM Firm Fixed Effect

                                                Firm Sample                   ASSD Universe                                                     Worker Sample                 ASSD Universe
                  Means: -0.03 (ASSD Universe), 0.02 (Firm Sample)                                                 Means: -0.03 (ASSD Universe), 0.03 (Worker Sample)




Notes: Distribution of firm wage effects for the ASSD universe and the matched firm and worker subsample, weighted
by average employment.


with 71% of the full-time vacancies in the AMS universe. In moving from the AMS universe to the
worker sample, we only include vacancies resulting in a hire through mediation of the AMS system
where a worker identifier was available leaving us with 86% of the full-time vacancies mediated
through the AMS.20 While the worker sample – the sample used to explore vacancy durations and
entry wages – is substantially smaller than the AMS universe, the descriptive statistics suggest
that it is not that different in terms of vacancy characteristics. Overall, the evidence in Table 2
suggests that the linking procedure works well and is unlikely to be contaminated by the fact that
a substantial number of AMS vacancies cannot be linked due to missing establishment- or person
identifiers.21 In particular, the worker sample looks quite similar to the full sample of vacancies in
terms required formal education, contract type and size of the posting firm.
    A second check assessing the representativeness of our linked vacancy-employer-employee
dataset compares the establishments posting linkable vacancies to the universe of establishments
in the ASSD, which covers all private sector establishments. This checks whether the establish-
ments to which we can link AMS vacancies are a representative subset of the ASSD establishment
universe. In Figure 5, we plot the distribution of firm-wage effect estimated following Abowd,
Kramarz and Margolis (1999). Panels (a) and (b) compare the distribution in the ASSD establish-
ment universe to the corresponding distributions but considering only establishments in the firm
and the worker subsample, respectively. While we discuss this concept in more detail below, it is
an estimate of the average wage paid in a firm, controlling for observed and unobserved worker
characteristics. Clearly, the distributions look very similar, with less mass at both ends of the dis-
tributions compared to the ASSD Universe. In Table A2 in the Appendix, we also checked whether
  20
    We also exclude observations where the observed starting wage was zero (69 cases).
  21
    The regression samples in Section 6 are somewhat smaller than this number because most regressions use the
natural logarithm of vacancy duration as the dependent variable, which is not defined for the sizeable fraction of the
sample with a vacancy duration of zero. See further below in this section for a discussion of this issue. In addition,
some control variables are not available for all observations in the worker sample.
                                                                                                   18
the firm sample is similar to the ASSD universe in terms of industry composition, employer size
and worker turnover. It turns out that the firm sample is somewhat more concentrated in manu-
facturing, construction, retail trade and tourism. Subsamples are also more likely medium sized,
while very small and very large establishments are underrepresented. The subsamples compare
very well to the universe in terms of the distribution across employment turnover categories.
    In sum, while many vacancies cannot be linked, the characteristics of linkable vacancies look
very similar to characteristics of the AMS vacancy universe. This suggests that the linking procedure
works and is unlikely invalidated by missing establishment or person identifiers. However, with
respect to industry and firm size the composition of establishments in the linked samples is
somewhat different from the one in the ASSD establishment universe. This is likely due to either
differences in the likelihood to post vacancies or selectivity in establishments’ propensity to post
vacancies on the AMS platform. While this calls for a cautious interpretation of our results, our
main takeaway is that the linked vacancy-employer-employee data is a highly informative data
source for studying vacancy durations and entry wages. We also probe the robustness of our main
findings in Section 6 below and find that they are not sensitive to controlling for establishment
size nor to splitting the sample by establishment size.


5    Vacancy Filling and Firm Growth
One of the major contributions of DFH is the finding that, at the firm level, the stock of vacancies is
an insufficient statistic for hiring. They document that faster growing firms have higher vacancy
yields (= hire more workers per vacancy posted). Their results are based on the JOLTS, a monthly
survey of the vacancy stocks, gross hires and separations. As argued above, the JOLTS is subject to
aggregation bias, leading to under-sampling of vacancies with short durations. Moreover, JOLTS
does not collect direct information on the duration of a given vacancy. While DFH compute a daily
vacancy-filling rate based on gross hires, separations and vacancy postings and correct for biases
due to time aggregation, it makes sense to reconsider their findings, as our data sample from the
flow and provide a direct measure of vacancy filling. Moreover, it is also interesting to analyze
whether the same patterns emerge with different institutions, such as those of Austria.
   We calculate the monthly employment growth rates in establishment size using the ASSD.
Following DFH, we calculate growth rates allowing for entries and exits, defined as

                                                   nt − nt−1
                                          gt =                   ,
                                                 0.5(nt + nt−1 )

where nt denotes the establishment size in period t. We merge these growth rates and the estab-
lishment size to the vacancy register. Following DFH, we define 207 growth rate bins, allowing
for mass points at -2 and 2, choosing the bins to be narrower for growth rates close to 0. We then
calculate the average vacancy-filling rate within these bins. As DFH, we smooth the results using

                                                    19
                                      Figure 6: Vacancy-Filling Hazard by Establishment Growth and Hiring
  (a) Vacancy-Filling Hazards by Empl. Growth Rates                                                                            (b) Vacancy-Filling Hazards by Hires Rates




                                                                                                               -3.1
                         2.2
                         2




                                                                                                    Log Daily Filling Hazard
                                                                                                                       -3.6
  Daily Filling Hazard
                         1.8




                                                                                                     -4.1
                         1.6
                         1.4




                                                                                                               -4.6
                               -30   -20         -10          0          10          20   30
                                                                                                                                 -4         -3           -2       -1        0
                                           Monthly Employment Growth Rate, Percent                                                               Log Hires Rate


    Notes: Panel (a) shows average vacancy-filling hazards by monthly employment growth rates and Panel (b)
    shows average (log) vacancy-filling hazards by (log) monthly hires rates in the matched firm sample for the
    years 1997–2014. The circles in Panel (b) are based on the averages of log vacancy-filling hazards and log hires
    rates in the employment growth rate bins in Panel (a), but including bins with growth rates below -30% and
    above 30%. The size of each circle is drawn in proportion to the number of observations in the bin and the red
    line shows the hires-weighted least-square estimate with a slope (s.e.) of 0.175 (0.000) and R2 = 0.91.


a centered five-bin moving average.
     The result of this exercise can be seen in Panel (a) of Figure 6.22 We find that same hockey-
stick type pattern as for DFH’s model implied vacancy-filling rate: a strong positive relationship
between vacancy filling and employment growth for growing firms and a constant filling rate
for shrinking firms. Quantitatively, the patterns are not as strong as in DFH who find that the
daily vacancy-filling rate increases fivefold from 0.05 for shrinking firms to around 0.25 for firms
growing 30%, whereas in our data the vacancy-filling rate increases by more than 50% from 0.014
to just below 0.022. This conclusion is confirmed when we compute the elasticity of vacancy-filling
rates to gross hires rates, as shown in Panel (b) of Figure 6. We find a robust positive relationship,
which indicates that firms that hire more workers not only post more vacancies but also fill a given
vacancy faster. The elasticity of the daily filling hazard to the hires rate is substantially smaller
in our data, with a value of 0.18 compared to the elasticity of 0.82 in DFH. Still, our elasticity
implies that vacancy filling increases substantially for establishments with a higher hires rate. The
elasticity, e.g., predicts that the vacancy-filling hazard increases by 47% for establishments with a
hires rate of 0.9 compared to establishments with a hires rate of 0.1.
     It is not clear whether the discrepancy in the magnitude between our estimates and DFH is
due to differences in the measurement of the vacancy-filling rate or differences in the labor market
setting between the U.S. and Austria. Unfortunately, we cannot compute DFH’s model implied
filling rate, because DFH’s method requires the entire stock of vacancies for each firm whereas we
only observe the subset of vacancies posted on the AMS website and thus we cannot distinguish
  22
                 Appendix Figure B1 shows the same pattern for the sample of immediately available vacancies.

                                                                                               20
                           Table 3: Additional Statistics on Hires and Vacancies


                                                                           AMS                DFH

                                                                  All        Immediately
                                                               Vacancies      Available


                  Employment at establishments with                26.4           26.4         34.8
                  no hires in t

                  Employment at establishments with                71.4           78.2         45.1
                  no vacancies at end of t-1

                  Hires in t at establishments with no             61.1           68.6         41.6
                  vacancies at end of t-1

                  Vacancies at end of t at establishments          20.3           23.7         17.9
                  with no vacancies at end of t-1

                 Notes: Authors’ tabulations of hires and vacancies for immediately available and
                all vacancies between 1997–2014 in the matched firm sample compared with results
                of DFH. Hiring in period t means hired between period t − 1 and period t.

the two potential sources of the discrepancy in the magnitude of the elasticity.23 In any event, we
believe a direct measure of vacancy filling as in the AMS data is preferable. Note that the fact
that we only observe AMS vacancies, shouldn’t bias the elasticity, as long as the filling and hiring
patterns are the same for AMS vacancies as for other job openings. Although we cannot check
empirically, there is no a priori reason to believe that the relationship between vacancy filling and
hiring is different for AMS vacancies and vacancies posted elsewhere. Figure A3 in the Appendix
also shows that, in the Austrian vacancy survey, the share of vacancies posted on the AMS website
does not change systematically with establishment growth.
    In summary, the evidence here confirms the view that vacancy postings are not a sufficient
statistic for hiring at the firm level and that firms that grow quickly use other recruiting channels
to attract workers. Appendix Table A4 also shows patterns of hiring and vacancy posting in
the Austrian data similar to those presented by DFH for the US. While AMS vacancy rates tend
to be smaller and AMS vacancy yields larger when compared to DFH, this is not surprising as
JOLTS measures all vacancies at surveyed establishments whereas the AMS vacancy database only
covers vacancies posted at the AMS. For this reason our analysis below focuses on outcomes at
the vacancy level such as vacancy duration rather than outcomes at the establishment level such
as vacancy yields. Finally, in Table 3 we look at further vacancy and hiring indicators. We find
that establishments with no hires at the monthly frequency account for 26% of employment, which
compares to 35% in DFH. We also find that 71% of employment is in establishments with no AMS
  23
     Appendix Figure B1 also shows that the vacancy yield has the same hockey-stick patterns as in DFH. Again,
because we don’t observe all vacancies at given firm, we prefer to focus here directly on the object of interest, which
is the rate of vacancy filling.
                                                          21
vacancy posted during the previous month; and 61% of employment is in establishments that hire
in the current month but did not post an AMS vacancy in the previous month. The corresponding
numbers in DFH are 45% and 42%, respectively. Note that higher numbers are to be expected in
the Austrian data, as AMS vacancies make up only 60% of all posted vacancies. Finally, we find
a high degree of persistence in the establishment-level incidence of AMS vacancies: only 20% of
vacancies are posted in establishments with no vacancy in the previous month, similar to DFH.
    In the Appendix Table A3, we present further evidence showing that hiring and separations
rates are of a similar order of magnitude in the ASSD as in JOLTS. The fact that labor turnover
among Austrian firms is at least as high as in the US has been pointed out in Stiglbauer et al. 2003.
Similar to DFH, we find that vacancy rates and vacancy yields vary substantially across industries
(see Table A4 in the Appendix). While we find remarkably similar vacancy patterns, AMS vacancy
patterns differ from JOLTS with respect to employer size: DFH report that vacancy rates increase
(and vacancy yields decrease) with employer size, the opposite is true in the Austrian data. As
discussed above, the AMS coverage rate is fairly stable across establishment size classes (see Table
A5) and thus differential coverage in the AMS data cannot account for these patterns.


6    Vacancy Durations and Wages on New Jobs
A central assumption in many search-theoretic models of the labor market is that firms post wages
or commit to a wage offer, and that the promised wage affects the likelihood of filling a job opening.
This is true both in models of directed search such as Moen (1997), where a higher posted wage
increases the number of workers applying to the job, or in models of random search such as Burdett
and Mortensen (1998), where a higher posted wage increases the likelihood for a given worker to
accept the job offer.
    Evidence on the relationship between vacancy filling and entry wages is scarce, with the
exception of Faberman and Menzio (2018) who use data from the Earnings and Opportunities
Pilot Project (EOPP) in the U.S. for the years 1980 and 1982. In stark contrast with the above
canonical search models, they document a positive relationship between vacancy durations and
entry wages, even after controlling for firm- and worker characteristics. Faberman and Menzio
interpret their evidence cautiously, arguing that is not necessarily in contradiction with search
theory because their controls may be insufficient to account for all the relevant heterogeneity that
bears on the relationship between starting wages and vacancy duration.
    With the matched vacancy-employer-employee data we can go one step further. Since we can
link the posted vacancy to the earnings history of the worker filling the vacancy, we can look in
more detail on the relationship between vacancy durations and entry wages of eventually filled
vacancies. In what follows, we first analyze the relationship between vacancy durations and
entry wages. In a second step, we decompose the entry wage in its establishment-, worker- and
match-components and analyze the relationship of each with the duration of vacancies.

                                                 22
                                            Figure 7: Log Entry Wage and Log Vacancy Duration




                                            2.8
                    Log(Vacancy Duration)
                                            2.7
                                            2.6
                                            2.5




                                                  3           3.5                       4                4.5
                                                                      Log(Entry Wage)

                                                           Percentile Average               Linear Fit

                    Notes: Each data point corresponds to the average within a given wage
                    percentile of the sample. The sample is trimmed for wage values below
                    the first and above the 99th percentile.


6.1   Vacancy Durations and Entry Wages
We start our empirical analysis in Figure 7 by plotting the raw averages of log vacancy durations for
each percentile bin of the distribution of entry wages. As evident from the figure, the relationship
between entry wages and vacancy duration appears to be non-linear. There is a negative slope
in the lowest percentiles of the entry-wage distribution, but a strongly positive relationship at
medium and high percentiles of the entry wage distribution. While the linear regression line
clearly does not provide a good fit to the data, it is drawn for comparison purposes with the paper
of Faberman and Menzio (2018) whose sample of around 1,500 job openings was too small to
assess non-linearities in the relationship between entry wages and vacancy duration.
    Table 4 further analyzes the relationship between vacancy durations and entry wages. Column
1 documents an overall positive relationship between vacancy durations and entry wages when
controlling for time fixed effects. In Column 2 we include control variables for the region, industry
and the required education level of the job, as well as the gender, age, age squared and the
year of labor market entry of the person matched to the job. While the conditional correlation
remains positive, it becomes smaller in magnitude, suggesting that observed characteristics are
important correlates for vacancy durations. In Column 2 we also include indicators for early
posting (dummies for 0-7 days, 8-30 days, 31-60 days, and more than 60 days). The inclusion of
early-posting dummies addresses the concern that firms trying to fill their vacancies quickly may
be posting early. We find that the reported coefficient in Column 2 remains very similar when we
exclude this set of dummies from the regression. Therefore, posting ahead of time of the date of
job availability does not seem to confound the duration/entry-wage relationship.

                                                                        23
             Table 4: Regressions with Log Vacancy Duration as Dependent Variable


                                                          Log Vacancy Duration

                                          (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)
            Log entry wage              0.230         0.053        -0.037       -0.057        -0.044
                                      (0.014)***    (0.010)***   (0.009)***   (0.016)***    (0.015)***

            Log job duration                                                    0.033
                                                                              (0.003)***

            On-job wage growth                                                  -0.033
                                                                               (0.017)*

            Firm empl. growth                                                   -0.007
                                                                                (0.010)

            Firm age                                                            -0.001
                                                                              (0.000)***

            Log firm size                                                       0.035
                                                                              (0.004)***

            Observations                535357       535357       535357        205783       294208
            R2                           0.010        0.174        0.211         0.236        0.589

            Baseline Controls             No           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
            Occ. FE (6 digits)            No           No           Yes           Yes          No
            Individual FE                 No           No           No            No           Yes

            Notes: Authors’ regressions with the worker sample for the years 1997-2014. Standard
           errors are clustered at the establishment level, except for column 5 where clustered standard
           errors did not converge due to the presence of many dummy variables. All regressions
           include a quarter fixed effect. Baseline controls include gender, age, age squared, dummies
           for the minimum educational requirement of the job and the year of labor market entry,
           as well as region & industry and an early posting fixed effect, where early posting fixed
           effects are dummies for posting the vacancy 0-7 days, 8-30 days, 31-60 days, and more than
           60 days prior to the desired start date.


   Column 3 is our preferred specification. In this column, we additionally control for 6-digit-
occupation-fixed effects. The conditional correlation suggests an elasticity of vacancy durations
with respect to the entry wage of -0.037. Note that the negative sign is in line with the qualitative
prediction of wage-posting models. The fact that the sign on the wage changes when including
the various control variables as well as a fine grid of occupation dummies (i.e. when moving
from Column 1 to Column 3 in Table 4) suggests that heterogeneity at the worker- and match
level is an important confounder of the relationship between vacancy durations and entry wages.
These results also echo the results in Marinescu and Wolthoff (2020), who find that the relationship
between applications and posted wages has the expected (positive) sign only when including job


                                                        24
title fixed effects in the regression.24 Overall, however, the relation remains economically small,
with a 1% increase in the entry wage being associated with a 0.04% decrease in vacancy duration.
    In Column 4, we show that the relation is robust to the inclusion of further worker- and firm
covariates, which are available only for a subsample of firms in our data. It turns out that vacancies
with longer durations are associated with longer subsequent job durations and lower wage growth
on the filled job. Including these variables in the regression, however, does not alter significantly
the coefficient of the entry wage, suggesting that these variables are not systematically correlated
with the entry wage. This alleviates concerns that the coefficient of the entry wage is biased due
to a possible negative correlation with wage growth on the job. This latter robustness check is
important, because theories of posted wages ultimately apply to wages over the entire duration of
the job and not just the entry wage. We also find that smaller and older firms are filling vacancies
more quickly.25 The final Column 5 shows results for a subsample of workers with at least two
unemployment spells. This allows to include individual fixed effects in the regression model to
control for any time-invariant observed and unobserved worker heterogeneity. The regression
coefficient on the entry wage is remarkably similar to the one in Column 3. Based on the evidence
of Table 4 we conclude that there exists a robust, negative, and significant association between
vacancy durations and entry wages, but the economic significance of the relationship is small.26


6.2    Vacancy Durations and Firm Wage Premia
In this sub-section, we decompose the entry wage in its establishment, worker and match com-
ponents and relate each of them to vacancy durations. As demonstrated by the results in Table 4,
worker- and job-specific heterogeneity as captured by occupation dummies and individual worker
fixed-effects are an important confounder of the relationship between vacancy durations and entry
wages. Since our vacancy-employer-employee data let us observe the earnings histories of those
workers who are matched to a given vacancy for many years before and after the match, we can
go one step further. We decompose the starting wage into worker- and firm effects using the
framework of Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (1999) (AKM) and then relate each component of
the wage to vacancy durations. More precisely, we build a yearly panel of daily wages (always
looking at the job held on June 30) of the universe of workers and firms observed in the Austrian
  24
     To be precise, in their results the sign only changes when they include job title fixed effects but not when they just
include 6-digit SOC codes.
  25
     Consistent with Figure 6, the effect of employment growth is negative, though it is not significant. If we control for
dummies for bins of employment growth in the regressions in Table 4, the effect is negative and significant, capturing
better the non-linear nature of the relationship between employment growth and vacancy filling. The estimated
coefficient on the wage remains unaffected.
  26
     In the Appendix Table C9, we report results where we regress the log of vacancy duration on the log of the present
discounted value (PDV) of wages over the employment spell. The estimated elasticities are negative, but remain
small. See Appendix C.3 for details of how we compute the PDV of wages of a job.




                                                            25
                                                    Figure 8: AKM Worker Effects and Log Vacancy Duration

                               2.8




                                                                                                                                      2.7
                                                                                                              Log(Vacancy Duration)
       Log(Vacancy Duration)
                               2.7




                                                                                                                                      2.65
                               2.6




                                                                                                                                      2.6
                                                                                                                                      2.55
                               2.5




                                     -.4   -.3    -.2        -.1       0           .1          .2   .3                                       -.2   -.1   0       .1       .2      .3        .4      .5   .6
                                                        AKM Worker Fixed Effect                                                                              AKM Worker Experience Effect

                                                 Percentile Average               Linear Fit                                                             Percentile Average            Linear Fit

                Notes: The figures show partial correlations of AKM worker effects and log vacancy duration, i.e. control-
                ling for the AKM establishment effects, the AKM residuals and the AKM person experience effect (left)
                resp. the AKM person experience effect (right). Each data point corresponds to the average within a given
                percentile of the AKM worker effect in the sample. The sample is trimmed for wage values below the first
                and above the 99th percentile.

matched employer-employee data (ASSD) and estimate the model

                                                                           log wit = θi + ψJ(i,t) + x0it ρ + dt + εijt ,                                                                                      (1)

where wit denotes the wage of worker i in year t, θi identifies the worker effect, ψJ(i,t) identifies
the firm effect (where J(i, t) denotes the firm where i is employed in year t). We also control
for observable time-varying worker characteristics xit (specifically, we control for a fourth-order
polynomial in experience and firm tenure), year dummies dt and εijt denotes the residual. Since
the model is computationally very demanding, we use the years 1985 to 2014 of the ASSD data to
estimate (1).27 We then relate the components of the entry wage to vacancy duration by estimating

                                                        log dijkt = β0 + ψ̂ j βψ + θ̂i βθ + x0it ρ̂βρ + ε̂ijt βε + z0ijkt γ + ηijkt ,                                                                         (2)

where dijkt denotes the vacancy duration of vacancy k posted by firm j and eventually matched
to worker i at time t. ψ̂ j , θ̂i , x0it ρ̂ and ε̂ijt denote the estimated coefficients from equation (1) and
zijkt is a vector of additional characteristics of the firm-worker pair. Note that x0it ρ̂ is a pure worker
experience effect as tenure is zero by definition for entry wages.
     Figures 8-10 present partial correlation graphs of vacancy durations and the various wage
components. The points in the graph correspond to the percentile bins of the distribution of
wage components, which are drawn against the average (log) vacancy durations associated with
  27
     The basic assumption of the AKM framework is additive separability between firm and worker effects. To assess
how well this describes the data, we computed the average residual εi jt according to the decile of the firm and worker
effect, as proposed by Card, Heining and Kline (2013). Generally, deviations from additive separability appear to be
mild (the absolute value always stays below 0.015) and concentrated among establishments paying high wages. See
Figure C1 in the Appendix for details.


                                                                                                         26
                 Figure 9: AKM Establishment Effect and Log Vacancy Duration




                                              2.7
                      Log(Vacancy Duration)
                                              2.65
                                              2.6




                                                     -.5   -.4   -.3        -.2       -.1          0            .1   .2
                                                                        AKM Establishment Effect

                                                                 Percentile Average                Linear Fit

                    Notes: The figure shows partial correlations of AKM establishment
                    effects and log vacancy duration, i.e. controlling for AKM worker
                    effects and the AKM residual. Each data point corresponds to the
                    average within a given percentile of the AKM establishment effects in
                    the sample. The sample is trimmed for wage values below the first and
                    above the 99th percentile.

the respective bin. Figure 8 draws the vacancy durations, respectively, against the AKM person
(pre-experience) effect (left panel), and the AKM experience effect (right panel). Both graphs
reveal a clear positive relationship suggesting that both dimension of worker heterogeneity are
strongly associated with longer vacancy durations which, in terms of magnitude, seem equally
relevant. Figure 9 plots vacancy durations against the AKM establishment effect and reveals a
clear negative relationship. Taken together, Figures 8 and 9 reveal a clear picture: Vacancies posted
by high-wage firms last shorter, vacancies filled by high-wage workers last longer. In Figure 10,
we plot the percentile bins of the residual wage distribution against vacancy durations. The
conditional correlation is less clear. This is reassuring as we would have expected that there are
many unobserved wage determinants (not attributable to permanent worker- or establishment-
differences) correlating with vacancy durations in both directions, thus yielding a less clear-cut
association. In addition, the AKM person and AKM establishment effects are measured with error
and thus these person- and firm-level measurement errors also go into the residual.
    We proceed by presenting regression results that include the components of the AKM decom-
position (2) instead of the log entry wage as regressors (Panel A of Table 5). The interesting
benchmark for comparison is the naive regression of log vacancy duration on the starting wage in
Column 2 of Table 4. The regression is now based on the smaller sample (where AKM firm effects
can be identified) and yields a coefficient of 0.066, the same order of magnitude as before. Column
2 of Table 5 shows the results corresponding to the figures 8-10. In particular, the regression reveals
the most notable result visible from Figure 9: high-wage firms manage to fill their vacancies more


                                                                              27
                                Figure 10: AKM Residual and Log Vacancy Duration




                                                   2.68
                                                   2.66
                           Log(Vacancy Duration)
                                                   2.64
                                                   2.62
                                                   2.6
                                                   2.58




                                                          -.5   -.3             -.1          .1          .3    .5
                                                                                  AKM Residual

                                                                      Percentile Average          Linear Fit

                        Notes: The figure shows partial correlations of AKM residuals and log
                        vacancy duration, i.e. controlling for AKM worker and establishment
                        effects. Each data point corresponds to the average within a given
                        percentile of the AKM residual in the sample. The sample is trimmed
                        for wage values below the first and above the 99th percentile.

quickly.28 The elasticity of the vacancy duration with respect to the firm (log-)wage component is
-0.082 and highly statistically significant. The point estimates becomes somewhat larger when we
add occupation fixed effects (Column 3), additional controls (Column 4), and when we confine the
sample by workers who are repeatedly observed filling a vacancy so that individual fixed effects
can be included instead of the worker’s AKM wage component (Column 5).29 Qualitatively, this
result appears consistent with a model in which some firms post higher wages to attract more
workers and fill vacancies more quickly, but the effect appears economically small with a 1% in-
crease in the firm effect being associated with a 0.1% decrease in the duration of the vacancy for our
preferred specification in Column 3. In the next section, we discuss the magnitude of our findings
and relate them to the findings in DFH as well as the predictions of search-theoretic models of firm
dynamics. As discussed in detail, the estimated effect of wages on vacancy duration in our data
can account only for a very small fraction of the variation in vacancy filling across firms.
    Column 2 of Table 5 also reports the estimates of the remaining wage components on vacancy
durations. Both the AKM worker and the AKM experience components are positively associated
with vacancy durations. This suggests that, in the raw data, worker heterogeneity is the dominant
force behind the overall positive relationship of vacancy durations and entry wages. If we interpret
  28
      Note that the coefficients on the AKM effects in Column 2 do not have to add up to the coefficient on the entry
wage in column 1. E.g., consider the case where the variance of one of the components is tiny but its effect on vacancy
duration is large, then the regression coefficient on the log entry wage in column 1 will do little to reflect the effect of
the component with the small variance, whereas the regression in column 2 will because it breaks out all components
of the entry wage.
   29
      We do not control for 6-digit occupation effects in this specification due to possible multicollinearity introduced
by the presence of a large set of dummy variables.
                                                                                      28
  Table 5: Regressions with Log AMS Vacancy Duration as Dependent Variable


                                                         Log Vacancy Duration

                                        (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)
 Panel A.
 Log entry wage                       0.066
                                    (0.010)***

 AKM establishment effect                           -0.082       -0.098        -0.175       -0.158
                                                  (0.023)***   (0.019)***    (0.026)***   (0.029)***

 AKM worker fixed effect                            0.279        0.057         0.045          —
                                                  (0.013)***   (0.013)***    (0.021)**

 AKM worker exp. effect                             0.079        -0.020        -0.038       -0.007
                                                  (0.015)***    (0.011)*      (0.020)*      (0.029)

 AKM residual                                       0.056        -0.029       -0.041        -0.011
                                                  (0.010)***   (0.009)***    (0.019)**      (0.016)

 Observations                         486997       486997        486997       188290        275967
 R2                                    0.178        0.179         0.216        0.239         0.589

 Panel B.
 Log entry wage                       0.053
                                    (0.010)***

 Avg. establish. log earnings                       -0.007       -0.071        -0.106       -0.103
                                                   (0.015)     (0.014)***    (0.020)***   (0.021)***

 Residual entry wage                                0.090        -0.021       -0.027        -0.015
                                                  (0.010)***    (0.009)**     (0.017)       (0.015)

 Observations                         535087       535087        535087       205783        294043
 R2                                    0.174        0.174         0.211        0.236         0.589

 Baseline Controls                      Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 Additional Controls                    No             No          No           Yes           No
 Occ. FE (6 digits)                     No             No          Yes          Yes           No
 Individual FE                          No             No          No           No            Yes

 Notes: Authors’ regressions with the worker sample for the years 1997-2014. Standard errors are
clustered at the establishment level. All regressions include a quarter fixed effect. Baseline controls
include gender, age, age squared, dummies for the minimum educational requirement of the job
and the year of labor market entry, as well as region & industry and an early posting fixed effect,
where early posting fixed effects are dummies for posting the vacancy 0-7 days, 8-30 days, 31-60
days, and more than 60 days prior to the desired start date. Additional controls include on-job
wage growth, log(job duration), lagged firm employment growth, firm age and log(firm size).



                                                  29
these AKM worker effects as proxy for innate and accumulated human capital, these patterns
may be either the result of longer decision lags in the hiring process of high-skilled workers
or due to more competition among firms the high-skill segments of the labor market (i.e., a
tighter labor market). The fact that unemployment durations tend to be shorter for higher-
skilled workers lends support for the latter view, though it does not preclude the presence of
both mechanisms. Introducing occupation fixed effects in Column 3 strongly reduces the size of
both estimated coefficients, but a robust, significantly positive association remains. The size of
the coefficients further decline when we introduce additional controls (Column 4), suggesting that
controls/occupation dummies and AKM worker effects are substitutes. All regressions in Columns
2-5 include the AKM residual that captures unobserved earnings-determinants not attributable to
permanent worker- or firm-differences. The correlation of these factors with vacancy durations is
positive in Columns 2, but turns negative once 6-digit occupation effects and other controls are
included, which mirrors the results in Table 4.
    In Panel B of Table 5 we use an alternative decomposition of the entry wage based on the yearly
average of the log of earnings at the establishment (capturing the establishment-component of
the wage) and the deviation of the entry wage from it (capturing the match-specific component
of the wage). Unlike AKM, however, this decomposition does not adjust for fixed heterogeneity
in wages across workers, but we do control for the same worker-level controls as in Panel A.
In any event, the patterns are similar to those of Panel A. The average establishment wage turns
significantly negative as soon as we start to control for 6-digit occupation suggesting that individual
heterogeneity confounds the naive regression of Column 1. Including further controls (Column 4)
or individual fixed effects (Column 5) confirms the picture. The main takeaway of Table 5 is clear:
vacancies that are eventually filled by high-wage workers last longer; vacancies that are posted
by high-wage firms last shorter. However, the association is quantitatively small suggesting a
duration elasticity with respect to the establishment component of the wage of about -0.1.


6.3   Robustness
In this section, we perform a series of robustness checks for the results in Tables 4 and 5.
    As discussed in section 4.2 above, the richness of the vacancy data leads to alternative definitions
of a vacancy. The measurement concept underlying the results reported so far is AMS duration.
In Table 6, we repeat the analysis in Tables 4 and 5 for the two alternative definitions of vacancy
duration. Column 1 repeats the results from our preferred specification (Column 3 in Tables 4
and 5). In Columns 2 and 3, we use as a dependent variable the duration of a vacancy according
as measured by the JOLTS duration and Posting duration concepts, respectively. Panel A reports
the results for the entry wage, whereas Panel B includes the AKM wage components and in
Panel C includes the average establishment wage and the deviation of the entry wage from the
average establishment wage. The alternative vacancy duration measures do lead to very similar
results, with vacancy durations being significantly negatively associated with the entry wage and
                                                  30
its establishment component. While the estimated correlations are somewhat smaller, the overall
picture remains: shorter durations of vacancies with high entry wages, in particular those posted
by high-wage firms; longer durations of vacancies filled by high-wage workers.30 The fact that
the elasticities are somewhat smaller is mainly due to the fact that the average duration for these
alternative measures is (by construction) somewhat longer.
    In Appendix C we provide further results and robustness checks on the association between
vacancy duration and the entry wage and its establishment component. Table C2 shows results
for all three vacancy duration concepts where we measure vacancy duration in days rather than in
logs. We report the results for our preferred specification and find that the association between the
entry wage and its AKM establishment component and vacancy duration is significantly negative
but economically small. Depending on which vacancy concept we use, the results imply that a
10 percent increase in the entry wage reduces vacancy duration by 0.15 to 0.26 days. Similarly,
a 10 percent increase in the establishment component reduces the duration of a vacancy by 0.21
to 0.49 days. The results on the AKM worker effect are not as robust, though this specification
controls for a lot of worker-level controls. In separate results not shown in the Appendix, the
AKM worker effect was strongly positively associated with vacancy duration when not using
worker-level controls in the regression.
    Tables C7 and C8 also show that the results are robust to trimming the sample below the 1st
and above 99th percentile of the distribution of starting wages, restricting the sample to men,
excluding recalls or controlling for the quintiles of average turnover at the establishment over the
sample period. Tables C3 and C6 in the Appendix also show that our results are not affected when
we use weights that adjust for selection of our worker sample relative to the AMS universe based
on educational requirements of the job, industry and region for each year in the sample period
(see the table notes for further details).
    In the Appendix Table C8, we provide further evidence on the relationship between vacancy
durations and the AKM components of the entry wages. A potential concern is that assumptions
underlying the AKM decomposition are too restrictive. For instance, they could be biased due to
endogenous mobility. Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002) argue that the estimated person effects might
be driven by the sequential sampling of alternative (high) wages leading to persistent differences
between otherwise identical individuals. We address this concern by looking only at job changes
associated with an intermediate spell of unemployment. Intermediate unemployment spells break
the link of sequential sampling, as a wage offered to a currently unemployed worker will only
depend on worker and firm type and not on the employment history. Nevertheless, estimating
our preferred specification on this sample reveals that the conclusions are unchanged.31
  30
     In the Appendix, we provide the full set of results using the JOLTS vacancy concept (Panel A of Table C3 and
Table C4) and the time-since-posting measure (Panel B of Table C3 and Table C5).
  31
     Re-estimating the worker and firm effects restricting our panel to job changes interrupted by registered unem-
ployment spells implies that, for every firm and worker, we lose a large number of observations leading to less precise
estimates. In addition, we cannot identify either the firm or worker effect for some vacancies.


                                                          31
 Table 6: Results for Alternative Specifications and Vacancy Concepts


                                                          Vacancy Concept

                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)
                                           Log AMS         Log JOLTS     Log Posting
 Panel A.
 Log entry wage                              -0.037           -0.021        -0.017
                                           (0.009)***       (0.010)***    (0.008)***

 Observations                                  535357        787623         796457
 R2                                             0.211         0.185          0.341

 Panel B.
 AKM establishment effect                    -0.098           -0.074        -0.074
                                           (0.019)***       (0.015)***    (0.013)***

 AKM worker fixed effect                     0.057            0.046         0.050
                                           (0.013)***       (0.011)***    (0.009)***

 AKM worker exp. effect                         -0.020       -0.000          0.004
                                               (0.011)*      (0.011)        (0.009)

 AKM residual                                -0.029           -0.012         -0.007
                                           (0.009)***        (0.010)        (0.008)

 Observations                                  486997        711293         718968
 R2                                             0.216         0.190          0.342

 Panel C.
 Avg. establish. log earnings                -0.071           -0.047        -0.044
                                           (0.014)***       (0.012)***    (0.010)***

 Residual entry wage                         -0.021           -0.008        -0.004
                                            (0.009)**        (0.011)        (0.008)

 Observations                                  535087        787123         795954
 R2                                             0.211         0.185          0.341

 Baseline Controls                               Yes           Yes           Yes
 Occ. FE (6 digits)                              Yes           Yes           Yes
 Individual FE                                   No            No            No

 Notes: Authors’ regressions with the worker sample for the years 1997-2014. Standard
errors are clustered at the establishment level. The results in Column (1) are the same
as the results in Column 3 of Table 5, whereas the other columns report results with
different dependent variables: Column (2) uses the log of JOLTS duration; Column (3)
uses the log of duration since posting as dependent variable. See footnote of Table 5
for further details regarding the control variables.


                                          32
    An alternative robustness check in Table C8 is based on the subsample of observations where
we can rely on at least 10 observations per worker and 10 observations per firm in the earnings
regression retrieving AKM worker and AKM establishment effects. This yields slightly stronger
association on AKM worker fixed- and experience-effects, but almost no change in the association
of vacancy durations and AKM establishment effects. Finally, we report results where we split the
sample by establishment size. We find that the coefficient on the AKM establishment coefficient
is very similar for both small and large establishments. This is reassuring given that large estab-
lishments are somewhat under-represented in our sample, and it suggests that our main results
would not change if we had more large establishments in our sample. Overall, our robustness
checks confirm that the estimates presented in Tables 4 and 5 are stable and of similar size.
    We conclude that our vacancy-employer-employee data reveal a clear-cut and robust relation-
ship between vacancy durations and entry wages: vacancy durations bear a negative association
with entry wages and firm-wage premia, though the economic significance of these effects are
small. Moreover, vacancies filled by high-wage workers are associated with longer vacancy dura-
tions, pointing to the importance of worker-heterogeneity to explain observed vacancy durations.


7        Implications for Search-Theoretic Models with Wage Posting
         and Recruiting Intensity
In this section, we relate our evidence on the association between entry wages and vacancy
durations to predictions of search-theoretic models of the labor market and firm dynamics.
    Qualitatively, our results are consistent with search models where firms post and commit to a
wage offer, where high-wage offers either attract more applications (in models directed search; see
Moen (1997)) or face a higher probability of acceptance (in models of random search; see Burdett
and Mortensen (1998)). While our evidence cannot discriminate between these two mechanisms,
both generate a negative relationship of vacancy duration with starting wages — as in our data,
when we control sufficiently for worker heterogeneity.32
    While these results are qualitatively consistent with models of wage posting, it is important to
shed light on the quantitative implications of the measured elasticity of vacancy duration to the
starting wage. A key question is whether firms’ wage policies can account for the sharp rise in
vacancy filling for growing firms, as documented by DFH. Their findings have been interpreted as
evidence for the importance of recruiting effort in hiring, including firms’ wage policies. To assess
the quantitative importance of our findings, we proceed in two ways.
    32
    The Burdett and Mortensen model generates a negative relationship of vacancy durations and wages due to the
presence of on-the-job search, where employed workers on different rungs of the job ladder have different acceptance
probabilities of outside offers, whereas in our data we only observe the matching process of unemployed workers. It
would, however, be easy to extend the model to allow for heterogeneous values in leisure (as, e.g., in Albrecht and
Axell (1984)) to generate differences in reservation wages and acceptance probabilities among the unemployed.


                                                        33
    First, we compute the patterns of vacancy filling by establishment hires rates as predicted by
our elasticity of vacancy duration to entry wages. For the purpose of this analysis, we assume
that changes in log duration are equal to changes in log vacancy-filling rates (with opposite
sign), which holds exactly in the absence of duration dependence. We also estimate in the ASSD
universe to what extent entry wages differ by hires rates. We find a positive but small relationship
in the data that is robust to controlling for additional worker and establishment characteristics.
We find an elasticity of entry wages to hires rates of between 0.03 (controlling for time) to 0.05
(controlling for time and establishment fixed effects), see Figure B2 in the Appendix for further
details.33 Combined with this evidence, we can then use our estimated wage-duration elasticities
to predict the vacancy-filling hazard by establishment hires rates. If we use our preferred elasticity
of vacancy duration to entry wages of -0.04, combined with an elasticity of entry wages to hires
rates of 0.05, this implies an elasticity of vacancy filling to hires rates of 0.002. If we compare, e.g.,
an establishment with a hires rate of 0.9 to an establishment with a hires rate of 0.1, this elasticity
predicts that the vacancy-filling rate is 0.4% higher for the establishment with the hires rate of
0.9. Even if we use the elasticity of vacancy duration to the establishment component of the entry
wage (-0.1), the predicted vacancy-filling rate will increase only by 1.1% for the establishment
with the higher hires rate. In stark contrast, in Panel (b) of Figure 6 we replicated the DFH-type
evidence with the Austrian data and found that the vacancy-filling rate increases strongly with
the hires rate, with an elasticity of 0.175, implying that establishments with a hires rate of 0.9 have
a vacancy-filling rate that is 47% higher compared to establishments with a hires rate of 0.1. This
back-of-the-envelope calculation thus suggests that firms’ wage policies can account only for a
very small fraction of the variation in vacancy filling by establishment hiring.
    Second, we evaluate the quantitative predictions of models with wage posting and contrast
them to our findings. Kaas and Kircher (2015) set up a model of firm dynamics with wage posting
and directed search, calibrated towards matching the facts in DFH and other relevant facts about
firm dynamics. Their model is thus a natural starting point to evaluate the quantitative importance
of our findings. In Appendix D.1, we re-calibrate the model of Kaas and Kircher to match the
average job-filling rate and job-finding rate in the Austrian data. The implied elasticity of vacancy
duration to starting wages is -17.9, which is more than two orders of magnitude larger than our
preferred estimates of the elasticity in columns 3 of Tables 4 and 5. The implied elasticity becomes
substantially smaller in a version of their model where the cost of posting a vacancy is nearly
linear in vacancies. In this case, however, the model predicts a nearly flat relationship between
hiring and vacancy filling and thus is inconsistent with the facts in DFH.34 This suggests that –
  33
      The elasticity becomes somewhat smaller when we control for establishment and worker characteristics, see Figure
B2 in the Appendix. These results are also consistent with the results in Carrillo-Tudela, Gartner and Kaas (2020) who
find that wages increase by 4-7 log points for firms with a hires rate of 0.25 compared to those with a zero hires rate.
   34
      In Table D4, we explore various alternative calibrations of the model and find that the model predicts a high
elasticity of vacancy duration to starting wages for all of these calibrations. Table D3 also shows that there is
fundamental tension between matching the DFH-type facts, summarized by the elasticity of vacancy filling to hires
rates, on the one hand and our new evidence on the elasticity of vacancy duration to starting wages on the other hand.

                                                          34
while qualitatively consistent with models of wage posting – the measured elasticity of vacancy
duration to wage posting is too small to explain meaningful variation in hires rates across firms.
    To conclude, both of these exercises suggest that firms’ wage policies are unlikely to serve as
an important recruiting instrument, at least not in a manner that is quantitatively important and
could account for the patterns in vacancy filling by establishment growth and hires rates. There
are, however, a number of important potential caveats to this conclusion.
    First, our empirical analysis shows that worker heterogeneity is important in explaining va-
cancy duration and confounds the empirical relationship between starting wages and vacancy du-
ration at the firm and job level. For this reason, in Appendix D.1 we extend the model of Kaas and
Kircher to allow for ex-ante heterogeneity in productivity across workers. We calibrate worker-
type specific vacancy-posting costs such as to match the evidence on the relationship between
vacancy duration and AKM worker fixed effects: if vacancy-posting costs are not fully propor-
tional to worker-specific productivity, firms post more vacancies for high-productivity/high-wage
workers, which lowers the filling rate per vacancy and thus lengthens vacancy duration. While
this model generates an overall positive correlation between vacancy duration and starting wages,
the relationship between vacancy duration and starting wages remains negative at the firm and
job level. However, the relationship predicted by the model is an order of magnitude larger than
measured in our data, unless we assume nearly linear vacancy-posting costs.35 Our conclusion
from above – wage posting explains only little firm-level variation in vacancy filling – thus appears
to be robust in a model with worker heterogeneity.
    Second, there could be a potential endogeneity issue, in the sense that firms may post higher
wages for vacancies they expect to take longer to fill. This type of heterogeneity in vacancy-filling
rates would lead the coefficient on the entry wage and its AKM establishment effect to be biased
towards zero or even a positive number. Yet, if this were the case, firms should respond also
on other margins. In particular, firms expecting long vacancy durations should post further in
advance of their desired start date. Our empirical results, however, are not strongly affected once
we control for the duration between dates of posting and desired job start (which we observed in
the data for each single vacancy). In other words, even when we line up vacancies that were posted
equally early (= equally long before the desired job start date), the relationship between vacancy
posting and starting wages remains similar. Furthermore, one may argue that even if firms don’t
respond by how much in advance they post the vacancy, firms with high quit rates may find it
more difficult to fill vacancies for replacement hiring and thus post higher wages. Again, this
would bias the relationship between entry wages and vacancy durations upward. Tables C7 and

The key model parameter is the elasticity of vacancy-posting costs, γ: a high cost-elasticity implies that it is costly for
growing firms to post many vacancies at once and thus they would rather rely on posting vacancies with high wage
offers; a low cost-elasticity implies that growing firms would rather offer low wages and post many vacancies instead.
   35
      To be more precise, we simulate the model and then estimate the AKM decomposition on the model simulated
data. We find that in the model simulated data, vacancy duration remains highly elastic to the AKM firm effect
and AKM residual. We also find this conclusion is not affected by whether our model features positive assortative
matching between workers and firms or not, see Appendix Table D3 for details.

                                                            35
C8 in the Appendix show, however, that the estimated elasticities remain unaffected when we
control for the quintiles of average turnover at the establishment over the sample period. The fact
that the coefficients are nearly unaffected when we control for turnover suggests that the potential
endogeneity of the entry wage to the expected vacancy duration is a minor issue. Thus it cannot
close the gap that exists between the actual patterns in vacancy filling by establishment hires rates
and the ones predicted by our wage-duration elasticities.
    Third, our model simulations are based on a version of the model of Kaas and Kircher with flat-
wage contracts. Allowing for wage-tenure contracts may break the link between starting wages
and the value of a job if wage growth is inversely related to the starting wage. It is important
to note here, however, that our regressions results in the empirical section are not affected when
we control for wage growth on the job and the duration of the job, suggesting that the restriction
to flat-wage contracts in our model is reasonable, at least in the present empirical application.
Furthermore, we estimated the expected present discounted value of wage payments for each firm
in the ASSD data base. We estimate the expected present discounted value of wage payments of a
job based on firm-level wage-tenure profiles and industry-level tenure-separation profiles (see the
Appendix C.3 for details). Table C9 in the Appendix shows that the estimated elasticity between
vacancy duration and the presented discounted value is negative, but remains small.
    Finally, measurement error in wages or the presence of non-wage amenities could bias the
coefficients on the AKM firm effect and the residual toward zero. While measurement error is
likely to be small in administrative data, the presence of non-wage amenities may attenuate the
estimated relationship between entry wages and vacancy duration. E.g., recent work by Hall and
Mueller (2018) and Sorkin (2018) suggests that non-wage amenities are important to understand
the job-acceptance behavior of unemployed workers or worker flows across firms. In Appendix
D.2, using the log-linear structure in Hall and Mueller (2018), we show that attenuation bias in our
regression framework only arises when wages and non-wage amenities are negatively correlated,
but are unbiased if the two are uncorrelated. Hall and Mueller (2018) estimate that wages and
non-wage amenities are moderately negatively correlated, which results in a bias by a factor of
0.75. I.e., if the measured elasticity between vacancy duration and the wage is 0.10 as in Column
3 of Table 5, then the true elasticity would be 0.13. This remains a far cry from reconciling the two
order of magnitude difference between the model prediction and its empirical counterpart.36
    Overall, these results suggest that firms are not using posted wages as an active recruiting
device, at least not in a manner that is quantitatively large enough to explain the sharp increase in
vacancy filling for growing firms. Rather, the results in DFH – and our replication of their results –
appear to be driven by other channels of recruiting effort, as in Gavazza et al. (2018), or by growing
firms relaxing their hiring standards, as in Sedlacek (2014) and Carrillo-Tudela et al. (2020).
  36
     Hall and Mueller (2018) assume that the flow value of the job v is the sum of the wage y and the non-wage amenity
n, where the latter is correlated with wages according to n = η − κ(y − ȳ) and where η is the idiosyncratic component
of the non-wage amenity, κ determines the negative correlation with y and ȳ is the mean wage. We show in Appendix
D.2 that the OLS regression coefficient of log duration on starting wages is downward biased by a factor 1 − κ relative
to the coefficient of a regression of log duration on the total job value v. Hall and Mueller (2018) estimate that κ = 0.25.
                                                            36
8    Conclusion
In this paper, we study how vacancy durations are related to entry wages of workers filling a
position. We exploit data from a new linked data set combining information on (durations and
characteristics of) individual vacancies with matched employer-employee data. The resulting
vacancy-employer-employee dataset allows us to link vacancy information to the employment
dynamics (growth, hirings, separations) of the posting firm as well as to the wages of the workers
eventually filling a vacancy. Exploiting the link of the vacancy to the worker allows us to study the
association between vacancy durations and entry wages. We find that starting wages and vacancy
durations are positively correlated in raw data, but the correlation turns negative when controlling
sufficiently for worker-level heterogeneity. Moreover, we find that the negative association is
particularly strong with the establishment component of the starting wage.
    The link of the vacancy to the firm also allows us to replicate in the Austrian data the re-
sults of Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2013) that growing firms fill their vacancies faster.
DFH’s evidence suggests that firms rely heavily on additional instruments to recruit workers, with
important implications for aggregate labor market dynamics and shifts in the Beveridge curve.
While we find a negative association between entry wages and vacancy duration, we argue that
the estimated elasticity remains economically small. We find that the elasticity between the entry
wage and vacancy duration is at least an order of magnitude too small to account for the sub-
stantial variation of matching efficiency that exists across establishments. Overall, our findings
thus suggest that firms’ wage policies do not constitute an important margin of recruiting effort.
Instead, hiring standards or other channels of recruiting effort such as spending on third-party
recruiters, employee referral systems, professional networking sites, recruiting events, etc., are
likely to be more important drivers of matching efficiency. Gavazza, Mongey and Violante (2018)
also show that the way recruiting effort is modelled has important and distinct implications for
the evolution aggregate matching efficiency over the business cycle. For these reasons, we believe
that more empirical and theoretical research on the different potential channels of recruiting effort
is a promising area for future research.


References
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis, “High Wage Workers and High Wage
    Firms,” Econometrica, 1999, 67 (2), 251–334.
Abraham, Katharine G, “Structural-Frictional vs. Deficient Demand Unemployment: Some New
    Evidence,” American Economic Review, 1983, 73 (4), 708–24.
Abraham, Katharine G., “Help-Wanted Advertising, Job Vacancies, and Unemployment,” Brook-
    ings Papers on Economic Activity, 1987, 18 (1), 207–248.
Albrecht, James, Bruno Decreuse, and Susan Vroman, “Directed Search and Phantom Vacancies,”
    Mimeo, 2019.
                                                 37
Albrecht, James W. and Bo Axell, “An Equilibrium Model of Search Unemployment,” Journal of
    Political Economy, 1984, 92 (5), 824–840.
Alvarez, Fernando, Katarina Borovickova, and Robert Shimer, “The Proportional Hazard Model:
    Estimation and Testing using Price Change and Labor Market Data,” NBER Working Paper
    No. 22188, 2016.
AMS, “Geschäftsbericht 2017, Trendwende am Arbeitsmarkt.,” 2018.
Andrews, M. J., S. Bradley, D. Stott, and R. Upward, “Successful Employer Search? An Empirical
    Analysis of Vacancy Duration Using Micro Data,” Economica, 2008, 75 (299), 455–480.
Bagger, Jesper, Francois Fontaine, Manolis Galenianos, and Ija Trapeznikova, “Vacancies, Em-
    ployment Outcomes and Firm Growth: Evidence From Denmark,” Mimeo, 2020.
Banfi, Stefano and Benjamin Villena-Roldan, “Do High-Wage Jobs Attract More Applicants?
    Directed Search Evidence from the Online Labor Market,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2019, 37
    (3), 715–746.
Barnichon, Regis, “Building a composite Help-Wanted Index,” Economics Letters, 2010, 109 (3),
    175–178.
Barron, John M, Mark C Berger, and Dan A Black, “Employer Search, Training, and Vacancy
    Duration,” Economic Inquiry, 1999, 35 (1), 167–192.
Belot, Michele, Philipp Kircher, and Paul Muller, “How Wage Announcements Affect Job Search
    Behavior: A Field Experiment,” IZA Discussion Paper Series No. 11814, 2018.
Berman, Eli, “Help Wanted, Job Needed: Estimates of a Matching Function from Employment
    Service Data,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1997, 15 (1), S251–92.
Blanchard, Oliver Jean and Peter Diamond, “The Beveridge Curve,” Brookings Papers on Economic
    Activity, 1989, 20 (1), 1–76.
Borovickova, Katarina and Robert Shimer, “High Wage Workers Work for High Wage Firms,”
    NBER Worker Paper No. 24074, 2019.
Burdett, Kenneth and Dale T. Mortensen, “Wage Differentials, Employer Size,and Unemploy-
    ment,” International Economic Review, 1998, 39 (2), 257–273.
      and Elizabeth J Cunningham, “Toward a Theory of Vacancies,” Journal of Labor Economics,
    1998, 16 (3), 445–78.
Card, David, David S. Lee, Zhuan Pei, and Andrea Weber, “Inference on Causal Effects in a
    Generalized Regression Kink Design,” Econometrica, 2015, 83 (6), 2453–2483.
     , Fabrizio Colella, and Rafael Lalive, “Does Stated Gender Preference Affect Recruiting?,”
    Mimeo, University of Lausanne, 2018.
     , Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline, “Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West German
    Wage Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (3), 967–1015.
     , Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber, “Cash-On-Hand and Competing Models of Intertemporal
    Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122
    (4), 1511–1560.
Carrillo-Tudela, Carlos, Hermann Gartner, and Leo Kaas, “Recruiting Policies, Job Filling Rates,
    and Matching Efficiency,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 14727, 2020.

                                              38
Coles, Melvyn G and Eric Smith, “Cross-Section Estimation of the Matching Function: Evidence
    from England and Wales,” Economica, 1996, 63 (252), 589–97.
      and       , “Marketplaces and Matching,” International Economic Review, 1998, 39 (1), 239–54.
Davis, Steven J., “The Quality Distribution of Jobs and the Structure of Wages in Search Equilib-
    rium,” NBER Working Paper No. 8434, 2001.
      and Brenda Samaniego de la Parra, “Application Flows,” Mimeo, 2017.
     , Christof Röttger, Anja Warning, and Enzo Weber, “Job Recruitment and Vacancy Durations
    in Germany,” Regensburger Diskussionsbeiträge zur Wirtschaftswissenschaft No. 481, 2014.
     , R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger, “The Establishment-Level Behavior of Vacan-
    cies and Hiring,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (2), 581–622.
Dickerson, Andy, “The Distribution and Determinants of Job Vacancies: Evidence From the 2001
    Employers Skill Survey,” Royal Economic Society Annual Conference 2003 Paper No. 63, 2003.
Edelhofer, Edith and Käthe Knittler, “Analyse der Arbeitsmarktnachfrage in Österreich,” Statis-
    tische Nachrichten, November 2013, pp. 1033–1045.
Eeckhout, Jan and Philipp Kircher, “Assortative Matching With Large Firms,” Econometrica, 2018,
    86, 85–132.
Ehrenfried, Felix and Christian Holzner, “Dynamics and endogeneity of firms’ recruitment be-
    haviour,” Labour Economics, 2019, 57, 63 – 84.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Ryan Michaels, and David Ratner, “The Beveridge Curve: A Survey,” Journal
    of Economic Literature, 2015, 53 (3), 571–630.
Engbom, Niklas and Christian Moser, “Earnings Inequality and the Minimum Wage: Evidence
    from Brazil,” Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Working Paper No. 7, 2018.
Faberman, R. Jason and Guido Menzio, “Evidence on the Relationship between Recruiting and
    the Starting Wage,” Labour Economics, 2018, 50, 67–79.
Gavazza, Alessandro, Simon Mongey, and Gianluca Violante, “Aggregate Recruiting Intensity,”
    American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (8), 2088–2127.
Gorter, Cees, Peter Nijkamp, and Piet Rietveld, “Employers’ Recruitment Behaviour and Vacancy
    Duration: An Empirical Analysis for the Dutch Labour Market,” Applied Economics, 1996, 28
    (11), 1463–1474.
Hall, Robert E. and Andreas I. Mueller, “Wage Dispersion and Search Behavior: The Importance
    of Non-Wage Job Values,” Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126 (4), 1594–1637.
Hershbein, Brad and Lisa B. Kahn, “Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased Technological
    Change? Evidence from Vacancy Postings,” American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (7), 1737–72.
Holzer, Harry J, “Job Vacancy Rates in the Firm: An Empirical Analysis,” Economica, 1994, 61
    (241), 17–36.
Holzer, Harry J., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger, “Job Queues and Wages,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 1991, 106 (3), 739–768.
Kaas, Leo and Philipp Kircher, “Efficient Firm Dynamics in a Frictional Labor Market,” American
    Economic Review, 2015, 105 (10), 3030–60.
Kuhn, Peter, “The Internet as a Labor Market Matchmaker,” IZA World of Labor, May 2014, p. 18.

                                                39
Lalive, Rafael, Jan van Ours, and Josef Zweimüller, “How Changes in Financial Incentives Affect
     the Duration of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73 (4), 1009–1038.
Leoni, Thomas and Wolfgang Pollan, “Lohnentwicklung und Lohnunterschiede in der Industrie
     seit 2000,” WIFO Monatsberichte, October 2011.
Marinescu, Ioana Elean and Ronald Wolthoff, “Opening the Black Box of the Matching Function:
     The Power of Words,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2020, 38 (2), 535–568.
Marinescu, Ioana Elena, “The General Equilibrium Impacts of Unemployment Insurance: Evi-
     dence from a Large Online Job Board,” Journal of Public Economics, 2017, 150, 14–29.
Modestino, Alicia, Daniel Shoag, and Joshua Ballance, “Upskilling: Do Employers Demand
     Greater Skill When Workers are Plentiful?,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.
Moen, Espen R., “Competitive Search Equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, 1997, 105 (2),
     385–411.
Mongey, Simon and Giovanni L. Violante, “Macro Recruiting Intensity from Micro Data,” NBER
     Working Paper No. 26231, 2019.
Postel-Vinay, Fabien and Jean-Marc Robin, “Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker and
     Employer Heterogeneity,” Econometrica, 2002, 70 (6), 2295–2350.
Riese, Martin and Stefan Bruckbauer, “Die Laufzeit der offenen Stellen in Österreich 1984 -
     1986,” in: Bundesministerium für Arbeit und Soziales (Hrsg.), Die Dynamik des Arbeitsmarktes.
     Forschungsberichte aus Sozial- und Arbeitsmarktpolitik Nr. 19, 1987, pp. 9–62.
Sedlacek, Petr, “Match efficiency and firms’ hiring standards,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2014,
     62, 123–133.
Shimer, Robert, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,” American
     Economic Review, 2005, 95 (1), 25–49.
Sorkin, Isaac, “Ranking Firms Using Revealed Preference,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018,
     133 (3), 1331–1393.
Stiglbauer, Alfred, Florian Stahl, Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, and Josef Zweimüller, “Job Creation and
     Job Destruction in a Regulated Labor Market: The Case of Austria,” Empirica, 2003, 30,
     127–148.
Sunde, Uwe, “Empirical Matching Functions: Searchers, Vacancies, and (Un-)biased Elasticities,”
     Economica, 2007, 74 (295), 537–560.
van Ours, Jan and Geert Ridder, “Cyclical Variation in Vacancy Durations and Vacancy Flows :
     An Empirical Analysis,” European Economic Review, 1991, 35 (5), 1143–1155.
      and        , “Vacancies and the Recruitment of New Employees,” Journal of Labor Economics,
     1992, 10 (2), 138–55.
Yashiv, Eran, “The Determinants of Equilibrium Unemployment,” American Economic Review,
     2000, 90 (5), 1297–1322.
Zweimüller, Josef, Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, Rafael Lalive, Andreas Kuhn, Jean-Philippe Wuellrich,
     Oliver Ruf, and Simon Büchi, “Austrian Social Security Database,” NRN working paper No.
     2009-03, 2009.


                                                40
Appendix - For Online Publication
Contents
A Data                                                                                                   2
  A.1 Descriptive Statistics on the AMS Vacancy Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
  A.2 AMS Vacancies, ASSD Universe and OStE Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
  A.3 Additional Descriptives: Vacancy Duration Concepts, Vacancy Lapses, and Business
       Cycle Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

B Vacancy Filling and Firm Growth                                                                      12

C Vacancy Duration and Wages on New Jobs                                                               14
  C.1 AKM Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      14
  C.2 Additional Regression Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    16
  C.3 Estimating the Expected Present Discounted Value of Wages of a Job . . . . . . . . .             24

D Implications for Search Theoretic Models                                                    26
  D.1 Kaas and Kircher (2015) with Ex-Ante Worker Heterogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
  D.2 Non-Wage Amenities and Attenuation Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35




                                                    1
A         Data

A.1         Descriptive Statistics on the AMS Vacancy Database

                      Table A1: Size and structure of the AMS Vacancy Database, 1997-
                      2014


                                                                   Vacancies        Establishments

                                                                        N      %                  N

                       A. Vacancies by Exit Status
                       Total                                     5,291,897   100            267,122
                       Filled Vacancies                          4,574,340     86           254,705
                                               by AMS            1,234,556     27           162,961
                                               by Others         3,339,784     73           229,669
                       Lapsed Vacancies                            717,557     14           110,129


                       B. Multiple Vacancies
                       Total                                     5,291,897   100            267,122
                       Single Vacancies                          1,417,461     27           245,934
                       Multiple Vacancies                        3,874,436     73           139,300
                                               Identical         2,148,453     55            93,114
                                               Not Identical     1,725,983     45           109,186

                       Notes: Number of vacancies and number of distinct establishments in the AMS
                      universe 1997–2014. Right-censored vacancies are vacancies still in progress in
                      2014-2, while left-censored spells are vacancies without an inflow in the sample
                      period.


    One common issue with job board data is that firms post one vacancy but intend to hire multiple
workers for that position. Survey data such as the JOLTS have an advantage in this respect, as they
collect information on the number of open positions and do not rely on the number of postings.
Luckily, the AMS asks firms about the number of open positions and records multiple and possibly
identical vacancies as separate entries in the data. It makes this effort because it would like to
know many unemployed workers can be matched to the firm. Figure A1 shows (employment-
weighted) distribution of the number of vacancies by firm in a typical month, weighted by the
employment share of each firm. About 50% of employment is in establishments posting exactly
one vacancy, 18% post two vacancies and the remainder of firms posts three or more vacancies.1
We also find that many of the multiple vacancies are indeed identical: among firms that post
at least two vacancies in a given month, 55% of vacancies have a twin-sister vacancy, meaning
    1
        We also find that 77% of firms in our firm sample do not have any vacancy open in a typical month.
                                                             2
              Figure A1: Distribution of Number of Vacancies by Firm and Month




                    .5
                    .4 .3
                Density
                    .2
                    .1
                    0




                            0      2             4            6           8          >=10
                                                 Number of Vacancies

                                Number of Identical Vacancies          Number of Vacancies

         Notes: Employment weighted distribution of number of vacancies by firm and month in the
         matched firm sample for immediately available vacancy outflows 1997–2014.


that all characteristics of the vacancy are identical (but not the vacancy outcomes such as vacancy
duration). As can be seen in Figure A1, the share of identical vacancies is particularly high among
firms that post 10 vacancies or more in a given month.




                                                       3
A.2   AMS Vacancies, ASSD Universe and OStE Survey

       Figure A2: Filled AMS Vacancy Outflows and ASSD Hires from Unemployment



                   Number of Filled Vacancies in AMS (in thousands)
                                                                      400
                                                                      300
                                                                      200
                                                                      100
                                                                      0




                                                                            1997    1999       2001     2003      2005        2007     2009     2011       2013
                                                                                                                       Year

                                                                                                 All Filled Outflows                 AMS Filled Outflows
                                                                       1
                   ASSD Hires from Unemployment
                   Share of AMS Vacancy Fillings in

                                    .6        .8




                                                                                                                                         Mean: 0.47
                             .4




                                                                                                                                         Mean: 0.31
                    .2




                                                                                                                                         Mean: 0.19
                                                                       0




                                                                             1997    1999        2001     2003     2005       2007      2009     2011      2013
                                                                                                                       Year

                                                                                           All Hires             Excluding Recalls              Blue-Collar Hires

        Notes: Panel (a) shows the number of filled vacancy outflows in the AMS (in thousands) 1997–
        2013, while Panel (b) shows the number of vacancy outflows filled through the AMS as a share
        of ASSD hires from unemployment. The solid line shows filled vacancy outflows as a share of
        all hires from unemployment, while the dashed line exclude recalls and the dotted line only
        considers hires from unemployment into blue-collar jobs excluding recalls.




                                                                                                                  4
Table A2: Employment Shares: ASSD Universe versus Matched
Firm Sample

                                                      Employment Share

                                                        ASSD          Firm
                                                      Universe      Sample
 Austrian Sample                                        100.00       100.00

                             Major industry
 Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                       1.50         0.11
 Manufacturing, mining, and quarrying                    17.43        25.55
 Construction                                             7.31         9.49
 Wholesale and retail trade                              15.77        16.27
 Tourism, hotels, and restaurants                         5.72         6.33
 Transportation, information, and communication           8.29         6.15
 Finance and insurance                                    3.49         3.85
 Education, health, and social services                   8.37         7.46
 Other services                                          30.64        23.68

                        Establishment size classes
 0 to 9 employees                                        19.73        10.20
 10 to 49 employees                                      21.31        24.07
 50 to 249 employees                                     20.90        26.89
 250 to 999 employees                                    16.33        21.41
 more than 1000 employees                                21.73        17.44

                        Worker turnover category
 No Turnover                                             23.67        16.10
 First Quintile                                          15.27        16.90
 Second Quintile                                         15.30        16.95
 Third Quintile                                          15.40        16.71
 Fourth Quintile                                         15.08        16.91
 Fifth Quintile                                          15.27        16.44

                Establishment Wage Fixed Effects Quartiles
 First Quartile                                           4.27         6.93
 Second Quartile                                         10.44        16.24
 Third Quartile                                          29.53        27.46
 Fourth Quartile                                         49.53        49.24

                         Number of Observations
 Number of Vacancies                                          0    2,820,511
 Number of Establishments                             1,601,249      109,855
 Number of Firm-Month                                79,582,304   14,450,183
 Notes: Employment shares based on ASSD data for the ASSD universe and the
firm sample 1997–2014.




                                    5
Table A3: Monthly Hires and Separation Rates: ASSD Universe versus
Matched Firm Sample

                                                        ASSD               Firm

                                                     Hires     Sep.     Hires     Sep.

 Austrian Sample                                      4.38     4.28       4.17     3.86

                                    Major industry
 Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                  15.88   15.67       11.12    10.71
 Manufacturing, mining, and quarrying                 2.62    2.63        2.51     2.29
 Construction                                         6.10    6.18        5.52     5.34
 Wholesale and retail trade                           3.62    3.55        3.38     3.02
 Tourism, hotels, and restaurants                    11.37   11.18       11.70    11.24
 Transportation, information, and communication       3.92    3.85        4.64     4.18
 Finance and insurance                                2.10    2.09        1.98     1.76
 Education, health, and social services               4.02    3.74        4.01     3.52
 Other services                                       4.04    3.88        4.29     3.99

                               Establishment size classes
 0 to 9 employees                                     6.35     6.23       6.54     6.01
 10 to 49 employees                                   5.53     5.43       5.33     4.98
 50 to 249 employees                                  4.40     4.31       4.19     3.90
 250 to 999 employees                                 3.46     3.35       3.23     2.97
 more than 1000 employees                             2.14     2.06       2.29     2.08

                               Worker turnover category
 No Turnover                                          0.00    0.00        0.00     0.00
 First Quintile                                       0.34    0.50        0.55     0.65
 Second Quintile                                      1.11    1.19        1.34     1.36
 Third Quintile                                       2.29    2.26        2.45     2.37
 Fourth Quintile                                      4.78    4.57        4.61     4.33
 Fifth Quintile                                      20.33   19.47       16.36    14.65

                      Establishment Wage Fixed Effects Quartiles
 First Quartile                                       8.21     8.03       6.27     5.75
 Second Quartile                                      5.99     5.89       4.73     4.42
 Third Quartile                                       4.41     4.39       4.37     4.11
 Fourth Quartile                                      3.43     3.29       3.52     3.21

                               Number of Observations
 Number of Vacancies                                             0           2,820,511
 Number of Establishments                                1,601,249             109,855
 Number of Firm-Month                                   79,582,304          14,450,183
 Notes: Hires and separation rates based on ASSD data for the ASSD universe and the firm
sample 1997–2014.




                                           6
Table A4: Vacancy Rates and Vacancy Yields by Industry, Size, Turnover, and Wage Fixed
Effect

                                                         Vacancy rate               Vacancy yield

                                                                 Immediately                  Immediately
                                                           All    Available            All     Available


 Austrian Sample                                          1.18            0.76         3.73          5.68
 DFH                                                       2.5               .          1.3             .


                                             Major industry
 Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                       1.46            0.94       20.22          43.36
 Manufacturing, mining, and quarrying                     0.72            0.51        3.58           5.11
 Construction                                             1.24            0.95        4.34           5.99
 Wholesale and retail trade                               0.79            0.53        4.42           6.63
 Tourism, hotels, and restaurants                         4.31            1.95        3.18           6.23
 Transportation, information, and communication           1.02            0.64        4.88           7.83
 Finance and insurance                                    0.55            0.39        3.80           5.31
 Education, health, and social services                   0.56            0.29        7.34          15.07
 Other services                                           1.48            1.09        3.53           4.74

                                       Establishment size classes
 0 to 9 employees                                         3.40            1.88         2.03          3.60
 10 to 49 employees                                       1.49            1.03         3.72          5.38
 50 to 249 employees                                      1.04            0.75         4.52          6.21
 250 to 999 employees                                     0.54            0.37         6.62          9.59
 more than 1000 employees                                 0.40            0.25         6.78         11.03

                                       Worker turnover category
 No Turnover                                              1.38            0.85         0.00          0.00
 First Quintile                                           0.27            0.16         2.74          4.70
 Second Quintile                                          0.45            0.29         3.38          5.28
 Third Quintile                                           0.63            0.41         4.18          6.30
 Fourth Quintile                                          1.01            0.70         5.02          7.22
 Fifth Quintile                                           3.27            2.24         5.56          7.96

                               Establishment Wage Fixed Effects Quartiles
 First Quartile                                           1.43            0.92         4.54          7.35
 Second Quartile                                          1.16            0.76         4.18          6.49
 Third Quartile                                           1.34            0.89         3.45          5.13
 Fourth Quartile                                          1.04            0.67         3.74          5.66

                                        Number of Observations
 Number of Vacancies                                 2,820,511       2,758,823    2,820,511    2,758,823
 Number of Establishments                              109,855         109,855      109,855      109,855
 Number of Firm-Month                               14,450,183      14,450,183   14,450,183   14,450,183
Notes: Vacancy rate and vacancy yield based on stock vacancies for the years 1997–2014 in the firm sample.




                                                    7
         Table A5: Vacancy Characteristics in Representative Vacancy Survey

                                                         AMS Posting            Vacancy Rate

                                                         Share      Vacancies   Rate      Firm-
                                                                                        Quarters

                                            Major industry
 Manufacturing                                            0.63        213,279   0.015     663,553
 Construction                                             0.68        138,647   0.018     818,335
 Wholesale and Retail Trade                               0.56        248,290   0.010   1,794,662
 Transportation and Storage                               0.52         87,514   0.015     343,884
 Accommodation and Food Service                           0.73        168,681   0.014   1,195,458
 Information and Communication                            0.34         81,645   0.019     256,192
 Financial and Insurance Activities                       0.36         49,977   0.017     202,798
 Real Estate Activities                                   0.38         20,083   0.012     244,547
 Professional, Scientific and Technical Activities        0.37        142,148   0.017     951,214
 Administrative and Support Activities                    0.73        206,879   0.018     292,157
 Public Administration and Defense                        0.50         73,586   0.003     109,083
 Education                                                0.40         25,024   0.004     135,961
 Human Health and Social Work                             0.50         69,314   0.006     659,357
 Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation                      0.50         10,620   0.006     153,957
 Other Service Activities                                 0.63         36,550   0.012     445,534
 Total                                                    0.57      1,582,518   0.013   8,354,469

                                       Establishment size classes
 0–9                                                      0.55        426,303   0.013   6,731,647
 10–49                                                    0.61        422,891   0.014   1,337,067
 50–249                                                   0.60        321,441   0.013     228,469
 250–999                                                  0.58        190,233   0.009      45,585
 1,000–4,999                                              0.55        142,505   0.007      10,330
 5000+                                                    0.47         79,145   0.006       1,371
 Total                                                    0.57      1,582,518   0.013   8,354,469

                                           Education classes
 Compulsory School                                        0.65        445,193       .           .
 Apprentice                                               0.67        596,890       .           .
 Secondary School                                         0.53         74,710       .           .
 "Meister"                                                0.54         21,546       .           .
 Higher School Certificate                                0.42        264,971       .           .
 Above Higher School Certificate                          0.31        176,965       .           .
 Missing                                                  0.20          2,241       .           .
 Total                                                    0.57      1,582,518       .           .
 Notes: Share of vacancies with AMS posting and quarterly vacancy rate based on a representative
vacancy survey 2009q1–2018q1 (Offene Stellenerhebung, OStE) excluding part-time, seasonal, and
apprentice vacancies.




                                                     8
Figure A3: Share of Vacancies with AMS Posting by Employment Growth Based on Representative
Vacancy Survey


                                              .8
        Share of Vacancies with AMS Posting
                                              .7
                                              .6
                                              .5
                                              .4
                                              .3
                                              .2




                                                   -.3   -.2   -.1             0             .1   .2   .3
                                                                     Employment Growth Bin




    Notes: The figure shows the share of vacancies posted with the AMS by employment growth bin in a rep-
    resentative vacancy survey 2009q1–2018q1 (Offene Stellenerhebung, OStE) excluding part-time, seasonal,
    and apprentice vacancies. The solid line shows raw data and the dashed line controls for year and quarter
    effects.




                                                                           9
A.3                  Additional Descriptives: Vacancy Duration Concepts, Vacancy Lapses,
                     and Business Cycle Patterns

      Figure A4: Comparison of Duration Measures Based on Exact or Proxied Posting Date
                                                          (a) Posting Duration                                                                                                       (b) JOLTS Duration
                               90




                                                                                                                                                         90
                               75




                                                                                                                                                         75
                               60




                                                                                                                                                         60
       Duration (in days)




                                                                                                                                   Duration (in days)
                               45




                                                                                                                                                         45
                               30




                                                                                                                                                         30
                               15




                                                                                                                                                         15
                               0




                                                                                                                                                         0
                                     1997q1               2001q1                 2005q1          2009q1            2013q1                                       1997q1               2001q1                 2005q1          2009q1            2013q1
                                                                             Quarterly Date                                                                                                             Quarterly Date

                                                                            Exact               Proxied                                                                                                Exact               Proxied




Notes: Comparison of duration measures based on exact and proxied posting date in the AMS universe for the years
1997–2014.




Figure A5: Vacancy-Filling Hazard and Vacancy Lapse Hazard, Relative to the Date of Availability
of the Job
                                                    (a) Weekly Filling Hazard                                                                                                  (b) Weekly Lapse Hazard
                               .05




                                                                                                                                                         .01
                               .04




                                                                                                                                   Weekly Lapse Hazard
       Weekly Filling Hazard
                               .03




                                                                                                                                                         .005
                               .02
                               .01
                               0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                     -52      -39   -26     -13       0     13      26    39    52       65   78   91   104                                     -52      -39   -26     -13       0     13      26    39    52       65   78   91   104
                                                                   Weeks relative to Availability Date                                                                                        Weeks relative to Availability Date




Notes: Weekly vacancy filling and lapse hazard relative to the date of the availability of the job in the AMS universe
based on exact vacancy dates for the years 2007–2014.




                                                                                                                              10
Figure A6: The Vacancy-Filling Hazard, the Unemployment Rate and Labor Market Tightness
over Time, for All Vacancies (Left) and Immediately Available Vacancies (Right)

                                                                 Panel A. Vacancy-Filing Hazards and Unemployment
                                    .02




                                                                                                                                                                                     .03
                                                                                                                    6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                    5.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5.5
                                    .018
         Daily Job Filling Hazard




                                                                                                                                                          Daily Job Filling Hazard
                                                                                                                          Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Unemployment Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                     .025
                                                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                    .016




                                                                                                                    4.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                     .02
                                    .014




                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                    3.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3.5
                                    .012




                                                                                                                                                                                     .015




                                           1997q1 1999q1 2001q1 2003q1 2005q1 2007q1 2009q1 2011q1 2013q1                                                                                   1997q1 1999q1 2001q1 2003q1 2005q1 2007q1 2009q1 2011q1 2013q1
                                                                        Quarterly Date                                                                                                                                   Quarterly Date

                                                      Filling Hazard (LHS)               Unemployment Rate (RHS)                                                                                       Filling Hazard (LHS)               Unemployment Rate (RHS)



                                                        Panel B. Vacancy-Filing Hazards and Labor Market Tightness
                                    .02




                                                                                                                                                                                     .03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                    2
                                 .018




                                                                                                                    1.8
                                                                                                                           Labor Market Thightness




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Labor Market Thightness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
           Daily Job Filling Hazard




                                                                                                                                                          Daily Job Filling Hazard
                                                                                                                                                                             .025
                                                                                                                    1.6
                     .016




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                                    1.4




                                                                                                                                                            .02
         .014




                                                                                                                    1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                    1
                                    .012




                                                                                                                                                                                     .015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .5




                                       1997q1 1999q1 2001q1 2003q1 2005q1 2007q1 2009q1 2011q1 2013q1                                                                                   1997q1 1999q1 2001q1 2003q1 2005q1 2007q1 2009q1 2011q1 2013q1
                                                                        Quarterly Date                                                                                                                                   Quarterly Date

                                                     Filling Hazard (LHS)           Labor Market Thightness (RHS)                                                                                     Filling Hazard (LHS)           Labor Market Thightness (RHS)


Notes: Labor Market Tightness is defined as the ratio of the stock of vacancies in the AMS data and the number of
unemployed from labor force survey data (Source: OECD). Labor Market Tightness is normalized to 1 at the beginning
of the sample period. The elasticity of the vacancy-filling hazard to labor market tightness is -0.47 (lower left panel)
and -0.37 (lower right panel).




                                                                                                                                                     11
B                     Vacancy Filling and Firm Growth

Figure B1: Vacancy Yields and Vacancy-Filling Hazards, for All Vacancies (Left) and Immediately
Available Vacancies (Right)

                                                        Panel A. Vacancy Yields by Monthly Employment Growth Rates




                                                                                                                                                            10
                             8




                                                                                                                                                            8
                             6
    Vacancy Yield




                                                                                                                                 Vacancy Yield
                                                                                                                                                            6
                             4




                                                                                                                                                            4
                             2




                                                                                                                                                            2
                             0




                                                                                                                                                            0
                                   -30           -20             -10                0            10           20           30                                     -30            -20             -10                0            10           20           30
                                                        Monthly Employment Growth Rate, Percent                                                                                         Monthly Employment Growth Rate, Percent

                                                    Unconditional                       Controlling for Establishment FE                                                            Unconditional                       Controlling for Establishment FE




                                              Panel B. Vacancy-Filling Hazards by Monthly Employment Growth Rates
                             2.2




                                                                                                                                                            2.8
                                                                                                                                                            2.6
                             2
      Daily Filling Hazard




                                                                                                                                     Daily Filling Hazard
                                                                                                                                                            2.4
                             1.8




                                                                                                                                                            2.2
                             1.6
                             1.4




                                                                                                                                                            2




                                   -30            -20            -10                0             10           20          30                                     -30             -20            -10                0             10           20          30
                                                         Monthly Employment Growth Rate, Percent                                                                                         Monthly Employment Growth Rate, Percent


                                                              Panel C. Vacancy-Filling Hazards by Monthly Hires Rates
                     -3.1




                                                                                                                                                    -2.8
     Log Daily Filling Hazard




                                                                                                                                     Log Daily Filling Hazard
                       -3.6




                                                                                                                                                       -3.3
       -4.1




                                                                                                                                       -3.8
                     -4.6




                                                                                                                                                    -4.3




                                         -4                 -3                 -2                       -1                 0                                            -4                  -3                 -2                       -1                 0
                                                                       Log Hires Rate                                                                                                                  Log Hires Rate

                                         Log Daily Filling Hazard                       Hires-Weighted Least Squares                                                    Log Daily Filling Hazard                        Hires-Weighted Least Squares
                                 Slope (s.e.) = 0.175 (0.000), R-squared = 0.912.                                                                                Slope (s.e.) = 0.145 (0.000), R-squared = 0.857.



Notes: The left-hand-side panels show results for all vacancies, whereas the right-hand-side panels show results for
immediately available vacancies. All figures are based on the matched firm sample for the years 1997–2014.
                                                                                                                                12
                           Figure B2: Entry Wages by Monthly Hires Rate, Across and Within Establishments
                                                                                         Panel A. Controlling for Time Only
                                 Within and Across Establishments                                                                                                         Within Establishments
          4.2




                                                                                                                                     4.2
Log Daily Entry Wage




                                                                                                                           Log Daily Entry Wage
                 4




                                                                                                                                            4
      3.8




                                                                                                                                 3.8
          3.6




                                                                                                                                     3.6
          3.4




                                                                                                                                     3.4
                           -5                  -4                   -3              -2            -1              0                                   -4                  -3                  -2              -1             0               1
                                                                      Log Hires Rate                                                                                                            Log Hires Rate

                                Log Daily Entry Wage                          Employment-Weighted Least Squares                                            Log Daily Entry Wage                          Employment-Weighted Least Squares
                           Slope (s.e.) = 0.031 (0.000), R-squared = 0.198.                                                                           Slope (s.e.) = 0.048 (0.000), R-squared = 0.356.




                                   Panel B. Controlling for Establishment and Worker Characteristics and Time
                                 Within and Across Establishments                                                                                                         Within Establishments
          4.4




                                                                                                                                     4.4
                     4.2




                                                                                                                                                4.2
  Log Daily Entry Wage




                                                                                                                             Log Daily Entry Wage
            4




                                                                                                                                       4
3.8




                                                                                                                           3.8
          3.6




                                                                                                                                     3.6




                           -5                  -4                   -3              -2            -1              0                                   -4                  -3                  -2              -1             0               1
                                                                      Log Hires Rate                                                                                                            Log Hires Rate

                                Log Daily Entry Wage                          Employment-Weighted Least Squares                                            Log Daily Entry Wage                          Employment-Weighted Least Squares
                           Slope (s.e.) = 0.018 (0.000), R-squared = 0.192.                                                                           Slope (s.e.) = 0.028 (0.000), R-squared = 0.364.


       Notes: Average log daily entry wages by monthly hires rate in the ASSD 1997–2014. The figure plots
       average log daily entry wages, controlling for year fixed effects and establishment (size, industry and
       region) as well as worker characteristics (age, gender, year of labor market entry and AKM worker fixed
       effects), against employment-weighted averages of the (log) hires rate by DFH employment growth rate
       bin. While the left-hand side shows employment-weighted averages and least-squares estimates for the
       overall sample, the right-hand side absorbs establishment fixed effects for the log hires rate.




                                                                                                                      13
C     Vacancy Duration and Wages on New Jobs

C.1   AKM Decomposition




                 Table C1: Variance Decomposition of AKM Effects


                                                ASSD Sample

                                            1985–2014        1997–2014

                 Var(Log Wage)                   0.271             0.285
                 Var(Worker FE)                  0.114             0.115
                 Var(Firm FE)                    0.071             0.075
                 Var(Covariates)                 0.017             0.017
                 Var(Residual)                   0.037             0.036
                 Cov(Worker,Firm)                0.012             0.014
                 Corr(Worker,Firm)               0.128             0.147
                 Observations               45,955,080       32,166,392
                 Firms                         902,926          718,603
                 Workers                     3,240,176        3,031,343
                Notes: Variance and covariance of different components of
                AKM regression in the ASSD sample 1985–2014 and 1997–2014.




                                           14
                      Figure C1: Mean Residuals by Person/Establishment Deciles




                      0.03

                      0.02
      Mean Residual




                      0.01

                         0

                      -0.01

                      -0.02
                              1
                                  2
                                      3
                                          4
                                              5                                                              10
                                                  6                                                      9
                                                      7                                              8
                                                          8                                      7
                                                              9                              6
                                                               10                        5
                                                                                     4
                                                                                 3
              Person Effect Decile                                       1
                                                                             2

                                                                     Establishment Effect Decile
Notes: Mean residuals by person and establishment deciles.




                                                                    15
C.2   Additional Regression Results

               Table C2: Results for Linear Specification (Instead of Log-Linear)


                                                                 Vacancy Concept

                                                       (1)              (2)               (3)
                                                      AMS             JOLTS            Posting
         Panel A.
         Log entry wage                               -1.505          -1.151            -2.617
                                                    (0.264)***      (0.283)***        (0.346)***
         Observations                                803115           803115           803115
         R2                                           0.144            0.127            0.308

         Panel B.
         AKM establishment effect                     -2.130          -2.422            -4.956
                                                    (0.566)***      (0.555)***        (0.797)***
         AKM worker fixed effect                     -0.174           1.079             -1.136
                                                     (0.372)        (0.374)***         (0.611)*
         AKM worker exp. effect                       -1.389          -0.863            -1.969
                                                    (0.281)***      (0.308)***        (0.371)***
         AKM residual                                 -1.557          -1.192            -2.081
                                                    (0.272)***      (0.298)***        (0.351)***

         Observations                                724690           724690           724690
         R2                                           0.146            0.130            0.305

         Panel C.
         Avg. establish. log earnings                 -1.919          -1.649            -3.512
                                                    (0.402)***      (0.401)***        (0.542)***
         Residual entry wage                          -1.307          -0.915            -2.195
                                                    (0.264)***      (0.295)***        (0.356)***

         Observations                                802611           802611           802611
         R2                                           0.144            0.127            0.308

         Baseline Controls                             Yes             Yes               Yes
         Occ. FE (6 digits)                            Yes             Yes               Yes
         Individual FE                                 No              No                No
         Notes: Authors’ regressions with the worker sample for the years 1997-2014. Standard errors
        are clustered at the establishment level. The table reports results using vacancy duration,
        measured in days, in linear form as dependent variable instead of log vacancy duration as
        in Table 6. Each columns report results with a different vacancy concept: Column (1) uses
        AMS duration, Column (2) uses JOLTS duration; Column (3) uses duration since posting as
        dependent variable. See notes in Table 5 for further details regarding the control variables.




                                                     16
 Table C3: Linear Regressions with Log Vacancy Duration as Dependent Variable


                                                         Log Vacancy Duration

                                         (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)

 Panel A. JOLTS Duration
 Log entry wage                        0.165         0.041       -0.021         0.015        -0.045
                                     (0.013)***    (0.010)***   (0.010)**      (0.016)     (0.011)***

 Observations                          787623       787623       787623        312576       428650
 R2                                     0.008        0.152        0.185         0.218        0.479

 Panel B. Posting Duration
 Log entry wage                        0.151         0.049       -0.017         0.010        -0.037
                                     (0.013)***    (0.008)***   (0.008)**      (0.012)     (0.010)***

 Observations                          796457       796457       796457        316710       432600
 R2                                     0.008        0.310        0.341         0.396        0.568

 Panel C. AMS Duration (Weighted)
 Log entry wage                        0.220         0.041        -0.051       -0.069        -0.049
                                     (0.014)***    (0.011)***   (0.011)***   (0.020)***    (0.016)***

 Observations                          535357       535357       535357        205783       294208
 R2                                     0.012        0.152        0.192         0.226        0.607

 Baseline Controls                       No            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
 Additional Controls                     No            No          No            Yes          No
 Occ. FE (6 digits)                      No            No          Yes           Yes          No
 Individual FE                           No            No          No            No           Yes

 Notes: Authors’ regressions with the worker sample for the years 1997-2014. Standard errors are
clustered at the establishment level. Weights are constructed by running a probit regression for each
year in the AMS universe of a dummy for being in the worker sample on dummies for educational
requirement of job, region and industry and then taking the inverse of the predicted value of the
probit regression. Values above 1000 are windsorized (affecting 0.01 percent of observations in the
worker sample). All regressions include a quarter fixed effect. Baseline controls include gender, age,
age squared, dummies for the minimum educational requirement of the job and the year of labor
market entry, as well as region & industry and an early posting fixed effect, where early posting fixed
effects are dummies for posting the vacancy 0-7 days, 8-30 days, 31-60 days, and more than 60 days
prior to the desired start date. Additional controls include on-job wage growth, log(job duration),
lagged firm employment growth, firm age and log(firm size).




                                                  17
  Table C4: Linear Regressions with Log JOLTS Duration as Dependent Variable


                                                             Log JOLTS Duration

                                        (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)
 Panel A.
 Log entry wage                       0.051
                                    (0.009)***

 AKM establishment effect                           -0.080         -0.074      -0.040        -0.154
                                                  (0.016)***     (0.015)***   (0.020)**    (0.019)***

 AKM worker fixed effect                            0.215          0.046        0.064         —
                                                  (0.011)***     (0.011)***   (0.015)***

 AKM worker exp. effect                             0.070           -0.000      0.021        0.031
                                                  (0.011)***       (0.011)     (0.019)      (0.020)

 AKM residual                                       0.050          -0.012       0.021       -0.009
                                                  (0.010)***       (0.010)     (0.019)      (0.012)

 Observations                         711293       711293          711293      283102       400126
 R2                                    0.158        0.159           0.190       0.224        0.482

 Panel B.
 Log entry wage                       0.041
                                    (0.010)***

 Avg. establish. log earnings                       -0.011         -0.047       0.001        -0.106
                                                   (0.012)       (0.012)***    (0.016)     (0.014)***

 Residual entry wage                                0.071          -0.008       0.024       -0.015
                                                  (0.011)***       (0.011)     (0.018)      (0.012)

 Observations                         787123       787123          787123      312575       428379
 R2                                    0.152        0.153           0.185       0.218        0.479

 Baseline Controls                      Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
 Additional Controls                    No             No           No           Yes          No
 Occ. FE (6 digits)                     No             No           Yes          Yes          No
 Individual FE                          No             No           No           No           Yes

 Notes: Authors’ regressions with the worker sample for the years 1997-2014. Standard errors are
clustered at the establishment level. All regressions include a quarter fixed effect. Baseline controls
include gender, age, age squared, dummies for the minimum educational requirement of the job
and the year of labor market entry, as well as region & industry and an early posting fixed effect,
where early posting fixed effects are dummies for posting the vacancy 0-7 days, 8-30 days, 31-60
days, and more than 60 days prior to the desired start date. Additional controls include on-job
wage growth, log(job duration), lagged firm employment growth, firm age and log(firm size).




                                                  18
 Table C5: Linear Regressions with Log Posting Duration as Dependent Variable


                                                         Log Posting Duration

                                        (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)
 Panel A.
 Log entry wage                       0.059
                                    (0.008)***

 AKM establishment effect                           -0.072       -0.074        -0.046       -0.139
                                                  (0.014)***   (0.013)***    (0.017)***   (0.017)***

 AKM worker fixed effect                            0.224        0.050         0.056          —
                                                  (0.010)***   (0.009)***    (0.013)***

 AKM worker exp. effect                             0.076         0.004        0.014         0.026
                                                  (0.010)***     (0.009)      (0.014)       (0.017)

 AKM residual                                       0.058        -0.007        0.019        -0.002
                                                  (0.009)***     (0.008)      (0.014)       (0.011)

 Observations                         718968       718968        718968       286667        403772
 R2                                    0.310        0.311         0.342        0.395         0.567

 Panel B.
 Log entry wage                       0.049
                                    (0.008)***

 Avg. establish. log earnings                       -0.002       -0.044       -0.007        -0.096
                                                   (0.010)     (0.010)***     (0.014)     (0.013)***

 Residual entry wage                                0.080        -0.004        0.020        -0.009
                                                  (0.009)***     (0.008)      (0.012)       (0.011)

 Observations                         795954       795954        795954       316709        432327
 R2                                    0.310        0.310         0.341        0.396         0.568

 Baseline Controls                      Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 Additional Controls                    No             No          No           Yes           No
 Occ. FE (6 digits)                     No             No          Yes          Yes           No
 Individual FE                          No             No          No           No            Yes

 Notes: Authors’ regressions with the worker sample for the years 1997-2014. Standard errors are
clustered at the establishment level. All regressions include a quarter fixed effect. Baseline controls
include gender, age, age squared, dummies for the minimum educational requirement of the job
and the year of labor market entry, as well as region & industry and an early posting fixed effect,
where early posting fixed effects are dummies for posting the vacancy 0-7 days, 8-30 days, 31-60
days, and more than 60 days prior to the desired start date. Additional controls include on-job
wage growth, log(job duration), lagged firm employment growth, firm age and log(firm size).




                                                  19
Table C6: Weighted Regressions with Log AMS Duration as Dependent Variable


                                                            Log AMS Duration

                                       (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
 Panel A.
 Log entry wage                       0.058
                                    (0.012)***

 AKM establishment effect                          -0.078         -0.105       -0.168       -0.178
                                                 (0.024)***     (0.022)***   (0.033)***   (0.030)***

 AKM worker fixed effect                           0.261          0.042        0.024         —
                                                 (0.018)***     (0.018)**     (0.026)

 AKM worker exp. effect                            0.062         -0.033       -0.049       -0.016
                                                 (0.016)***     (0.014)**    (0.025)**     (0.031)

 AKM residual                                      0.044          -0.037      -0.046       -0.016
                                                 (0.013)***     (0.012)***   (0.023)**     (0.017)

 Observations                        486997       486997         486997       188290       275967
 R2                                   0.157        0.158          0.198        0.231        0.608

 Panel B.
 Log entry wage                       0.041
                                    (0.011)***

 Avg. establish. log earnings                      -0.012         -0.074       -0.103       -0.111
                                                  (0.016)       (0.016)***   (0.026)***   (0.021)***

 Residual entry wage                               0.072          -0.040      -0.049       -0.021
                                                 (0.012)***     (0.011)***   (0.021)**     (0.016)

 Observations                        535087       535087         535087       205783       294043
 R2                                   0.152        0.152          0.192        0.226        0.607

 Baseline Controls                     Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
 Additional Controls                   No             No           No           Yes          No
 Occ. FE (6 digits)                    No             No           Yes          Yes          No
 Individual FE                         No             No           No           No           Yes

 Notes: Authors’ regressions with the worker sample for the years 1997-2014. Standard errors are
clustered at the establishment level. Weights are constructed by running a probit regression for each
year in the AMS universe of a dummy for being in the worker sample on dummies for educational
requirement of job, region and industry and then taking the inverse of the predicted value of the
probit regression. Values above 1000 are windsorized (affecting 0.01 percent of observations in the
worker sample). See notes in Table 5 for details regarding the control variables.




                                                 20
                               Table C7: Additional Robustness Checks


                                                             Sample

                         (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
 Log entry wage        -0.037        -0.033     -0.021      -0.028       -0.036        -0.037       -0.040
                     (0.009)***    (0.011)***   (0.014)   (0.011)***   (0.009)***    (0.009)***   (0.010)***

 Observations          535357       525046      483588      365654       535357       518570       458536
 R2                     0.211        0.211       0.213       0.214        0.213        0.213        0.204

 Notes: Column (1) reports the baseline results from Column 4 in Table 4; Column (2) reports results where
the sample is trimmed below the 1st and above 99th percentile of the distribution of starting wages; Column
(3) reports results where the sample is trimmed below the 5th and above 95th percentile of the distribution of
starting wages; Column (4) reports results where the sample is restricted to men; Column (5) reports results
where we additionally control for quintiles of average establishment turnover in the sample period; Column
(6) reports results where we exclude recalls; Column (7) reports results where the sample is restricted to
E-U-E transitions.




                                                     21
                                                      Table C8: Additional Robustness Checks


                                                                                       Sample

                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)        (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
      Panel A.
      AKM establish.        -0.098       -0.082       -0.073       -0.098       -0.096       -0.091       -0.099       -0.097       -0.162       -0.117
      effect              (0.019)***   (0.017)***   (0.024)***   (0.020)***   (0.025)***   (0.019)***   (0.019)***   (0.020)***   (0.019)***   (0.032)***

      AKM worker            0.057        0.017        0.125        0.054        0.075        0.057        0.060        0.054        0.016        0.076
      fixed effect        (0.013)***    (0.013)     (0.016)***   (0.014)***   (0.017)***   (0.013)***   (0.013)***   (0.014)***    (0.020)     (0.016)***

      AKM worker            -0.020       -0.035      -0.005       -0.019       -0.009       -0.021       -0.020       -0.027        0.091       -0.005
      exp. effect          (0.011)*    (0.010)***    (0.013)      (0.012)      (0.012)     (0.011)*     (0.011)*     (0.012)**    (0.038)**     (0.013)

      AKM residual          -0.029       -0.035       -0.012      -0.027       -0.015        -0.029       -0.028       -0.035       -0.080      -0.010
                          (0.009)***   (0.010)***    (0.011)     (0.011)**     (0.011)     (0.009)***   (0.009)***   (0.010)***   (0.014)***    (0.012)

      Observations         486997       358215       302798       478050       335872       486997       472047       422703       114448       372549




22
      R2                    0.216        0.224        0.246        0.216        0.219        0.217        0.217        0.208        0.250        0.214

      Panel B.
      Avg. establish.       -0.071                                 -0.068       -0.058       -0.079       -0.072       -0.072       -0.134       -0.067
      log earnings        (0.014)***                             (0.016)***   (0.018)***   (0.014)***   (0.014)***   (0.015)***   (0.013)***   (0.023)***

      Residual entry       -0.021                                 -0.015       -0.014       -0.015       -0.020        -0.025       -0.038      -0.008
      wage                (0.009)**                               (0.010)      (0.011)     (0.009)*     (0.009)**    (0.009)***   (0.012)***    (0.011)

      Observations         535087       535372       535372       524800       365481       535087       518305       458317       128579       406508
      R2                    0.211        0.083        0.083        0.211        0.214        0.213        0.213        0.204        0.245        0.209

      Notes: All regressions include baseline controls and Occ. FE. Column (1) reports the baseline results from column 4 in Table 5; Column (2) reports
     results where the AKM effects were estimated only from E-U-E transitions; Column (3) reports results where the sample is restricted to persons
     and establishments where AKM effects were estimated for at least 10 worker observations and at least 10 establishment observations; Column (4)
     reports results where the sample is trimmed below the 1st and above 99th percentile of the distribution of starting wages; Column (5) reports results
     where the sample is restricted to men; Column (6) reports results where we additionally control for quintiles of average establishment turnover in
     the sample period; Column (7) reports results where the sample excludes recalls; Column (8) reports results where the sample is restricted to E-U-E
     transitions; Column (9) reports results for the sample of establishments with 10 employees or less; and Column (10) reports results for the sample of
     establishments with more than 10 employees.
Table C9: Log AMS Duration and Present Discounted Value (PDV) of Wages


                                                         Log AMS Duration

                                       (1)             (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)

 Panel A. Establishments with at least 50 wage observations
 Log entry wage                      0.063
                                   (0.011)***

 Log(PDV)                                            -0.010    -0.018      -0.063      -0.055
                                                     (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.019)***   (0.024)**

 Observations                        506487      506487        506487     197874      278096
 R2                                   0.173       0.173         0.211      0.236       0.601

 Panel B. Establishments with at least 200 wage observations
 Log entry wage                      0.082
                                   (0.012)***

 Log(PDV)                                            -0.002    -0.023     -0.058       -0.058
                                                     (0.022)   (0.022)   (0.023)**    (0.031)*

 Observations                        436279      436279        436279     173720      238541
 R2                                   0.173       0.173         0.211      0.237       0.633

 Baseline Controls                     Yes            Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
 Additional Controls                   No             No        No          Yes         No
 Occ. FE (6 digits)                    No             No        Yes         Yes         No
 Individual FE                         No             No        No          No          Yes

 Notes: Authors’ regressions with the worker sample for the years 1997-2014. Standard
errors are clustered at the establishment level. All regressions include a quarter fixed effect.
Baseline controls include gender, age, age squared, dummies for the minimum educational
requirement of the job and the year of labor market entry, as well as region & industry
and an early posting fixed effect, where early posting fixed effects are dummies for posting
the vacancy 0-7 days, 8-30 days, 31-60 days, and more than 60 days prior to the desired
start date. Additional controls include on-job wage growth, log(job duration), lagged
firm employment growth, firm age and log(firm size). The samples in Panel A and B are
restricted to establishments with at least 50 and 200 wage observations in the ASSD data,
respectively, to limit attenuation bias due to measurement error in the estimated PDV of
wages. See Section C.3 for details of how we compute the PDV of wages of a job.




                                                23
C.3    Estimating the Expected Present Discounted Value of Wages of a Job
In this section, we describe how we compute the expected presented discounted value (PDV) of
wage payments of a job. Let us denote years of tenure as t, the yearly wage payment as w and the
yearly interest rate as r. We can express the expected PDV of wages of a given job as

                                                   1 − δ(t)
                                  V(t) = w(t) +             V(t + 1).                               (C1)
                                                   1 + r(t)

   Solving this forward and assuming that r(t) = r, we get

                                          T "Y
                                             m
                                               1 − δ(t + m)
                                          X                 #
                               V(t) =                                   w(t + m)
                                          m=0
                                                            1+r
                                                 k=0
                                          T            !m
                                          X      1
                                      =                     S(t + m)w(t + m),                       (C2)
                                          m=0
                                                1+r

where T is a fixed end date of a job (e.g., retirement) and S(t) is the probability of survival to tenure
t.
    While we observe the realizations of wages and separations over the entire duration of a job, the
difficulty lies in measuring the expected PDV because (1) separation probabilities are not observed
but only the random realization thereof and (2) wages are not observed post separation. We deal
with these issues by

  1. estimating industry-specific separation rates by tenure. We implement this by estimating a
     proportional hazard model with industry-specific shifters. Figure C2 shows the estimated
     baseline survival function and separation rates by years of tenure.

  2. estimating wage-tenure profiles at the firm level. We implement this by estimating the
     regression model of the form

                                      log w j (t, y) = α j + β jt̃(t) + γ y ,                       (C3)

      where α j is a firm fixed effect that reflects the firm’s average entry wage (i.e. at tenure 0)
      and β jt̃(t) is a tenure fixed effect with t̃(t) a tenure-year bin. We bin tenure years because of
      considerations of sample size and choose the following bins: less than 1 year, 1 year, 2-3
      years, 4-5 years, 6-9 years, 10-19 years, 20 years and higher. We also control for aggregate
      time trends by controlling for y(ear) fixed effects, γ y .

We further assume that all jobs end deterministically after 30 years, T = 30, which reflects the
average years worked prior to retirement. We also assume a value of r of 0.02, which corresponds
to the average interest rate in Austria over the sample period.


                                                       24
        Figure C2: Survival Function and Separation Rate Based on Proportional Hazard Model




                                                                                                     .25
                        1
                        .8




                                                                                                     .2
    Survival Function




                                                                                   Separation Rate
                                                                                                     .15
                        .6
                        .4




                                                                                                     .1
                                                                                                     .05
                        .2
                        0




                                                                                                     0
                             0   50      100             150         200                                   0    50      100             150   200
                                      Tenure in Months                                                               Tenure in Months

Notes: Survival function and separation rate by monthly tenure based on a proportional hazard rate model for all
employment spells starting between 1997–2014.


   Given all these assumptions, our estimate of the PDV at tenure 0 in firm j in industry k is

                                                               30          !m
                                                               X      1
                                                    V̂ j =                      Ŝ j(k) (m)eα̂ j +β̂ jt̃(m) ,                                       (C4)
                                                               m=0
                                                                     1+r

where Ŝ j(k) (t) is the estimated survival rate to tenure t at firm j in industry k, α̂ j is the estimated
average starting wage at firm j and β̂ jt̃(t) is the estimated average wage paid in firm j in tenure-year
bin t̃(t).




                                                                            25
D      Implications for Search Theoretic Models

D.1     Kaas and Kircher (2015) with Ex-Ante Worker Heterogeneity
In this section, we evaluate our evidence through the lens of directed search theory. The model of
Kaas and Kircher (2015) is a natural starting point, as it characterizes directed search in the context
of firm heterogeneity in productivity and was calibrated explicitly to match the facts documented
in DFH. In the Kaas and Kircher model, posted wages act as a recruitment device: firms that want
to grow fast post higher wages to reduce the time it takes to fill a vacancy. As demonstrated in Kaas
and Kircher (2015), the model has important implications for the evolution aggregate matching
efficiency over the business cycle.2
    The goal of the exercise here is to re-calibrate the model to match the features of the Austrian
labor market, including the DFH-type evidence documented in Section 5. We extend the model to
the case of ex-ante worker heterogeneity and then use it to evaluate whether the model can match
three key observations of the previous section: (1) the positive association of vacancy durations
with raw (unconditional) starting wages, (2) the positive association of vacancy durations with
AKM worker effects, and most importantly, (3) the negative association of vacancy durations with
AKM establishment effects.


Model Setup We extend the model of Kaas and Kircher to the case of ex-ante worker hetero-
geneity.3 We follow Kaas and Kircher as closely as possible and concentrate here on the features
that are specific to the model with ex-ante worker heterogeneity.
     In the model, there is a continuum of firms, which produce F(y, x, L1 , L2 , ..., LN , y, x) units of
output with L1 ≥ 0, L2 ≥ 0, ..., LN ≥ 0 labor inputs. x is fixed firm-level productivity and y is a firm-
level productivity shock. New firms pay a setup cost K, draw a fixed firm type x with probability
π(x) and die at exogenous rate δ0 (x), which potentially differs across firm types.4 Firms are hit with
a firm-level productivity shock y with probability π y and which is drawn uniformly at random from
the interval [1 − ȳ, 1 + ȳ]. Firms search for new employees by posting Vi vacancies for workers of
type i, paying a fixed wage wi , and paying recruitment costs C(V1 , V2 , ..., VN , L1 , L2 , ..., LN , y, x). The
posted wage determines the number of workers applying to the opening, λi , and thus determines
the vacancy-filling rate mi . There are N different types of workers and there is a continuum of
workers for each worker type. Workers direct their search to a particular firm-vacancy sub-market
j and quit their job at exogenous rate s0 , which we assume to be the same across worker types. The
   2
     In principle, one could also consider a version of the model of Burdett and Mortensen (1998), but we are not
aware of any version of this model that was set up and calibrated towards the facts in DFH. In addition, the Burdett
and Mortensen model generates a negative relationship of vacancy durations and wages only due to the presence of
on-the-job search, where employed workers on different rungs of the job ladder have different acceptance probabilities
of outside offers, whereas in our data we only observe the matching process of unemployed workers.
   3
     The model of Kaas and Kircher also features aggregate shocks, which we abstract from here.
   4
     Kaas and Kircher assume this mainly to match the establishment dynamics in the data.


                                                         26
quit rate is the lower bound on the total separation rate si ∈ [s0 , 1] for a given worker type, as firms
hit by negative productivity shocks may decide to layoff some or all of their workers of a given
type. In equilibrium, workers are indifferent between the different sub-markets. Workers supply
a unit of labor when employed, and receive bi when unemployed. There is no on-the-job search.
     As Kaas and Kircher, we solve in our numerical simulations the social planner version of the
problem with flat-wage contracts.5 In equilibrium, wages vary both across worker and firm types.
Even though there is no bargaining, wages vary across worker types because workers don’t search
in submarkets that deliver less than the value of unemployment and thus, the unemployment
benefit bi is a critical determinant of the posted wage. Posted wages also depend on fixed and
transitory firm productivity, x and y, and the size of its labor force for each type of worker,
L1 , L2 , ..., LN . Newly-born firms tend to post more vacancies and at higher wages because they
want to grow quickly toward their optimal size. The relationship between firm productivity and
posted wages is less clear and depends on assumptions about the shape of the vacancy-posting
cost function. All else equal, firms that face a higher cost of posting a vacancy, post a higher wage
in order to fill their vacancies more quickly.


Recursive Representation To gain some intuition, let’s consider first the model without any
shocks and assume that δ0 (x) = δ0 , i.e. the exogenous firm death rate does not depend on firm
productivity. In a model without shocks, firms never want to shrink and thus firm death and
separations are purely exogenous, i.e. δ(x) = δ0 and si = s0 . Let Jx (L, W) be the value function of
the firm with productivity x, and Wi the wage bill to which the firm is committed for each type of
                                                                                                PN                PN
                                                                                                     W                 W
worker i. As in Kaas and Kircher, one can write Jx (L, W) = Jx (L, 0) − 1−β(1−δ
                                                                             i=1    i
                                                                                0 )(1−s0 )
                                                                                                      i=1
                                                                                           where 1−β(1−δ     i
                                                                                                         0 )(1−s0 )

is the net present value of existing wage commitments, which is independent of future hiring
decisions. The firms recursive maximization problem can thus be written as

                                                                      N
                                                                      X
                     Jx (L, 0) = max xF(L, x) − C(V, L, x) −                Di (mi )Vi + β(1 − δ0 )Jx (L+ , 0),
                                    (m,V)
                                                                      i=1

                          s.t.L+i   = Li (1 − s0 ) + mi Vi , ∀i = 1, ..., N,

                                 1−δ0
where Di (mi )Vi = wi (mi ) 1−β(1−δ 0 )(1−s0 )
                                               mi Vi is the net present value of wage commitments paid for the
mi Vi new hires of type i and wi (mi ) is the wage for worker type i with vacancy-filling rate mi . We
refer to the text of Kaas and Kircher for the first order conditions and other details, which follow
in exact analogy for each worker type. Free entry of firms implies that xX π(x)Jx (0, 1)≤ K.
                                                                                     P

    Now, let’s turn to the model with firm-level shocks and where exogenous firm death rates
depend on firm-level productivity, i.e. δ0 (x).6 In analogy to Kaas and Kircher, we solve the social
   5
       See their paper for further details.
   6
       Unlike Kaas and Kircher, we abstract from aggregate shocks, as this is not the focus of our analysis.



                                                                 27
planner version of the problem.7 The social value of the firm of type x satisfies the Bellman equation

                                                             N
                                                              X                 N
                                                                                X
                  G (L, y; M) =
                    x
                                       max F(L, y, x) −               bi Li −         µi [Li + λ(mi )Vi ] − f
                                      (m,V,s,δ)
                                                                i=1             i=1
                                                                                
                                                                                  +     +
                                      −C(V, L, y, x) + β(1 − δ)E y G (L , y ; M)
                                                                            x
                                                                                                                (D1)


                            s.t.      L+i = Li (1 − si ) + mi Vi , ∀i = 1, ..., N,



and subject to δ ∈ [δ0 (x), 1], si ∈ [s0 , 1], mi ∈ [0, 1], and Vi ≥ 0, ∀i = 1, ..., N, and where M =
(µ1 , µ2 , ..., µN ) are the social values of each type of worker tied to the firm in a given period. In
our calibration, we set f = 0 and thus all firm exit is exogenous, i.e. δ = δ0 (x). As discussed in
detail in Kaas and Kircher, the firm’s social flow value consists of the output of the firm minus
the opportunity cost of employment (bi Li ), the social cost of workers tied to the firm, including the
unemployed applying to the firm (µi [Li + λ(mi )Vi ]), fixed operating costs ( f ) and vacancy-posting
costs (C(V, L, y, x)). Positive entry requires that xX π(x)Gx (0, 1; M)= K, which is satisfied in all
                                                        P

calibrations that we explore. We solve the model, by first forming an initial guess of M, then
solving the Bellman equation above, and then iterating on M until the resource constraints of the
economy are satisfied with equality (i.e., workers of all types are either employed or unemployed
searching for a job).


Calibration We start by parameterizing the model of Kaas and Kircher (i.e., without worker
heterogeneity). We follow them as closely as possible, allowing for 5 different firm types x and 5
different shocks y on the interval [1 − 0.312, 1 + 0.312], but re-calibrate certain parameters to match
certain features of the Austrian labor market and vacancy data (see Table D1 for all the parameter
values): First, we set the vacancy cost scale parameter c to 0.11 to match a weekly vacancy-filling
                                                                                                    1
rate of 0.10. Second, we set the parameters k and r of the matching function m(λ) = (1 + kλ−r )− r to
target a weekly job-finding rate of 0.033 and an elasticity of job finding to labor market tightness
of 0.72. Finally, we set the entry cost K to 2.4. As discussed in the Appendix of Kaas and Kircher,
this is a pure normalization since all firms’ value functions are linearly homogeneous in the vector
(x, b, c, K).
   7
    For the type of production function and vacancy cost functions considered in the calibration below, it is easy to
show that the proof of Kaas and Kircher that the decentralized economy is efficient carries over the case with ex-ante
heterogeneous workers.




                                                           28
                                  Table D1: Calibrated Parameter Values

      Parameter    Value    Description                            Target/Source
      c            0.11     Vacancy cost scale parameter           Weekly vacancy-filling rate of 0.102
      γ             0.5     Vacancy cost elastiticity              Vacancy-filling rates by employment growth
                                                                   & Elasticity of vacancy filling to hiring of 0.18
      k             4.8     Matching function scale parameter      Weekly job-finding rate of 3.3 percent
      r            0.56     Matching function elasticity           Elasticity of job finding to tightness of 0.72
      K             2.4     Entry cost                             Normalization
      β             0.999   Discount factor                        Kaas and Kircher
      b               0.1   Unemployment income                    Kaas and Kircher
      s0            0.48%   Quite rate                             Kaas and Kircher
      x1             0.37   Firm productivity of firm type 1       Kaas and Kircher
      x2             0.74   Firm productivity of firm type 2       Kaas and Kircher
      x3             1.17   Firm productivity of firm type 3       Kaas and Kircher
      x4             2.03   Firm productivity of firm type 4       Kaas and Kircher
      x5             4.14   Firm productivity of firm type 5       Kaas and Kircher
      σ1          98.820%   Firm share at birth of firm type 1     Kaas and Kircher
      σ2           1.000%   Firm share at birth of firm type 2     Kaas and Kircher
      σ3           0.153%   Firm share at birth of firm type 3     Kaas and Kircher
      σ4           0.025%   Firm share at birth of firm type 4     Kaas and Kircher
      σ5           0.002%   Firm share at birth of firm type 5     Kaas and Kircher
      δ0,1        1.710%   Exogenous exit rate of firm type 1     Kaas and Kircher
      δ0,2        0.270%   Exogenous exit rate of firm type 2     Kaas and Kircher
      δ0,3        0.160%   Exogenous exit rate of firm type 3     Kaas and Kircher
      δ0,4        0.088%   Exogenous exit rate of firm type 4     Kaas and Kircher
      δ0,5        0.016%   Exogenous exit rate of firm type 5     Kaas and Kircher
      ȳ            0.312   Transitory productivity range          Kaas and Kircher
      πy            0.027   Adjustment probability                 Kaas and Kircher


    In the model extension with ex-ante heterogeneous workers, we assume the following func-
tional forms for the production function and vacancy-posting costs8

                                                          N 
                                                          X
                                                             ai (x)Lαi ,
                                                                      
                                          F(L, y, x) = yx                                                          (D2)
                                                             i=1
                                                       N            γ !
                                                       X        ci  Vi
                                     C(V, L, y, x) =                   Vi ,                                        (D3)
                                                       i=1
                                                              1 + γ Li

which are the same as in Kaas and Kircher (2015), except that we sum over N types of workers
and ai (x) denotes worker-type-specific productivity, which potentially interacts with firm type x.
Note that our assumption of additivity of worker types in production and vacancy costs implies
that there are no complementarities in production or vacancy posting between worker types, as
the marginal product and the marginal vacancy-posting cost for each worker type i is independent
of the number of other types of workers employed at the same firm. In the model without worker
heterogeneity, the firm productivity levels for each type of firm are directly taken from Kaas and
  8
   See also Eeckhout and Kircher (2018) who provide an extension of the model of Kaas and Kircher (2015) with
more general production functions, but linear vacancy-posting costs.

                                                        29
    Table D2: Calibration of Key Parameters in Model with Ex-Ante Heterogeneous Workers

                                                                        Model Extension w/
                                                                       Worker Heterogeneity
                           Parameters          Kaas & Kircher           (1)            (2)
    Worker                a1 (x1 )/a2 (x1 )          1/1               0.7/1.3        0.9/1.1
    Productivities:       a1 (x2 )/a2 (x2 )          1/1               0.7/1.3        0.8/1.2
                          a1 (x3 )/a2 (x3 )          1/1               0.7/1.3        0.7/1.3
                          a1 (x4 )/a2 (x4 )          1/1               0.7/1.3        0.6/1.4
                          a1 (x5 )/a2 (x5 )          1/1               0.7/1.3        0.5/1.5
    Vacancy                      c1                  0.11               0.07           0.10
    Posting Costs:               c2                  0.11               0.08           0.08


Kircher, but then scaled down by a factor of 0.815 in the case of the model with multiple worker
types to target that the average firm size in the economy remains unchanged.
     In what follows, we present three calibrations: (i) the baseline model of Kaas and Kircher
without ex-ante worker heterogeneity, but calibrated to Austrian data, (ii) a model with worker
heterogeneity, where relative worker productivities are independent of firm productivities, and
(iii) a model with worker heterogeneity with complementarities between worker skills and firm
productivities (generating positive assortative matching as high-skilled workers are relatively
more productive at high-productivity firms). Table D2 presents the assumed parameter values on
worker productivities and vacancy-posting costs in the three calibrations. The two calibrations
with ex-ante worker heterogeneity assume (for simplicity) two types of workers and set relative
worker productivities to match the dispersion of AKM worker fixed effects in the data with a
standard deviation of 0.3. As shown in Table D3 below, the correlation of worker and firm types
in calibration (iii) (assortative matching) is 0.51, which is in the range of estimates provided by
Borovickova and Shimer (2019) using Austrian data. All our calibrations with ex-ante worker
heterogeneity assume that type-2 workers are preferred by all firms and thus we refer to them as
the high-skilled type. There is nothing, however, that restricts us to do so; in principle, we could
allow for type-2 workers to be less productive than type-1 worker at low productivity firms, which
would generate even stronger positive assortative matching.
     Note that we assume that bi = bE(ai (x)), where b = 0.1, i.e. the unemployment benefit is
proportional to average worker productivity across firms. We calibrate the model such that the
replacement rate (b over average wage) is 0.7, as in Kaas and Kircher. In the versions with
heterogeneous workers, we calibrate vacancy-posting costs c to match a job-filling rate of 0.11
for the worker of type 1 and 0.094 for the worker of type 2, to generate the positive association
of AKM-worker fixed effects and vacancy duration. This calibration strategy generates vacancy-
posting costs that are nearly identical across worker types. In fact, if we were to impose identical




                                                30
costs, the results would be very similar.9 The key point here is that vacancy-posting costs are less
than proportional to worker-ability and thus, for workers of type 1, firms post fewer vacancies but
at a higher filling rate (by increasing posted wages).


Results We start by reporting a few results of the model without ex-ante worker heterogeneity,
calibrated to Austrian data. Panel A in Table D3 shows selected model results in the model where
the vacancy cost elasticity, γ, varies between 0.1 and 1.10 As can be seen in the table, the elasticity
of vacancy duration to the starting wage is negative and very large. In other words, the posted
wage appears to be a very strong instrument to affect vacancy duration by affecting the length
of the queue in a given labor market. The elasticity declines substantially with the parameter γ
but remains below -1. At the same time the model with a low value of γ, is inconsistent with the
DFH-type of evidence, which shows that the vacancy-filling rate is strongly positively correlated
with employment growth and hiring at the firm level. This is also illustrated in Figure D1, where
among the three calibrations shown in the figure the one with γ = 0.5 yields the best fit to the
relationship of the firm growth and the weekly vacancy-filling rate.11
    Panels B and C of Table D3 show the results for the model with ex-ante heterogeneous workers.
The table includes the AKM regression coefficients, which were estimated on data simulated from
the model with 20,000 firms and 400,000 workers over a period of 10 years.12 The results show
that now the relationship between the entry wage and vacancy duration is positive, with a similar
coefficient as in the data. Just like in our empirical results, however, this masks the differential
effects of the AKM worker and AKM firm effects on vacancy duration: The coefficient on the
AKM worker effect is positive and similar to the one in the data. This is not surprising, given
that we calibrated the vacancy cost scale parameter c to generate a vacancy-filling rate of 0.11 for
the low-skilled worker and 0.094 for the high-skilled worker. Qualitatively, the model matches
the sign of the coefficient on the AKM firm effect. However, just like in the baseline model, the
magnitude of the coefficient is more than an order of magnitude higher than in the data. Similarly,
the coefficient on the AKM residual of the starting wage is very negative in the model but close to
zero in the data. The model version with a lower value for the vacancy cost elasticity parameter
γ lowers the elasticity of vacancy duration to the AKM firm effect and the AKM residual, but
at γ = 0.1 the model no longer matches the elasticity of the hires rate to the vacancy-filling rate
   9
      See Engbom and Moser (2018) for a similar finding in the context of an extension of the model of Burdett and
Mortensen (1998) to ex-ante worker heterogeneity.
   10
      Table D4 contains the results for various alternative calibrations, including the original calibration in the paper of
Kaas and Kircher (2015).
   11
      While the calibration with γ = 0.5 slightly over-predicts the vacancy-filling rates for growing firms, it slightly
under-predicts the elasticity of vacancy filling to hires rates. If we changed γ to a lower value, we would do better on
the former, but worse on the latter. We believe, therefore, that a calibration with γ = 0.5 provides a reasonable fit to
the data on vacancy-filling rates by both employment growth and hires rates.
   12
      To be precise, we estimated the model for 520 weeks and then used the data from the last week of each year
to estimate the AKM worker and firm fixed effects. In analogy to the empirical results, in a second step, we then
estimated the linear regressions of log vacancy duration on the starting wage and the AKM effects.

                                                            31
Table D3: Simulation Results of Model of Kaas and Kircher and Model Extension
with Ex-Ante Worker Heterogeneity


 Panel A.                                                                Kaas and Kircher
                                                         Data        γ=1    γ = 0.5     γ = 0.1
 Elast. of Vacancy Duration to Starting Wage             0.23        -21.8        -17.9         -3.9
 Elast. of Vacancy-Filling Rate to Hires Rate            0.18         0.27         0.14         0.03


                                                                          Model Extension
                                                                      w/ Worker Heterogeneity
 Panel B.                                                                    w/o PAM
                                                         Data        γ=1     γ = 0.5    γ = 0.1
 Correlation of Worker and Firm Types                     —           0.00        0.01          0.01
 Elast. of Vacancy Duration to
 ... Starting Wage                                       0.23         0.22         0.25         0.26
 ... AKM Firm Fixed Effect                               -0.08        -9.9         -7.4         -1.9
 ... AKM Worker Fixed Effect                             0.28         0.23         0.26         0.26
 ... AKM Residual                                        0.06        -25.3        -24.7         -8.8
 Elast. of Vacancy-Filling Rate to Hires Rate            0.18         0.25         0.14         0.03


                                                                          Model Extension
                                                                      w/ Worker Heterogeneity
 Panel C.                                                                    w/ PAM
                                                         Data        γ=1     γ = 0.5    γ = 0.1
 Correlation of Worker and Firm Types                     —           0.51        0.51          0.48
 Elast. of Vacancy Duration to
 ... Starting Wage                                       0.23         0.21         0.29         0.30
 ... AKM Firm Fixed Effect                               -0.08       -13.5         -7.0         -0.8
 ... AKM Worker Fixed Effect                             0.28         0.09         0.22         0.29
 ... AKM Residual                                        0.06        -23.6        -25.0         -3.8
 Elast. of Vacancy-Filling Rate to Hires Rate            0.18         0.26         0.15         0.04
 Notes: Panel A shows the results of the model without worker heterogeneity, i.e. the model of Kaas
and Kircher calibrated to the Austrian data. Panel B shows results for the calibration (1) and Panel C
shows results for the calibration (2) of the model with worker heterogeneity in Table D2. The model
calibration in Panel C features substantial Positive Assortative Matching (PAM), as can be seen in the
correlation of worker and firm types in the table. The statistics from the data refer to the coefficients
reported in Column 1 of Table 4 (elasticity of vacancy duration to starting wage), Figure B1 (elasticity
of vacancy-filling rate to hires rate) and Column 2 of Table 5 (elasticity of vacancy duration to AKM
effects). The statistics from the model are based on simulated data with 20,000 firms and 400,000
workers over a period of 10 years.




                                                   32
Figure D1: Weekly Vacancy-Filling Rates by Employment Growth in Data and Model

                                                                      Panel A. Kaas and Kircher
                                                            0.22
                                                                      Data
                                                                      Model ( =1)
                                                                      Model ( =0.5)
                                                             0.2      Model ( =0.1)




                                                            0.18




                                  Weekly Job Filling Rate
                                                            0.16




                                                            0.14




                                                            0.12




                                                             0.1

                                                               -0.3       -0.2             -0.1               0       0.1   0.2
                                                                                          Monthly Employment Growth Rate



           Panel B. Model Extension w/ Worker Heterogeneity (w/o PAM)
                                                            0.22
                                                                      Data
                                                                      Model w/ Worker Heterogeneity ( =1)
                                                                      Model w/ Worker Heterogeneity ( =0.5)
                                                             0.2      Model w/ Worker Heterogeneity ( =0.1)




                                                            0.18
                                  Weekly Job Filling Rate




                                                            0.16




                                                            0.14




                                                            0.12




                                                             0.1

                                                               -0.3       -0.2             -0.1               0       0.1   0.2
                                                                                          Monthly Employment Growth Rate



            Panel C. Model Extension w/ Worker Heterogeneity (w/ PAM)
                                                        0.22
                                                                      Data
                                                                      Model w/ Worker Heterogeneity and PAM ( =1)
                                                                      Model w/ Worker Heterogeneity and PAM ( =0.5)
                                                            0.2       Model w/ Worker Heterogeneity and PAM ( =0.1)




                                                        0.18
                          Weekly Job Filling Rate




                                                        0.16




                                                        0.14




                                                        0.12




                                                            0.1

                                                              -0.3        -0.2            -0.1                0       0.1   0.2
                                                                                         Monthly Employment Growth Rate




   Notes: The figure shows weekly vacancy-filling rates by employment growth in data and
   model. Panel A shows the results for the model in Kaas and Kircher (2015), but calibrated
   to match the patterns of vacancy filling and job finding in the Austrian data. Panel B shows
   the results for the model extension with worker heterogeneity and no positive assortative
   matching. Panel C shows the results for the model extension with worker heterogeneity and
   positive assortative matching.



                                                                                                        33
       Table D4: Additional Simulation Results of Model of Kaas and Kircher with γ = 0.5

                                    Data   Baseline   KK      RR=0.98    ȳ = 0.5   π y = 0.5   s0 = 0.01    = 0.5
    Key Model Elasticities:
    Vac. dur. to starting wage      0.23    -17.9     -43.8    -239.5     -12.6      -19.3        -14.6      -11.3
    Vacancy filling to hires rate   0.18    0.15      0.33      0.14      0.13       0.16          0.15       0.15

    Calibration Targets:
    Replacement Rate (RR)                    0.72     0.70     0.98       0.70        0.72        0.70       0.72
    Vacancy-Filling Rate            0.10     0.10     0.30     0.10       0.10        0.10        0.10       0.10
    Job-Finding Rate                0.03     0.03     0.11     0.03       0.03        0.03        0.03       0.03
    Notes: All simulations use a value of γ = 0.5. KK refers to the parameters in the baseline calibration of Kaas
   and Kircher (2015), which targets the weekly vacancy-filling and job-finding rate for U.S. data.


(see Table D3) and the relationship of the vacancy-filling rate to the growth rate of the firm (see
Figure D1). The similarity of the results in the model without and with complementarities between
high-skilled workers and high-x firms, suggests that our regressions results are not affected by the
issues related to AKM that impede the identification of assortative matching.
    Overall, we conclude from this exercise, that – while qualitatively consistent with models of
wage posting – the measured elasticity of vacancy duration to wage posting is too small to explain
meaningful variation in hires rates across firms. Firms’ wage policies are unlikely to serve as an
important recruiting instrument, as in Kaas and Kircher (2015), at least not in a manner that is
quantitatively important and that could account for the patterns in vacancy filling by establishment
growth.




                                                         34
D.2    Non-Wage Amenities and Attenuation Bias
In this section, we assess to what extent the OLS regression coefficients are attenuated in the
presence of non-wage amenities based on the estimated in Hall and Mueller (2018). Hall and
Mueller (2018) posit that the (log of the) flow value of a job (v) is composed of a wage value (y)
and a non-wage value (n), where the two are imperfectly correlated, with

                                         n = η − κ(y − ȳ),                                       (D4)

where ȳ is the mean of the distribution of y, η is the part of the non-wage value that is uncorrelated
with the wage value y and κ captures the (negative) correlation between wage and non-wage
values.
   If we want to run a regression of the log of vacancy duration on the log of the flow value of
the job (v), but instead use the wage flow value (y) as a proxy for v, this may bias the estimated
coefficient. To see this more clearly, assume a population relationship of the following linear form

                                       log(d) = α + βv + ε,                                       (D5)

which we estimate by using the log wage value (y) instead of the log of the total value (v). One
can therefore write

                                       y = v−n
                                          = v − η + κ(y − ȳ),                                    (D6)

where −n = −η + κ(y − ȳ) is akin to non-classical measurement error.
   Without loss of generality, we assume in what follows that all variables have mean zero (or
represent demeaned values). Using v = y + n = (1 − κ)y + η, we can write the estimated OLS
coefficient as

                                               Cov(log(d), y)
                                     βOLS =
                                                   Var(y)
                                               Cov(α + βv + ε, y)
                                           =
                                                     Var(y)
                                                 Cov(v, y)
                                           =   β
                                                  Var(y)
                                                 Cov((1 − κ)y, y)
                                           =   β
                                                     Var(y)
                                           =   β(1 − κ),                                          (D7)

which implies that the relationship is attenuated by a factor 1 − κ. Hall and Mueller (2018) estimate
a value of κ = 0.25, which implies that our empirical elasticities should be scaled up by a factor

                                                  35
 1
1−κ
     = 1.33 to get to the elasticity w.r.t. job values (v) instead of wages. Note also that Hall and
Mueller (2018) cannot empirically distinguish non-wage amenities from the value attributed to
rising future wage payments. In other words, in their approach, future wage payments are just
another amenity that is not reflected in the current wage and thus, the estimate here of the bias in
the OLS coefficient should account for both bias arising due to non-wage amenities and bias arising
due to wage-tenure contracts.




                                                36
