                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION

                                        Nathan Canen
                                        Chad Kendall
                                       Francesco Trebbi

                                     Working Paper 25110
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25110


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




We thank Matilde Bombardini, Josh Clinton, Gary Cox, Jeffery Jenkins, Keith Krehbiel, as well
as seminar participants at various institutions for comments. We are grateful for funding from
CIFAR and for hospitality at the Graduate School of Business at Stanford University during part
of the writing of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Nathan Canen, Chad Kendall, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unbundling Polarization
Nathan Canen, Chad Kendall, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 25110
September 2018
JEL No. P16,P48

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the determinants of political polarization, a phenomenon of increasing
relevance in Western democracies. How much of polarization is driven by divergence in the
ideologies of politicians? How much is instead the result of changes in the capacity of parties to
control their members? We use detailed internal information on party discipline in the context of
the U.S. Congress – whip count data for 1977-1986 – to identify and structurally estimate an
economic model of legislative activity where agenda selection, party discipline, and member
votes are endogenous. The model delivers estimates of the ideological preferences of politicians,
the extent of party control, and allows us to assess the effects of polarization through agenda
setting (i.e. which alternatives to a status quo are strategically pursued). We find that parties
account for approximately 40 percent of the political polarization in legislative voting over this
time period, a critical inflection point in U.S. polarization. We also show that, absent party
control, historically significant economic policies, including Debt Limit bills, the Social Security
Amendments of 1983, and the two Reagan Tax Cuts of 1981 and 1984 would have not passed or
lost substantial support. Counterfactual exercises establish that party control is highly relevant for
the probability of success of a given bill and that polarization in ideological preferences is instead
more consequential for policy selection, resulting in different bills being pursued.

Nathan Canen                                      Francesco Trebbi
Department of Economics                           University of British Columbia
University of Houston                             6000 Iona Drive
3623 Cullen Boulevard                             Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
Houston, TX 77204-5019                            Canada
ncanen@uh.edu                                     and CIFAR
                                                  and also NBER
Chad Kendall                                      ftrebbi@mail.ubc.ca
USC FBE Dept.
3670 Trousdale Pkwy, Ste.308
BRI-308, MC-0804
Los Angeles, CA, 90089-0804
chad.kendall@marshall.usc.edu
2                       NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

                                               1. Introduction

    We focus on a set of open questions in the political economy literature on political polar-
ization, a phenomenon that has taken a sharply increasing tack since the mid-1970s in the
United States.1 Other OECD countries have experienced similar trajectories recently, and
deeply antagonistic political environments are commonplace across Western Europe today. To
many observers, polarization has been linked to heightened policy uncertainty over government
spending, regulation and taxes, with consequences for the pricing of financial assets and sov-
ereign debt market volatility (Baker et al., 2014, 2016; Pastor and Veronesi, 2012; Kelly et al.,
2016). Critically, this segmentation of legislatures across party lines may be the result of more
than just exogenous shifts in the ideologies of elected representatives. The goal of this paper
is to present a credibly identified method for unbundling polarization in outcomes, votes and
policies, into its constituent determinants, polarization in ideologies and party control. We
also quantitatively analyze the differential effects of these underlying mechanisms on expected
equilibrium policy outcomes in the U.S. Congress.
    A first question is how much of political polarization in votes is the result of more ideo-
logically polarized politicians and how much is due to party leaderships forcing rank-and-file
members to toe the party line.2 The question of whether or not the current political polar-
ization in Congress can be solely attributed to changes in the ideological composition of the
legislative chambers, for example due to the progressive replacement of moderate representa-
tives with extreme ones, remains unsettled (Theriault, 2008; Moskowitz et al., 2017).3 Political
parties, through changes in institutional rules and in their system of internal leadership (as
in the aftermath of the 1994 Republican Revolution) may have contributed to polarization in
outcomes and division across party lines by allowing parties to more effectively steer members
in support of strategically set agendas.4
1
 For evidence of polarization in the U.S. Congress, see McCarty et al. (2006); McCarty (2017).
2
 See Ban et al. (2016) for a discussion of whether political polarization is the result of better internal enforcement
by party leaders.
3
 To answer this question, one must first deal with the primitive problem of assessing the ideal points of politicians,
a long-standing issue in the political economy and political science scholarship focused on the behavior of national
legislatures (Levitt, 1996; Poole and Rosenthal, 2001; McCarty et al., 2006; Mian et al., 2010). Showing where
politicians’ preferences are located, absent any equilibrium disciplining by parties on floor votes (we will refer
to this latter action as “whipping”), requires recovering the unbiased distribution of within-party individual
ideologies, a problem which is known to be subject to severe identification issues (Krehbiel, 2000; Snyder and
Groseclose, 2000).
4
  Seminal work from Cox and McCubbins (1993), Cox and McCubbins (2005) and Aldrich (1995) emphasizes the
importance of parties for the functioning of Congress. It focuses on how parties use the available institutions to
coordinate and set policies to their benefit, as well as how party leaders work towards their goals with their party
members. Cox and McCubbins emphasize institutional mechanisms by which majority parties get their policies
on the floor, blocking the minority’s policies. They discuss incentives to do so, including the “brand" value
                                         UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                                  3

   A second question is how polarization in the legislature affects the policies that are pursued
and approved. Polarization may affect not only the details of the bills proposed, but also which
status quo policies are contested in the first place (and which are instead left unpursued).
Policy alternatives, including tax cuts, healthcare reforms, trade policy or tariffs bills, are
endogenous and presented strategically based upon the likelihood that a given proposal will
pass. The different drivers of polarization may affect the policy alternatives chosen ex ante
by the agenda setter, who, based on how the equilibrium probability of bill passage varies,
may respond differently to changes in the technology of party control relative to shifts in the
ideological composition of fellow legislators.
   The first contribution of this paper is to provide an economic model of legislative activity
for a two-party system. The model is designed to capture strategic considerations on multiple
nested dimensions. The first dimension is which issues (and for a given issue, which specific
policy alternatives) are selected by proposing parties. Policies that are not sufficiently valuable
vis-à-vis a specific status quo, or too difficult to pass given the extant chamber composition,
may not be pursued at all. The second dimension is whether or not, once a certain alternative
to a status quo is proposed, the leadership decides to invest in acquiring extra information
about the prospects of that specific policy alternative (i.e. “to whip count” a bill). Policies
that appear unpromising once more information is acquired may not be pursued further (i.e.
not brought to the floor for an official vote). The 2017 repeal attempt of the Affordable Care
Act is a salient example. A third dimension for consideration is, if a bill is eventually brought
to the floor for a vote, which legislators can be disciplined (i.e. “whipped ”) in order to maximize
the likelihood of passage. As our economic model formalizes, member voting decisions, the
observable output of the model, are ultimately endogenous to all of these previous phases of the
process. Quantitative approaches based on sincere voting or abstracting from party control, as
in the vast majority of the political economy literature, overlook these important dimensions.
   Empirically unbundling the multiple elements of this process is the second contribution
of the paper. We identify and estimate our model structurally. We are able to resolve the
identification problems previous researchers have faced thanks to the use of new data that

of a party, increasing re-election chances for politicians, increasing the coordination of policies that politicians
may be unsure of, setting policy positions, as well as helping to enforce and coordinate policies and votes.
Evidence, such as in Forgette (2004), has shown that these mechanisms of policy positioning and agenda-setting
are present, as measured by the attendance rates and transcripts from party caucuses, and affect legislative
roll call voting. Aldrich (1995) and his Conditional Party Government theory proposes that parties play an
important role in pushing policies of interest to the rank and file. Economists such as Caillaud and Tirole (2002)
have also taken a similar stance to party organization, emphasizing internal control issues, but with a focus on
electoral success.
4                      NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

supplements standard floor voting (“roll call ”) information, thus decoupling true individual
ideological positions (before any party control is exerted) from party discipline targeted towards
members on the fence of support for a bill.5 We make use of a complete corpus of whip count
votes compiled from historical sources by Evans (2012) for the U.S. House of Representatives.
Whip counts are private records of voting intentions of party members, used by party leaders
to assess the likelihood of success of specific bills under consideration.6 Our sample period
includes the 95th to 99th Congress (years 1977 to 1986). These Congresses occur at the
inflection point of contemporary U.S. polarization dynamics (McCarty et al., 2006), allowing
us to observe how ideological differences across parties and party discipline evolve over this
critical time period.
    Member’s responses at the whip count stage are useful for recovering the true ideological
positions of politicians before party control is exerted. Our argument is three-fold. First,
the information revelation value of whip counts resides in the repeated interaction between
members and the leadership, limiting the ability of rank-and-file politicians to systematically
lie or deceive their own party leaders. These interactions are frequent and the stakes are
typically high. Second, by a revealed preference argument, the fact that costly whip counts are
systematically employed by the party leadership to ascertain the floor prospects of crucial bills
bears witness to their usefulness and informational value. It is unclear why leaders would spend
valuable time on these counts otherwise. Third, as we model explicitly, certain designated party
5
  The main difficulty lies in being able to compare outcomes with parties, to outcomes with none. In a series
of works, Keith Krehbiel (Krehbiel (1993), Krehbiel (1999), Krehbiel (2000)) has argued that the previous
literature failed to address the confounding issues of whether parties are effective, or whether they are only a
grouping of like-minded politicians. This identification problem comes from using outcomes such as roll call
votes, party cohesion, or party unity scores. These measures, of which Nominate (Poole and Rosenthal (1997))
and its variations rely upon, are a combination of politicians’ preferences and of party effects. Politicians from
the same party are likely to share similar ideologies, so could be voting in the same way regardless of party
discipline. The paradox, as stated by Krehbiel (1999), is that this confound would make it seem that parties are
strongest when they are most homogeneous ideologically (and hence, when they are needed the least). That, in
turn, leads to an empirically difficult problem: how does one separate individual ideology measurements from
party effects? In particular, how does one estimate party effects when ideology measures confound both parties
and individual ideologies?
6
 The data structure of whip counts has been explored occasionally in the past, as in the works of Ripley (1964)
and Dodd (1979) for example, but with different objectives. In both papers, the data was collected when the
authors worked within the Whip Offices (as American Political Science Association Congressional Fellows). Our
final data provides a comprehensive set-up: for many bills over different Congresses, we can track the voting
intentions of politicians, how these changed at the final vote, and the whips who were responsible for making
these changes happen. Two works in particular have looked at whip counts in the context of parties and party
discipline. Burden and Frisby (2004) look at 16 whip counts and their roll calls and find that most of the
switching of votes has gone in the direction of party leaders. They argue that even if this undermines the true
impacts of whips (as many of the votes are guaranteed by leaders in equilibrium, without having them actually
change), it still presents evidence of the high effectiveness of this measure. Evans and Grandy (2009) also
use whip counts, and provide an extensive survey of whipping in he House of Representatives and the Senate,
drawing attention to some historical examples.
                                       UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                                5

members (called whips), who are responsible for ensuring some subset of members toe the party
line, maintain constant relationships with their delegation and know their districts. This makes
private preferences at least partially observable, reducing informational asymmetries (Meinke,
2008).7
    In addition to providing information about politicians’ true ideological positions, the whip
count data offers identifying variation for assessing party discipline and agenda setting. Con-
cerning party discipline, switching behavior in Yes/No between the whip count stage and the
roll call stage provides the variation necessary to pin down the extent of whipping – how much
control the party is able to exert. Concerning agenda setting, we exploit the fact that not all
bills that are voted on the floor are whip counted, and that certain bills that are whip counted
are subsequently dropped without a subsequent floor vote.8 By explicitly modeling this selec-
tion process, we theoretically identify thresholds determining which bills are voted on and/or
whip counted. Together with flexible assumptions on the distribution of latent status quo
policies, these thresholds allow us to recover information on policies that are never proposed
and never voted.
    This paper establishes several findings. Our results show that standard approaches to the
estimation of ideal points based on random utility models (or optimal classification) that
employ roll call votes alone, such as the popular DW-Nominate approach (Poole and Rosenthal,
2001), miss important density in the middle of the support of the ideological distribution. These
methods, which conflate party control with the estimation of individual ideologies (Snyder and
Groseclose, 2000), show a polarization level of ideal points much larger than the actual one
based upon our unbiased estimates. Across the 95th-99th Congresses, we find that the distance
between party medians is on average about 60% of that based upon standard DW-Nominate
estimates. According to our estimates, the share of total polarization attributed to party
discipline, as opposed to ideological differences, varies from 34 percent in the 96th Congress to
44 percent in the 99th Congress. Importantly, these results do not rely on arbitrary assumptions
about which bills may be whipped or not by the party (we operate under the assumption that
parties can discipline votes on any bill) and without the omission of any floor votes from the
analysis, including lopsided or unanimous votes.

7
 Multiple assistant and regional whips are part of the party leadership hierarchy and are typically appointed or
elected within a delegation. As further testimony of the value of whips’ activities, the Majority and Minority
Whips, who organize these counts, are ranked second or third in importance within the party hierarchy.
8
 For a recent important example, consider early 2017 efforts to repeal the Affordable Care Act by the Republican
leadership in the House. These attempts were repeatedly whip counted, but not voted.
6                     NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

    In terms of agenda-setting, we show that for every 100 issues that the majority party
(Democrats in our sample) could potentially deliberate within a congressional cycle, on av-
erage, 7 are never voted because they are not sufficiently valuable for the leadership; 86 are
brought directly to the floor where they are whipped and voted; and 7 are whip counted. Of
the 7 bills whip counted, 2 are whip counted and then dropped, while 5 are brought to the
floor, where they are then whipped and voted.
    With our structural estimates at hand, we show that party discipline matters substantially
and has proven crucial for the passage of important bills. Eliminating party discipline in
the form of whipping is precisely rejected relative to a model with party discipline using
standard model selection tests. The extent of party discipline is statistically different from
zero, quantitatively sizable, and growing between 1977 and 1986.
    Given the specific time period over which our whip count data is available, we are also able
to assess, through counterfactuals, the role of parties in steering particularly salient economic
bills in the early 1980s, including the two Reagan Tax Reforms of 1981 and 1984, several
Social Security Amendments, Debt Limit Increase Acts, the National Energy Act of 1977,
and the implementation of the Panama Canal Treaty in 1979. Some of these bills would not
have passed or would have substantially lost support absent party discipline. In counterfactual
exercises that focus on agenda setting, we also establish that party control is highly relevant
for the equilibrium probability of success of a given policy alternative against the status quo.
Polarization in the ideological preferences of legislators is instead more consequential for setting
the policy alternative for each status quo, resulting in substantially different bills being pursued.
    This paper contributes to three broad strands of literature. First, it is concerned with the
polarization of political elites. The empirical literature on political polarization has a rich
history (Poole and Rosenthal, 1984), and has experienced a recent resurgence in interest due
to glaring increases in partisanship in voting (McCarty, 2017, but also media reports9). Rising
political polarization has been detected not only in legislator ideology assessments based on
roll calls, but in candidate survey responses (Moskowitz et al., 2017), congressional speech
scores (Gentzkow et al., 2017), and campaign contributions measures (Bonica, 2014). Con-
siderations on polarization from an economic perspective, related to the seemingly increasing
policy gridlock after the 2008 financial crisis, are offered in Mian et al. (2014). We contribute
to this discussion from an empirical perspective by quantitatively unbundling some of the deep

9
 See, for instance, Philip Bump, December 21, 2016, “Farewell to the most polarized Congress in more than 100
years!” Washington Post.
                                        UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                                7

determinants of polarization. In this respect our work complements other recent attempts,
such as Moskowitz et al. (2017), but it differs in terms of theory, identification strategy, and
in the use of a structural approach.
     A second, closely related, literature considers the problem of separating politician’s ideo-
logical preferences from party discipline. At the heart of the problem is the observation by
Krehbiel (1999, 1993) that party unity in floor voting may not necessarily be conclusive evi-
dence of discipline. This observation is, at its core, an identification critique. Politicians from
the same party are likely to share a similar ideology, and hence may vote similarly even absent
party control. Exemplifying one of the most popular existing procedures used to estimate
legislator ideology10, McCarty et al. (2006) offers a broad discussion of this research area and
links it to parallel relevant phenomena, such as the co-determined evolution of U.S. income
inequality (Piketty and Saez, 2003).
     Decomposition efforts in problems of political agency are rooted in an older literature that
seeks ways to separate a politician’s true policy preferences from that of the party, by focusing
on situations in which one or the other factor would not be present. Snyder and Groseclose
(2000) propose one such method of separating party effects from politician ideology, which has
been widely used and adapted (e.g. McCarty et al., 2001; Minozzi and Volden, 2013). Their
argument is that parties concentrate their efforts on results that they can influence, such as
close legislative votes. Seemingly, expected lopsided votes would not attract nor need party
intervention. Absent party effects on lopsided votes, Snyder and Groseclose (2000) argue in
favor of estimating individual ideologies from a first stage on lopsided roll calls alone. After
recovering estimates of individual preferences, in a second stage they study close votes to
recover party effects, given the previously estimated legislator true preferences. There are two
main methodological obstacles to this this approach. First, which vote is lopsided and which
is contested is endogenous to the choice of policy alternative by the agenda setter (see the
discussion in Bateman et al., 2017). This selection mechanism is explicit in our framework.
Secondly, McCarty et al. (2001) note that this method provides poor identifying variation due
to minimal differences in vote choices within a party for lopsided votes. In contrast, our paper
does not rely on an arbitrary selection of votes where parties are assumed to be inactive.11
10
   Among the standard approaches to estimation are Poole and Rosenthal (1997); Clinton et al. (2004); Heckman
and Snyder (1997).
11
  Other closely related papers such as Clinton et al. (2004), who use Bayesian methods to estimate ideal points,
also employ lopsided bills to recover party discipline. Another approach looks at politicians who change party to
see how their voting behavior changes. As Nokken (2000) finds, congressmembers who switch party do change
voting patterns, suggesting that ideology is not their sole decision factor. Our model microfounds this change in
8                      NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

Previous works have also discussed how polarization and agenda setting may interact (Clinton
et al., 2014; Bateman et al., 2017), a point that our model clarifies.
    A final literature to which we contribute deals with the consequences of polarization for
the behavior of legislatures. Mian et al. (2014) offers a discussion of the effects of political
polarization on government gridlock and lack of reform. They also discuss how gridlock may be
particularly damaging in the contexts of the aftermath of deep economic crises, where political
stalemate may trigger secondary adverse events (e.g. sovereign debt crises following banking
crises). The relationship between slowdowns in legislative productivity and polarization is also
a topic frequently discussed in political science (e.g. Binder, 2003 and references therein).
None of these works, however, offers a theory for the analysis of the role of polarization in the
context of strategic party control efforts and endogenous agenda setting decisions.
    The rest of our work is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our model and Section 3
our main analytical results. Section 4 describes our data, with emphasis on our application of
whip count information. Section 5 focuses on the identification of the model and our estimation
procedure. Section 6 discusses our results, and Section 7 provides our counterfactual exercises
and benchmarks our analysis to extant metrics of polarization. Section 8 concludes. The
Appendix contains all proofs and additional empirical supporting material.

                                                   2. Model

    We present a model with two main features: (i) party discipline, and (ii) agenda-setting.
Two parties compete for votes on a series of issues that make up a congressional term. Each
party employs a subset of their legislators (the whips) to discipline their members (including
other whips).12 For a given status quo policy, a (randomly-selected) proposing party chooses the
alternative policy (if any) to be voted upon, accounting for both its own ability to discipline
(whip) its members, as well as that of the other party, and on the value and likelihood of
passage of the alternative policy. Because floor votes are costly, not all status quo policies will
be pursued. If an alternative is pursued, the proposing party can employ a formal whip count,
behavior. An interesting historical approach is presented by Jenkins (2000). By studying congressmembers who
initially served in the U.S. House and then served in the Confederate House during the American Civil War, he
finds striking differences in the estimated ideologies for the same politician from voting behavior in the different
Houses. Since the legislators were the same, and in very similar institutional settings, he concludes (with further
evidence) that differences were due to agenda setting and party discipline rather than mere ideology. Finally,
Ansolabehere et al. (2001)) use a survey directly targeted at candidate ideology (NPAT, also used in Moskowitz
et al., 2017) to estimate ideal points, hence moving away from roll calls.
12
  To illustrate the size of the whip apparatus each party uses, we report data on the number of whips by party
and Congress in Table 9 (data originally compiled by Meinke (2008)). These whips compose the Majority or
Minority Whip as well as regional and assistant whips.
                                          UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                          9

which allows it to obtain additional information about a bill’s probability of success before a
floor vote, and to drop bills that are unlikely to pass conditional on the count.13 Whether the
proposing party chooses to conduct a formal whip count depends upon its option value relative
to the fixed cost of undertaking this process.

2.1. Preliminaries.
     Party members vote on a series of policies at times t = 1, 2, . . . , T with the majority vote
determining the winning policy. Each party, p ∈ {D, R}, has a mass of Np members whose
underlying ideologies, θ, are continuously distributed with cumulative distribution functions
(CDFs), Fp (θ), in a single-dimensional space. We assume that the corresponding probability
distribution functions (PDFs), fp (θ), have unbounded support. The median member(s) of a
party are identified by θpm and represent the preference of the party overall. We assume without
           m < θm .
loss that θD    R

     In each period, party D is randomly recognized with probability γ, allowing it to set the
policy alternative, xt , to be put to a vote. With the remaining probability, 1 − γ, party R is
recognized. The recognized party draws a status quo policy, qt , from a continuous CDF, W (q),
with corresponding PDF, w(q), which is also assumed to have unbounded support.14

2.2. Preferences.
     There are three sets of actors for each party: non-whip members, whip members, and the
party itself.
     Whips are a ‘technology’ that a party uses to discipline its members. We take the mass and
ideologies of whips as exogenous and assume an exogenous matching of whips to members for
which they are responsible, such that each member is controlled by exactly one whip. Whips
acquire information from members and are rewarded for obtaining votes that the party desires.
     All party members (whips and non-whips) derive expressive utility from the policy, kt ∈
{qt , xt }, that they vote for. This utility is given by u(kt , ωti ), where ωti = θi +δ1,t
                                                                                        i +δ i +η +η
                                                                                            2,t  1,t 2,t

determines their position on a particular bill. We assume a symmetric, strictly concave utility
function: u(kt , ωti ) = u(|kt − ωti |) with u(ωti , ωti ) = uk (ωti , ωti ) = 0, ukk (kt , ωti ) < 0.
     θi is a member’s fundamental ideology, a constant trait of i.15 A member’s position on
                                                                             i and δ i , and
a particular bill is determined by this ideology, two idiosyncratic shocks, δ1,t    2,t

13
  The party not setting the agenda may also conduct a whip count, but this occurs less frequently in our data
so we do not model its reason for doing so.
14In our application, D is the majority party. We do not model how the frequency of recognition is determined
by the leadership of both parties.
15In this regard, we follow the discussion and evidence from Lee et al. (2004) and Moskowitz et al. (2017).
10                     NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

two aggregate shocks, η1,t and η2,t . Multiple shocks are required to model the information
acquisition problem of the proposing party, as will become clear below. The aggregate shocks
are common across all members of both parties and are independent draws from a normal
                                                                                   i and
distribution with mean zero and standard deviation, ση . The idiosyncratic shocks δ1,t
 i are identically and independently distributed across i and t according to the continuous,
δ2,t
unbounded, and mean zero CDF, G(δ) with corresponding PDF, g(δ).
     Whip members, in addition to their utility from voting, receive a payment of rp (which may
differ across parties) for each member i for whom the whip is responsible and that votes with
the party. rp may represent, for example, improved future career opportunities within the party
hierarchy.16 We model whip influence over the members for which she is responsible as an abil-
ity to persuade a member to change his position on a particular bill. To influence a member’s
position by an amount, yti (i.e. to move his ideal point to ωti + yti ), a whip bears an increasing
cost, c(yti ) (c0 > 0), which can be thought of, most simply, as an effort cost.17 We assume
c(0) < rp so that a whip optimally exerts a non-zero amount of influence. The contribution
to a whip’s utility from whipping is therefore given by i rp I(i votes with party) − c(yti ) ,
                                                       P                                    

where I(.) is the indicator function and the summation is over all members for whom he is
responsible.
     Each party derives utility from that of its median member, u(kt , θpm ) where kt ∈ {qt , xt } is
the winning policy. For simplicity, we assume that the party’s position, represented by their
median member is not subject to idiosyncratic or aggregate shocks.18 Because the party does
not directly bear the cost of whipping members, whipping is costless to the party (and thus
both parties always whip votes to the maximum extent possible).


2.3. Information and Timing.
     The timing of the model is as follows (see Figure 1). At each time t:

      (1) The proposing party is randomly recognized and a status quo policy, qt , is drawn.
      (2) Whip count stage:

16Rewarding the whip only if he switches a member’s vote does not change the results.
17Having the shocks and influence operate on the ideological bliss point rather than as changes in utility (i.e.
u(kt , θi ) + δ1,t
               i      i
                   + δ2,t + η1,t + η2,t + yti ) simplifies the model in two ways. First, it ensures that the maximum
influence exerted by a whip (see Section 3.2) is a constant, independent of the locations of the policies and
the distance between them. Second, it ensures the expected number of votes monotonically decreases in the
extremeness of the alternative policy, xt (see the proof of Proposition 1), which need not be the case for utility
shocks.
18This assumption rules out the possibility that an aggregate shock causes the proposing party to prefer the
status quo over the alternative they themselves proposed.
                                     UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                         11



                                         Figure 1. Timeline

                                     𝜂𝑡1 and 𝛿𝑡1   whip count   𝜂𝑡2 and 𝛿𝑡2              roll call
         qt observed   xt chosen     realized      (optional)   realized      whipping   vote




         (a) The proposing party chooses the policy xt as an alternative to the status quo qt
             and decides whether or not to conduct a whip count at a cost, Cw > 0.
                                                                    i , are realized and observed
        (b) The first aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks, η1,t and δ1,t
                                                                     i , and the policy he
             noisily: each member observes his idiosyncratic shock, δ1,t
             prefers, u(xt , θi + δ1,t
                                   i + η ) ≶ u(q , θ i + δ i + η ), but not the realization of η .
                                        1,t     t         1,t   1,t                             1,t

         (c) If a whip count is undertaken, each member makes a report, mit ∈ {Y es, N o}, to
             his whip, answering the question of whether or not they intend to support the
             alternative policy, xt . The outcome of the whip count is common knowledge.
        (d) The proposing party (conditional on the whip count, if taken) decides whether or
             not to proceed with the bill, taking it to a roll call vote at a cost, Cb > 0.
   (3) Roll call stage:
                                                                              i , are realized
         (a) The second aggregate and idiosyncratic utility shocks, η2,t and δ2,t
             and observed as in the case of the first shocks: each member observes his idiosyn-
                            i , and the policy he prefers u(x , ω i ) ≥ u(q , ω i ), but not the the
             cratic shock, δ2,t                              t   t         t   t

             realization of η2,t .
        (b) Similar to a whip count, whips communicate with their members to learn the sum
             of the aggregate shocks, η1,t + η2,t .
                                                               i + δ i of the members for
         (c) Whips learn the sum of the idiosyncratic shocks, δ1,t  2,t

             whom they are responsible and choose the amount of influence to exert, yti , over
             each member.
        (d) The roll call vote occurs.

The information structure (who knows what and when) is a formalization of the role that
whips play in obtaining and aggregating information by keeping close relationships with the
rank-and-file members for which they are responsible. Information about individual member
positions is important for determining (i) which members are most easily persuaded to toe the
party line, and (ii) the aggregate position on a bill, which is important for determining the
likelihood that a particular bill is going to pass the roll call.
12                     NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

                                               3. Analysis

     We solve the model via backward induction. In Sections 3.1 and 3.2, we determine the
decisions of members and whips. These decisions are the same for each party, so we drop the
party label for convenience. In Sections 3.3 through 3.5, we turn to the decisions unique to the
proposing party: which alternative policy to pursue, if any, and whether or not to conduct a
whip count and a floor vote.


3.1. Roll Call Votes.
     Prior to the roll call vote, whips communicate with the members for whom they are respon-
sible in order to learn the value of η1,t +η2,t , which is necessary for deciding how much influence
to exert (see Section 3.2). To do so, each whip asks each member whether or not they intend
to vote for the alternative policy, xt . In the aggregate across politicians, this process reveals
the aggregate shocks as in the case of a whip count (see Section 3.3). Whips then communicate
the values of the aggregate shocks to all members, so that they have full information at the
time of their vote.
     A member votes for xt if and only if u(xt , ωti + yti ) ≥ u(q t , ωti + yti ) where ωti + yti is the
member’s ideological bliss point after whip influence.19 It is convenient to define the marginal
voter as the ideological position of the voter who is indifferent between the two policies. Given
                                                                            xt +qt
symmetric utility functions, this voter is located at ωti = M Vt =             2 ,   absent party discipline
and aggregate shocks.


3.2. Whip Decisions.
     At the time of the whipping decision (just prior to roll call), each whip has full information
about the ideological position of his members. He therefore knows whether or not a given
(conditional) transfer induces a vote for a party’s preferred policy or not, and so either exerts
the minimal influence necessary to make the member indifferent between policies, or exerts no
influence at all. The maximum influence he is willing to exert, ypmax , is defined by rp = c(ypmax ),
or ypmax = c−1 (rp ). ypmax is strictly greater than zero by assumption (c(0) < rp ).
     Given yPmax , Lemma 1 establishes that only members who would not otherwise vote for the
party’s preferred policy, and are within a fixed distance of the marginal voter are whipped.


19Ties have measure zero due to the continuous nature of the shocks and therefore the vote tie-breaking rule is
immaterial.
                                        UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                                13

                                                                                  0
   Lemma 1: Assume a party strictly prefers policy kt over policy kt . Then, only members, i,
whose realized ideologies are on the opposite side of M Vt from kt and such that |ωti − M Vt | ≤
ypmax are whipped.

3.3. The Whip Count.
   If a whip count is conducted, whips receive reports, mit ∈ {Y es, N o}, from each member
for whom they are responsible and subsequently make these reports public. If each member
reports truthfully, he reports mit = Y es if u(xt , θi + δ1,t
                                                          i + η ) ≥ u(q , θ i + δ i + η ) and
                                                               1,t     t         1,t   1,t

mit = N o otherwise. Given the continuum of reports, {mit }, by the law of large numbers,
E[η1,t |{mit }] = η̂1,t , where η̂1,t is the realized value of η1,t .
   All members reporting truthfully forms part of an equilibrium strategy of the overall game
because no single member can influence beliefs about η̂1,t , and hence cannot influence the
eventual policy outcome by misreporting.20 We therefore assume in what follows that members
play a truth-telling strategy.21
   We formalize these claims in Lemma 2.


   Lemma 2: Truth-telling at the whip count stage forms part of an equilibrium strategy.
Under truth-telling, the realization of the first aggregate shock, η̂1,t , is known with probability
one.

3.4. Optimal Policy Choices.
   After observing qt , the proposing party can choose to do one of three things. One, it can
decide not to pursue any alternative policy. Two, it can choose an alternative policy to pursue,
xt , without conducting a whip count. In this case, the party pays the cost, Cb , of pursuing
the bill to the roll call stage. Three, the party can choose an alternative policy to pursue and
conduct a whip count at a cost, Cw . In this case, after observing the results of the whip count,
the party can decide whether or not to continue with the bill at a cost of Cb . Choosing to
undertake the whip count is analogous to purchasing an option: the option to save the cost of
pursuing the bill should the initial aggregate shock η1,t turn out unfavorably.
   For status quo policies to the left of the proposing party’s ideal point, θpm , the alternative
policy pursued (if any) must lie to the right of the status quo: any policy to the left of qt is less
20In addition, misreporting does not change the amount of influence a member’s whip exerts because the whip
learns the member’s true position before exerting influence.
21As usual, there also exists an equilibrium of the whip count subgame in which each member babbles, so that
nothing is learned about η̂1,t . This equilibrium is not empirically plausible because in this case no costly whip
count would ever be conducted.
14                     NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

preferred than qt and qt can be obtained at no cost. Similarly, for status quo policies to the
right of θpm , the proposed alternative policy must lie to the left of the status quo. In choosing
how far from the status quo to set the alternative policy, the proposing party faces an intuitive
trade-off: policies closer to its ideal point are more valuable, should they be successfully voted
in, but are less likely to obtain the necessary votes to pass.
     To formalize this intuition, define the number of votes that xt obtains (with probability one)
as Y (M˜V 2,t ), where M˜V 2,t ≡ M Vt − η1,t − η2,t is the realized marginal voter (after aggregate
shocks) at roll call time (similarly the realized marginal voter at whip count time is defined by
M˜V 1,t ≡ M Vt − η1,t ). Note that Y (M˜V 2,t ) is stochastic only because of the random aggregate
shocks – the idiosyncratic shocks average out because of a continuum of members. Using
these definitions, the proof of Lemma 3 shows that more preferred policies obtain less votes on
average.


     Lemma 3: The expected number of votes that the alternative policy, xt , obtains strictly
decreases with the distance between xt and the proposing party’s ideal point.
     The result of Lemma 3 guarantees that the alternative policy proposed must lie between
the party’s ideal point and the status quo policy. An alternative policy on the opposite side
of the ideal point from the status quo is dominated by xt = θpm , which is both more preferred
and obtains more votes in expectation.
     For the remainder of the analysis we present the case in which party D is the proposer – the
case of party R is symmetric. Given the whipping technologies available to each party (defined
                                                            max and y max ) we can define
by the maximum influence their whips are willing to exert, yR        D

the position of the marginal voter when the alternative policy is such that it obtains exactly
half of the votes. Denote this position, MˆV i,j , where the subscripts i, j ∈ {L, R} indicate the
directions of the policy that parties D and R whip for, respectively.22 Each M ˆVi,j is then given
by Y (M ˆVi,j ) =   NR +ND
                       2   .
     In the absence of a whip count, if party D pursues an alternative policy, the alternative
policy xt must maximize

               no    count                                    m                          m
             EUD             (qt , xt ) = P r(xt wins)u(xt , θD ) + P r(xt loses)u(qt , θD ) − Cb

where the cost of of proceeding with the bill, Cb , is paid with certainty.

22Each M ˆ
         Vi,j is a function of many parameters of the model, so we suppress their dependencies for convenience.
Note, however, that each is independent of qt and xt .
                                       UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                               15

                                          m , since x ∈ (q , θ m ], both parties prefer and whip for
  For status quo policies to the left of θD          t    t D

xt , the rightmost policy. Because Y (M˜V 2,t ) is monotonically decreasing in xt , and therefore in
                                                                                               
M˜V 2,t , xt wins if and only if M˜V 2,t < M VˆR,R so that P r(xt wins) = P r M˜V 2,t < MˆV R,R .23
The sum of the aggregate shocks, η1,t +η2,t , is normally distributed with a variance of σ 2 = 2ση2
                                                      ˜
                                                      M V 2,t −M VˆR,R
                                                                       
so that we can write P r(xt wins|xt > qt ) = 1 − Φ            σ          , where Φ denotes the CDF
of the standard normal distribution.
                                           m , we have x ∈ [θ m , q ). Party D therefore whips
  For status quo policies to the right of θD            t    D t

for the leftmost policy, xt , but party R may whip for either policy depending on where qt
                            m . As a simplification, we assume party R always whips for
and xt lie with respect to θR
qt in this case.24 Under this assumption, xt wins if and only if M˜V 2,t > M VˆL,R , so that
                           ˜
                           M V 2,t −M VˆL,R
                                            
P r(xt wins|xt < qt ) = Φ          σ          .
  Conducting a whip count provides the option value of dropping the bill and avoiding the
cost, Cb , if the first aggregate shock makes it unlikely the bill will pass. After conduct-
ing the whip count, party D continues to pursue the bill if and only if P r(xt wins|η1,t =
                 m ) − u(q , θ m )) + u(q , θ m ) − C ≥ u(q , θ m ), where η̂
η̂1,t ) (u(xt , θD        t D            t D         b     t D               1,t is the realized value of η1,t
            m ) is the party’s utility from the outside option of dropping the bill. P r(x wins|η
and u(qt , θD                                                                             t       1,t =

η̂1,t ) is easily shown to be strictly monotonic in η̂1,t , so that we can define cutoff values of η1,t ,
η 1,t and η 1,t , such that party D continues to pursue the bill if and only if η1,t > η 1,t (for status
                             m ) or η
quo policies to the left of θD        1,t < η 1,t (for status quo policies to the right).

  Given these continuation policies, prior to the whip count, party D chooses xt to maximize


                                       h
  count                                                                     m
EUD     (qt , xt ) = P r(η1,t > η 1,t ) P r(xt wins|η1,t > η 1,t ) (u(xt , θD ) − Cb )
                                                                            i
                                                                   m
                     + 1 − P r(xt wins|η1,t > η 1,t ) (u(qt , θD     ) − Cb ) + P r(η1,t < η 1,t )u(qt )

                                          m and
  for status quo policies to the left of θD




23Ties occur with measure zero so any tie-breaking rule suffices.
24Similarly, if party R proposes an alternative to a status quo policy, q < θ m , we assume party D always whips
                                                                         t   R
for the status quo. We can solve the model without these assumptions, and the results are qualitatively similar.
The difference is that the proposing party may choose to set the alternative policy such that the other party is
exactly indifferent between policies in order to gain its support, rather than pushing for an alternative policy
closer to the proposing party’s ideal point. Thus, the model predicts a mass of bills for which the the marginal
voter is at exactly the opposing party’s ideal point. In reality, uncertainty about party positions is likely to
prevent this fine-tuning of policies.
16                          NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI




   count                                                                     m
                                        
 EUD     (qt , xt ) = P r(η1,t < η 1,t ) P r(xt wins|η1,t < η 1,t ) (u(xt , θD ) − Cb )
                                                                   m
                                                                             
                      + 1 − P r(xt wins|η1,t < η 1,t ) (u(qt , θD    ) − Cb ) + P r(η1,t > η 1,t )u(qt )

                                              m.
     for status quo policies to the right of θD
     We define xcount
                t     and xno
                           t
                                         count   to be the optimal alternative policies pursued (if any alterna-
tive is pursued) when a whip count is conducted and when it is not, respectively. Proposition 1
shows that, provided that the cost of pursuing a bill, Cb , is not too large, these optimal policies
are unique and bounded away from the party’s ideal point. Furthermore, the alternative policy
pursued with a whip count is closer to the party’s ideal policy. Intuitively, the fact that a whip
count allows the party to drop bills that are unlikely to pass after observing the first aggregate
shock allows it to pursue policies that are more difficult to pass.


     Proposition 1: There exists a strictly positive cutoff cost of pursuing a bill, Ĉb > 0, such
that for all Cb < Ĉb , the optimal alternative policies, xcount
                                                           t     and xno
                                                                      t
                                                                                                  count ,   are unique and
contained in                m)
                     (qt , θD    for qt <     m,
                                             θD     contained in     m, q )
                                                                   (θD          for qt >     m,
                                                                                            θD                   m for
                                                                                                   and equal to θD
                                                                         t
       m.
qt = θ D
     The requirement in Proposition 1 that Cb be sufficiently small is for analytical purposes
only. Numerically, we have been unable to find a counterexample in which the proposition
does not hold.

3.5. The Whip Count and Bill Pursuit Decisions.
     To complete the analysis, we determine for which status quo policies alternative policies
are pursued and, when they are pursued, whether or not a whip count is conducted. De-
fine the value functions, VDcount (qt ) = EUD
                                            count (q , xcount ) − u(q , θ m ) and V no
                                                    t t              t D           D
                                                                                                               count (q )
                                                                                                                       t    =
  no
EUD      count (q        no count )             m ), as the gains from pursuing an alternative policy with
                                      − u(qt , θD
                    t , xt

and without conducting a whip count, respectively (note that these definitions account for the
cost of pursuing a bill, Cb , but ignore the cost of the whip count, Cw ). Lemma 4 characterizes
the value functions as a function of the status quo policy.


     Lemma 4: Fix Cb < Ĉb such that the optimal alternative policies, xcount
                                                                        t     and xno
                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                      count ,

                                 m , the value of pursuing an alternative policy with a whip
are unique. Then, for all qt 6= θD
count, VDcount (qt ), strictly exceeds that without, VDno          count (q
                                                                              t ).   Furthermore, both value functions
                                      UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                                     17

                             m |, but the difference between them, V count (q )−V no
strictly decrease with |qt −θD                                                                 count (q )   strictly
                                                                    D        t   D                     t

increases.
  Intuitively, both value functions decrease as the status quo approaches the proposing party’s
ideal point because there is less to gain from an alternative policy. More interestingly, the
difference between the value functions increases as the status quo approaches the party’s ideal
point because the whip count is an option that allows the proposing party to initially pursue
a bill, but drop it if the initial aggregate shock turns out to be unfavorable (thus avoiding the
cost, Cb ). This option value is always positive because the party could always ignore the result
of the whip count. It increases as the status quo nears the party’s ideal point because passing
                                                                            m , the marginal voter
an alternative policy becomes more difficult (fixing xt , as qt approaches θD
            m , resulting in a lower probability of passing). Therefore, exercising the option
approaches θD
becomes more likely, and hence more valuable.
  Using the nature of the value functions, Proposition 2 shows which bills are pursued with
and without a whip count, accounting for the fact that whipping is costly.




  Proposition 2: Fix Cb < Ĉb such that the optimal alternative policies, xcount
                                                                           t     and xno
                                                                                      t
                                                                                                              count ,

are unique and fix the cost of a whip count, Cw > 0. Then, we can define a set of cutoff status
                                                            m < q ≤ q such that:
quo policies, q l , q l , q r , and q r , with q l ≤ q l < θD    r   r


    (1) for qt ∈ [−∞, q l ] ∪ [q r , ∞], the optimal alternative policy, xno
                                                                          t
                                                                                   count ,   is pursued without
        conducting a whip count.
    (2) for qt ∈ (q l , q l ] ∪ [q r , q r ), the optimal alternative policy, xcount
                                                                               t     , is pursued and a whip
        count is conducted.
    (3) for qt ∈ (q l , q r ), no alternative policy is pursued.

We illustrate Proposition 2 via an example in Figure 2.
  For status quo policies nearest to party D’s ideal policy, alternative policies are never pursued
because the value of such an alternative over the existing status quo is small. For status quo
policies farther away, alternative policies may be pursued with or without a whip count, but
when both are possible (as in the empirically relevant case illustrated), it is always policies
farthest from the party’s ideal policy that are pursued without a whip count, because they
have a higher probability of passing ex ante (lower option value).
18                    NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI



                               Figure 2. Example of Value Functions




Note: Value functions of pursuing an alternative policy with and without a whip count. Party D is the
proposing party. The value functions are simulated using θDm          m
                                                             = −0.5, θR = 0.5, M VˆR,R = M VˆL,R = −0.5,
ση = 1, Cb = 0.5, Cw = 0.025, and quadratic utility.




                                                 4. Data

     We use data from two main sources. The whip count data was compiled from historical
sources by Evans (Evans (2012)), and the roll call voting data come from VoteView.org (Poole
and Rosenthal, 1997, 2001).
     The whip count data collected by Evans is a comprehensive set of whip counts retrieved from
a variety of historical sources, mostly from archives that hold former whip and party leaders’
papers. Evans (2012) describes the data collection procedure in depth. We use data from
1977-1986, as whip count data for other Congresses are not as comprehensive and complete as
those for the 95th-99th Congresses, mainly due to idiosyncratic differences in the diligence of
record-keeping by the Majority and Minority Whips. Importantly, however, the period under
analysis is particularly interesting because, according to most narratives, it sits at the inflection
point of modern political polarization in U.S. politics (e.g. McCarty et al., 2006).
                                  UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                     19

  For the Republican Party, we have data from 1977-1980, originating from the Robert H.
Michel Collection, in the Dirksen Congressional Center, Pekin, Illinois, Leadership Files, 1963-
1996. This part of the data “appears to be nearly comprehensive about whip activities on that
side of the partisan aisle, 1975-1980” (Evans (2012)). Data for the Democratic Party covers
1977 to 1986, and originates from the Congressional Papers of Thomas S. Foley, Manuscripts,
Archives and Special Collections Department, Holland Library, Washington State University,
Boxes 197-203. Although John Brademas was the Majority whip from 1977 to 1980, his papers
are collected within the Thomas Foley Collection (his successor). According to Evans (2012),
“the Brademas records are extensive and very well organized, and I am confident that they
are nearly comprehensive. For that matter, I also have a similar sense of the archival file from
Foley’s time in the position”.
  We rely on the matching of Evans (2012) to associate each whip count with a bill voted
on the floor (if the latter was sufficiently close to the one that had a whip count). In total,
we have 340 bills with whip counts covering the period of 1977 to 1986, of which 238 can
be directly associated with a subsequent floor vote in the House. 70 of the whip counts are
Republican and the remaining 270 are Democratic. For each whip count, we have data on the
Yes or No responses of each congressmember to the party’s particular question. Several bills
include further whip counts (i.e. a second, third whip count), in which case we use the first
whip count, as it is most representative of a member’s position pre-whipping.
  Our analysis relies on whip count responses being more accurate signals of true legislator
ideologies than floor votes. We justify this argument on the basis of the repeated interaction
between the whips and rank-and-file members over time. This interaction both reduces the
asymmetry between the principal and the agent concerning true agent types (their preferences
for a policy) and makes systematic lying implausible. Empirically, we highlight that costly and
time consuming internal whip counts are run routinely by both parties, indicating that they
must they must be of use, requiring that truth-telling be the norm. Furthermore, the outcome
of whip counts appears to guide decisions by the leadership in moving forward or abandoning
a policy alternative, as in the case of the GOP effort in repealing the ACA.
  To demonstrate the differences between whip counts and roll calls in the raw data, Figure
3 plots the distribution of individual vote choices aligned with the party leadership at each
phase (for bills proposed by the majority party that have both whip count and roll call votes).
The number of members voting with the leadership dramatically increases at roll call time - a
shift from approximately 160 votes with leadership at whip count time to 218 at roll call time.
20                     NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

Notice that 218 is the simple majority threshold for the chamber - what is needed to pass a
bill at roll call. Around 58 members are persuaded to toe the party line on average, moving in
the direction supported by the party leaders, in accordance with our theory.
     Table 1 provides aggregate statistics on the number of bills for which we have: (i) whip
counts only (subsequently dropped), (ii) whip counts and roll calls, and (iii) roll calls only.
Key bills in our time-frame address a variety of questions about economic policy, foreign aid,
and domestic policy, among others. Examples include the Reagan Tax Reforms of 1981 and of
1984, the National Energy Act of 1977, the Healthcare for the Unemployed Act of 1983, the
Contra affair in Nicaragua of 1984, the implementation of the Panama Canal Treaty in 1979,
and multiple votes for increasing the debt limit.

                                  5. Identification and estimation

5.1. Identification.
     We provide a formal proof of identification in Appendix B. Here, we state the necessary
assumptions and provide intuition about the identifying variation.
     The first assumption provides a normalization of the location of ideal points:

     Assumption 1 (Ideal Point Locations): We normalize the ideal point of one member
(without loss of generality, member ‘0’), θ0 = 0.

     As with a discrete choice model, we must choose the distribution, G, for the idiosyncratic
shocks, δt . The ‘scale’ of the ideal points is pinned down by a normalization of the variance of
this distribution. We assume G is standard normal so that the convolution of the two shocks,
δ1 + δ2 , which we denote G1+2 , is a normal distribution with a variance of two.25

     Assumption 2 (Ideal Point Scale): G is standard normal, with CDF denoted by Φ(·).


     The following two assumptions (Assumptions 3 and 4) are needed solely for the analysis of
agenda setting and are not required for our theory or for estimation of ideal points and party
discipline.
     In order to be able to determine the mass of status quo policies that are never pursued
(which we do not observe), we must make a parametric assumption about the distribution
of status quo policies, W (q). We assume a normal distribution, N (µq , σq2 ) for the status quo
policies themselves, but note that the resulting distribution of marginal voters (as determined
25A Normal distribution, while not essential, is convenient because it has a simple closed form for the convolution
G1+2 .
                                          UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                                   21

by the proposing party) is generally very different from normal. For the purpose of allowing
the status quo distribution to change over time, we allow W (q) to vary by Congress.

  Assumption 3 (Status Quo Distributions): The distribution of status quo policies is
W (q) ∼ N (µq , σq2 ). µq and σq2 may vary by Congress.


  Lastly, in order to determine the optimal alternative policy and hence marginal voter, we
assume each party has a quadratic loss utility function around its ideal point.

  Assumption 4 (Utility): The utility a party derives from a policy, kt , is given by a
quadratic loss function around the ideal point of its median member, u(kt , θpm ) = −(kt − θpm )2 .


  Under Assumption 2, the probability that a member of party D votes Yes at the whip count
is given by



                               P (Y esit = 1) = P (δ1,t
                                                    i
                                                        + θi ≤ M Vt − η1,t )
                                                         i
                                                   = P (δ1,t ≤ M˜V 1,t − θi )

(5.1)                                              = Φ(M˜V 1,t − θi ),

and at roll call time it is given by



                 P (Y esit = 1) = P (δ1,t
                                      i      i
                                          + δ2,t ≤ M Vt − η1,t − η2,t − θi ± yD
                                                                              max
                                                                                  )
                                           i
                                     = P (δ1,t    i
                                               + δ2,t ≤ M˜V 2,t − θi ± yD
                                                                        max
                                                                            )
                                              M˜V 2,t − θi ± yD
                                                              max
(5.2)                                = Φ(             √           ).
                                                        2
                               max enters depends upon the direction that party D whips (see
In (5.2), the sign with which yD
Section 5.2).
  We seek to identify the parameter vector,


         Θ = {{{θpi }, ypmax , q l,p , q l,p , q r,p , q r,p }p∈{D,R} , γ, µq , σq , {M˜V 1,t }, {M˜V 2,t }, ση }

As is standard in ideal point estimation, the member ideal points, {θpi }, are identified relative
to each other by the frequencies at which the members vote Yes and No over a series of whip
count votes. Namely, they are proportional to their probabilities of voting Yes over the same
22                       NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

set of bills. Their absolute positions are then pinned down by the normalization assumptions
(Assumptions 1 and 2). Given the ideal points, the realized marginal voter at each whip count,
{M˜V 1,t }, is then identified as the ‘cutpoint’ that best divides the Yes and No votes.
     At roll call time, each party has a different cutpoint (because of different party discipline
parameters) given by {M˜V 2,t } ± ypmax . The two cutpoints are identified by the locations that
best divide Yes and No votes within a party. We determine the sign of the party discipline
parameter using a proxy for the whipping direction (see Section 5.2). With whip count data, we
can separately identify each party discipline parameter by the average change in votes between
the whip count and roll call.26 Then, because the estimated cutpoint at roll call time within a
party is given by {M˜V 2,t } ± ypmax , we can recover the realized marginal voters, {M˜V 2,t }. The
variance in the second aggregate shock, η2 , is given by the variance of the differences between
realized marginal voters at whip count and at roll call.
     Identification of the parameters governing agenda-setting, {γ, µq , σq , {q l,p , q l,p , q r,p , q r,p }p∈{D,R} },
requires the distributional assumption, Assumption 3. Under this assumption, the status quo
distribution that the parties draw from is normal, which, from the theory, means that the
bills with only roll calls are drawn from a truncated normal.27 The resulting distribution of
marginal voters is pinned down by the relationship between status quo policies and optimal
alternative policies (Lemma A1 in the Appendix shows that the relationship between status
quo and marginal voter is one-to-one), assuming each party has a quadratic loss utility function
around its ideal point (Assumption 4). Convolving the distribution of marginal voters with
those of the first and second aggregate shocks (whose variances have already been identified)
provides a distribution over the realized marginal voters, {M˜V 2,t }, which we then match to
the data.
     Intuitively, the mean, variance, and cutoffs of the truncated normal distribution all provide
independent effects on the distribution of realized marginal voters for bills with roll calls only,

26To identify the individual party discipline parameters from the change between whip count and roll requires
that the aggregate shock between these stages be mean zero. Alternatively, given that the two parties agree on
some proposals (whip in the same direction), but disagree on others (whip in opposite directions), the difference
between their cutpoints may be either the difference or the sum of the individual discipline parameters, providing
a second source of identification of the individual parameters. Given this additional source of identification, we
do not need to impose the mean zero assumption in estimation.
27For computational reasons, we estimate the status quo cutoffs directly rather than the cost parameters, C
                                                                                                                 b
and Cw , that determine them. The cutoffs are complex, implicit functions of the cost parameters making it
infeasible to calculate them within the optimization loop. By allowing the cutoffs to be different on either
side of each party’s median, we are implicitly allowing the costs to be potentially different in each case. This
assumption therefore allows the cost of pursuing a bill to depend upon whether or not parties agree or disagree
over the alternatives.
                                        UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                             23

but we verify this intuition with extensive Monte Carlo simulations. Once the status quo
distribution is identified, the cutoffs, q l,p and q r,p , that determine the range of status quo
policies for which whip counts are conducted are pinned down by the number of whip counted
bills. Finally, the probability that D proposes a bill, γ, is determined by a proxy for the party
proposing the bill, as discussed in the following subsection.




5.2. Two Step Estimation.
  We observe votes for both parties, p ∈ {D, R}, at both the whip count stage (denoted
Y esi,wc                                          i,rc
    t,p ) and at the roll call stage (denoted Y est,p ), for each politician i ∈ {1, ..., N } and

period t ∈ {1, ..., T }. We estimate the model in two steps.
  In the first step, we take the distribution of status quo policies as given, which is possi-
ble because we estimate the realized marginal voters as fixed effects. We estimate the set
of parameters, Θ1 = {{{θpi }, ypmax }p∈{D,R} , {M˜V 1,t }, {M˜V 2,t }, ση }, by maximum likelihood,
allowing the party discipline parameters, ypmax , to vary by Congress.
  Replacing the conditional probability of observing a Yes vote at roll call given a Yes vote at
whip count by its unconditional probability, we can define the pseudo-likelihood for the first
step:

        L(Θ1 ; Y esi,wc      i,rc
                   t,p , Y est,p ) =
                                                 Np
                                               T Y
                                                                            i,wc                     i,wc
                                                         P (Y esi,wc            P (Y esi,wc
                                         Y     Y
                                                                        Y est,p                1−Y est,p
(5.3)                                                           t,p = 1)               t,p = 0)
                                       p∈{D,R} t=1 n=1
                                                              i,rc                     i,rc
                                       × P (Y esi,rc
                                                t,p = 1)
                                                        Y est,p
                                                                P (Y esi,rc
                                                                       t,p = 0)
                                                                               1−Y est,p


  Using the pseudo-likelihood as opposed to the more cumbersome original likelihood has no
effect on consistency of the estimation (Gourieroux et al. (1984), Wooldridge (2010)), because
our model is identified despite the nuisance of the dependence between the roll call and the
whip count stages.
  For the Democratic Party, we can use equations (5.1) and (5.2), together with our parametriza-
tion to re-express the likelihood of a series of votes by member of party D in (5.3) as:
24                    NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI




(5.4)
LD (Θ1 ; Y esi,wc      i,rc
             t,p , Y est,p ) =
                         ND
                       T Y                                                           1−Y esi,wc
                                                   i,wc
                       Y                                                                   t,p
                               Φ(M˜V 1,t − θi )Y est,p        1 − Φ(M˜V 1,t − θi )
                       t=1 n=1
                                                                 !Y esi,rc                                    !!1−Y esi,rc
                                       M˜V 2,t − θi ± yD                                M˜V 2,t − θi ± yD
                                                       max            t,p                               max           t,p

                                 ×Φ            √                             1−Φ                √
                                                 2                                                2

     using P (Y esi,phase
                  t,p     = 1) = 1 − P (Y esi,phase
                                            t,p     = 0), for phase ∈ {wc, rc}. An analogous
expression for the likelihood of votes by member of party R holds (see Appendix B).
     We estimate (5.3), subject to θ0 = 0 (Assumption 1).28 To do so, we must first make Yes
or No votes comparable between whip counts and roll calls (whip count questions may be
framed opposite to that of the roll call).29 To do so, we use party leadership votes to assign
the party’s preferred direction on a particular whip count/roll call. In order of priority, we use
the (majority/minority) party leader’s vote, the (majority/minority) party whip’s vote, and,
for the small set of votes for which neither are available, the direction that the majority of the
party voted.
     For each roll call vote, we also need a proxy for the direction in which each party whips. We
again rely on the direction that party leadership votes. For the majority of bills, this revealed
preference, together with guidance from the theory, pins down the whipping directions. In
particular, if the two party leaderships vote differently, we know from the theory that the
status quo must have originated between the party’s preferred positions. In this case, each
party whips in the direction its party leadership prefers. If the leadership of both parties votes
Yes, then the status quo could either be left of both medians with the Democrats proposing,
or right of both medians with the Republicans proposing. In the former case, we expect a
greater fraction of Republicans to support the bill, and vice versa in the latter case. Therefore,
when the party leaderships both vote Yes, we assign the proposing party to the party that has
the least support for the bill. Finally, a small minority of bills are supported by neither party,
which cannot be reconciled with our theory. In order to avoid any selection issues, we include



28In practice, we set member 0 in our sample to be the member with DW-Nominate score closest to 0 to facilitate
comparison.
29
  For example, often for the minority party, but not always, a whip count is framed in the negative, “Will you
vote against...?” .
                                             UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                                    25

them by treating them as a ‘tremble’ by one of the party leaderships, assigning the proposing
party to be that with greater support of the bill.
   Completing the first step, after estimating (5.4), we obtain an estimate of ση2 from the
variance of the difference between the realized marginal voters at whip count and roll call (for
those bills which have both).
   In the second step, we estimate the remaining parameters,
Θ2 = {γ, µq , σq , {q l,p , q l,p , q r,p , q r,p }p∈{D,R} }, using both the realized marginal voters, {M˜V 2,t },
for bills with only roll calls and the number of whip counts (whether pursued to roll call or
not).30 In each period, we observe either a whip count (W Ct = 1) or the realized marginal
voter for a roll call without whip count (RCt = 1) so that the likelihood can be written

                                                                  T
                                                                  Y
                   L   second step
                                     (Θ1 ; W˜Ct , M˜V 2,t ) =             P (W Ct )W Ct P (M˜V 2,t )RCt
                                                                  t=1
   The probability of observing a whip count is simply the probability that a status quo is
drawn from the appropriate interval of the q support. Because for some status quo policies
(those between q l,p and q r,p ) we observe neither a whip count nor a roll call, we must condition
on the probability that we observe either. For example, for a whip count for a status quo to
the right of a party’s median, we have, using Proposition 2:

                                                            q r,p −µq            q r,p −µq
                                                       Φ(       σq    )   − Φ(      σq       )
                                       P (W Ct ) =
                                                             P (W Ct ∪ RCt )
   where


                  
                      q l,D − µq            q r,D − µq       
                                                                  q l,R − µq            q r,R − µq 
P (W Ct ∪RCt ) = γ Φ(            ) + 1 − Φ(           ) +(1−γ) Φ(            ) + 1 − Φ(           )
                           σq                    σq                    σq                    σq

   A realized marginal voter can come from a range of status quo policies. For example, the
probability of observing a particular realized marginal voter for a status quo drawn from the
right of the Democrats median (conditional on observing either a whip count or roll call) is:

                                                                                                             
                                                                                  !                  qt −µq
                                         Z   ∞
                                                       M˜V 2,t − M V (qt )               φ              σq
                  P (M˜V 2,t ) =                   φ                                                              dqt
                                           q r,D                σ                     P (W Ct ∪ RCt )
30Although the first step also recovers the realized marginal voters at the time of the whip count, {M˜V },
                                                                                                        1,t
they are a function of the unobserved cost parameter, Cb , and so are not easily incorporated into the likelihood
function. They are not necessary, however, as the number of whip counts themselves are sufficient to recover
the associated cutoffs.
26                           NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI
                       
                           qt −µq
                                    
                   φ         σq
     The term,   P (W Ct ∪RCt ) ,       is the conditional probability of drawing a particular qt . A given qt
determines the marginal voter, M Vt = M V (qt ), through the first-order condition.31 The term,
   ˜                 
   M V 2,t −M V (qt )
φ          σ            is then the probability of observing a particular realized marginal voter,
M˜V 2,t , for the given M Vt . Integrating over all possible qt ’s that could generate the observed
realized marginal voter gives the probability.
     In order to estimate the second step likelihood, we need to identify for each whip count and
realized marginal voter, the associated range of status quo policies. Our theoretical model,
combined with the votes of party leadership provide this identification for the roll calls. If the
Democratic leadership votes Yes and Republican leadership votes No, the bill must have been
proposed by the Democrats and originated from a status quo to the right of the Democrat’s
median. In the opposite case, the bill must have been proposed by the Republicans and the
status quo must be left of the Republican’s median. If both leaderships vote Yes, then it
could have been proposed by the Democrats for a status quo left of their median or by the
Republicans for a status quo to their right. We assign the proposing party as in the first step,
based upon the fraction of each party supporting the bill. Finally, if both party leaderships
vote No, we assign the proposing party as in the first step, assuming the leader whose party
provided the most support for the bill ‘trembled’. In this case, the appropriate range of status
quo policies lies between the party medians as in the case in one party’s leadership votes Yes
and the other No.
     For whip counts with roll calls, we identify the associated range of status quo policies for
the whip counts based upon the corresponding range of status quo policies associated with the
roll call (as described above). For whip counts without roll calls, there is no way to determine
the leadership stance of the party that didn’t conduct a whip count. The natural assumption
is that a party is more likely to conduct a whip count when it expects opposition from the
other party, so we assume that the party conducting the whip count is the proposer and that
the status quo is right of the party’s median for Democratic proposals and left of the party’s
median for Republican proposals.
     In estimating the second step likelihood, we allow the cutoff status quo policies,
{q l,p , q l,p , q r,p , q r,p }p∈{D,R} and the distribution (µq and σq ) to vary by Congress, but hold


31Importantly, the first-order condition in case of no whip count does not depend on the unobserved cost
parameters. For each Congress, we calculate the optimal policy alternatives for each party using estimates
of the party medians, the standard deviation of the sum of the aggregate shocks, and the MˆV i,j parameters
calculated from the estimates obtained in the first step.
                                       UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                             27

the probability that the Democrats propose the bill, γ, constant. As such, we are implicitly
allowing the costs, Cb and Cw , to vary by Congress.


                                                6. Results

6.1. First Step Estimates: Ideologies and Party Discipline.
  Table 2 presents our first step estimates using maximum likelihood. In this step, we recover,
from 315 whip counts and 5424 roll call votes, the estimated ideologies, θi , for 711 members
of Congress. We report the party medians for each congressional cycle. We also recover the
                              max and y max , for each Congress, and the standard deviation of
party discipline parameters, yD        R

the aggregate shocks, ση . All parameters are precisely estimated.
                                                                                  max and
  In our first main result, Table 2 shows that both party discipline parameters, yD
 max , are positive and statistically different from zero in each Congress, rejecting the null of
yR
a model without party discipline (i.e. with no whipping). This party discipline results in
additional polarization in votes, above and beyond that due to ideological polarization itself.
Under standard methods that use roll calls only and assume sincere voting by politicians,
this additional polarization in votes incorrectly loads on the ideologies, producing perceived
ideological polarization that is too large. In fact, party discipline results in the party medians
               max + y max too far apart when party discipline is ignored.32 To illustrate this
being exactly yD      R

fact, Figure 4 plots kernel densities of the estimated legislator ideologies, θi , by party and over
time from our full model (solid lines). For comparison purposes, it also plots the corresponding
ideological distributions (dashed lines) which result from estimates of a misspecified model in
                                      max = 0 and y max = 0.
which we impose no party discipline, yD            R

  Differences in our methodology from standard methods (i.e. DW-Nominate random util-
ity, optimal classification scores, Heckman-Snyder linear probability model scores, or Markov
Chain Monte Carlo approaches) are not driving our results. As evidence, Figure 5 compares
the estimated ideologies from our full model (right panel) and misspecified model with no
party discipline (left panel) to the standard DW-Nominate estimates. The misspecified model
and DW-Nominate estimates are very nearly the same, demonstrating that the two meth-
ods produce comparable results. Our full model, however, reveals a gap in density over the
ideological middle ground, driven by DW-Nominate’s loading of party discipline on legislator

32One may think that party discipline results in a ‘hollowing out’ of the middle of the distribution. However,
party discipline simply shifts the cutpoint between Yes and No (see equation 5.2), which, under the assumption
of unbounded idiosyncratic shocks, affects the estimates of all ideologies in the same way.
28                     NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

ideology. This misspecification results in a sizable bias in DW-Nominate estimates, amounting
to around 0.20 in DW-Nominate units.
     Tracing across Congresses, Table 2 shows that party polarization, in terms of the distance
                       m − θ m , widens over time. Thus, even controlling for party discipline,
between party medians θR    D

we confirm the previous view that ideologies are segregating across party lines. However,
Figure 6 illustrates that party discipline is also becoming more important over time for both
parties: the trend in ypmax for each party is clearly positive, tracing an increase in the reach
of party leaders over rank-and-file members. The null hypothesis of a constant ypmax across
Congresses is rejected via a likelihood ratio test after obtaining estimates from the constrained
model (see Table 10 in Appendix C for details).
     The perceived ideological polarization in a misspecified model increases not only because of
actual increases in ideological polarization, but also due to stronger party discipline. Table 3
shows that party discipline accounts for 34 to 44 percent of perceived ideological polarization,
and is increasing in importance over time.
     This rise in party discipline in the mid 1970s coincides with large reforms conducted in the
House of Representatives, in particular among the majority Democratic party. During this
period, power was heavily concentrated in the party leadership’s hands. Among the changes,
leaders became responsible for committee assignments (including the Rules Committee), the
Speaker gained larger control of the agenda progress, new tactics emerged (such as packaging
legislation into ‘megabills’), and the Democratic Steering and Policy Committee was formed.
The latter met regularly to gather information and determine tactics and policies, with the
leadership controlling half of the votes. One strong motivation for these reforms was policy:
to guarantee that more liberal policies would pass rather than be held back by Committee
chairmen. See Rohde (1991) for a thorough description of the reforms and their motivation.33
     Our first step estimates also allow us to address model fit. Table 4 reports in-sample model
fit: individual vote choices correctly predicted by the model. The overall fit for roll call votes
(with and without whip counts) is 85.5 percent. For whip count votes, the fit is lower, at
63 percent. Because whip count votes are much fewer in number and maximum likelihood
does not weight whip count votes more heavily than roll call votes, the average fit is higher
in the more numerous roll call sample. Overall, the fit of the model is very good, especially

33One can also observe polarization in votes in the Senate, starting in the mid to late 1970’s. Although the
Senate did not face institutional changes as extensive as those in the House of Representatives, their leaders
also adopted “technological innovations” such as megabills, omnibus legislation, and time-limitation agreements,
allowing more control over their party members and the agenda. See Deering and Smith (1997) for a discussion.
                                       UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                              29

considering that we don’t drop a single roll call (we include both lopsided and close votes).
This approach differs from extant approaches that condition on (occasionally hard to justify)
selected subsamples of votes. For comparison, over our sample, the DW-Nominate prediction
rate is 85.9 percent, but the procedure drops 892 roll calls that we include.
  Lastly, our first step produces an estimate of the size of the aggregate shock between whip
count and roll call, η2,t . In the theory, we assume that η2,t follows a mean-zero normal dis-
tribution which is important for characterizing the solution for the alternative policy, xt , that
is used empirically in the second step of estimation. In practice, we recover the distribution
of η2,t semi-parametrically. Figure 7 shows graphically that a normal distribution fits the re-
covered distribution of these aggregate shocks very well, providing empirical support for our
assumption.

6.2. Second Step Estimates: Agenda Setting.
  Table 5 presents the results of maximum likelihood estimation of the second step. This
step estimates the parameters of the distribution W (q) from which status quo policies are
drawn. We find that the mean of status quo policy, qt , is between the party medians, with
a standard deviation similar to the estimated distance between the party medians.34 The
empirical identification of these latent probability distributions and their truncation points
is a more complex exercise relative to the first step, but Monte Carlo simulations provide
extensive validation. In addition, our results prove to be stable across starting points.
  In addition to the distribution of status quo policies itself, we are interested in identifying
the status quo policies, qt , that are: (i) never brought to the floor; (ii) whip counted and then
brought to the floor with a corresponding alternative, xt , and (iii) brought directly to the
floor with a corresponding alternative. Figures 8 and 9 present the estimated distributions of
the status quo policies. Status quo policies under the dashed line are brought directly to the
floor. Those shaded in gray are preceded by whip counts. Finally, the gaps in the distributions
around the party medians represent the ‘missing mass’: those status quo policies that are never
pursued. As reported in Table 6, the fraction of such policies hovers around 10 percent across
Congresses for the minority party and ranges from from 1 to 25 percent for the majority party.
Bill that are first whip counted may also never see a floor vote, a form of agenda setting made

34We do not model explicitly intertemporal linkages across Congresses in terms of policy alternatives today
that become tomorrow’s status quo policies, or any dynamic considerations in this respect on the part of party
leaders. These extensions appear completely intractable. However, our parametric time-varying distribution of
status quo policies allows the model to capture these dynamic considerations across Congresses, to a reasonable
extent.
30                    NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

explicit in our model. In the data, across all Congresses, on average two out of seven whip
counted bills are abandoned before reaching the floor (Table 1). Overall, our results suggest
substantial censoring of the status quo policies pursued, indicating selection is an important
role of parties in legislative activity.
     Lastly, agenda setting works not only through selection, but through choosing the policy
alternative to pursue. Figures 10 and 11 report the implied distributions of marginal voters
based upon the estimated status quo distribution and the optimal policy alternatives, x∗t , from
theory.35 Each graph illustrates both parties’ efforts to move policy closer to their ideal points
across the entire distribution of status quo policies. The reduction in the variance of the
marginal voter distribution relative to that of the status quo policies is substantial, indicating
sizable changes in policy. In addition, the variance in the marginal voter distribution narrows
over time, consistent with the finding that parties are increasingly able to discipline members,
and can thus pursue policy alternatives closer to their ideal points.

                                             7. Counterfactuals

     We study the impact of polarization on policy outcomes with three counterfactual exer-
cises. Importantly, we are able to independently assess the effects of the two determinants of
polarization: party discipline and ideological polarization.

7.1. Salient Bills.
     In the first exercise, we analyze the role of party discipline for the approval of historically
salient legislation, focusing on a series of economically consequential bills from our sample. To
do so, we maintain the policy alternatives to be voted on as they were proposed in Congress
(including realized aggregate shocks), but assume that parties cannot discipline members’ votes
- legislators vote solely according to their ideologies. Specifically, we calculate the predicted
                          max = y max = 0.
votes for a bill setting yD      R

     Among the bills we consider are the lifting of the arms embargo to Turkey, the Panama
Canal Treaty, several increases to the Debt Limit, the Social Security Amendments of 1983,
and the Reagan Tax Reforms of 1981 and 1984. The first and second columns of Table 7
show that our baseline model fits these votes well. The third column presents the results
of the counterfactual exercise, showing that party discipline is quantitatively important for
the outcomes of these bills as, in some cases, their passage would have been reverted. In
35We plot the marginal voters,    qt +x∗
                                     2
                                       t
                                         , rather than   the distribution of alternative policies, x∗t , because the latter
is a non-monotone function of    qt which is difficult   to depict graphically.
                                        UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                        31

particular, a lack of party discipline would have reversed the approval of increases to the Debt
Limit and significantly decreased support for the Social Security Amendments of 1983 and the
1984 Reagan Tax bill. The reversal of the Debt Limit bills (the same class of legislative acts
that have produced government shutdowns in the aftermath of 2010) is particularly interesting
because, in this case, the party does not control the actual content of the bill (it defines one
figure for the ceiling of all U.S. public debt) and so could not have altered the bill because of
a lack of ability to discipline. This endogeneity of bills is an issue we turn to in the following
section.
   Although many bills lose support, Table 7, shows that others actually gain support, a
consequence of differences in the location of the marginal voter and the directions each party
whips their members. Consider H.R. 5399 banning aid to the Contras. For this bill, the
Democrats whipped in favor and the Republicans against. The estimated marginal voter at
roll call time is 0.288, right of both party medians.36 Shutting down the ability of Democrats to
whip for support of this bill changes a limited number of votes, as very few Democrats lie to the
right of the marginal voter. On the other hand, shutting down the ability of the Republicans to
whip against the bill increases its support substantially, because many Republican ideologies
lie near the marginal voter. Thus, absent party discipline by either party, the number of Yes
votes actually increases. An analogous argument, with opposite signs, leads to a decrease in
support for the National Energy Act and for the 1984 Tax Reform. When parties whip in the
same direction, there can also be large effects. H.R. 9290, which increased the temporary debt
limit in the 95th Congress, loses about 35 Yes votes absent whipping. The estimated marginal
voter is −1.20, a point sufficiently to the left that only a small minority of politicians would
have voted Yes without both parties whipping for its support. In this case, a loss of 35 votes
is sufficient to flip the observed outcome.
   The results in this section point to the quantitative importance of party discipline in deter-
mining policy outcomes. Our exercise here is, however, only a partial equilibrium exercise: ab-
sent the ability to discipline members, the equilibrium policy alternatives would have changed.
We consider the full equilibrium effects of a lack of ability to discipline in the following section.



7.2. Agenda Setting.


36This number rationalizes the large number of both Democrats and Republicans voting Yes, even if the Re-
publican leadership voted against it.
32                   NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

                                                                                     max =
7.2.1. No Party Discipline. We consider a counterfactual exercise with no whipping (yD
 max = 0), but unlike in the previous section, we allow the proposing party to re-optimize.
yR
This entails choosing which status quo policies to pursue, whether to perform a whip count or
not, and selecting the optimal alternative policy, xt . Because we can’t identify the status quo
associated with a particular bill (due to aggregate shocks), in this section we focus on averages
across bills. In particular, we calculate the average probability that a bill will pass and the
average distance between the status quo and the proposed alternative, focusing on status quo
policies that lie between the party medians (as estimated with our main model).
     Table 8 reports these two measures for the estimates from our main model, as well as under
the counterfactual of no whipping. From these results, we see that party discipline impacts the
probability of approval of a bill more so than it affects the choice of the policy alternative. For
bills proposed by the Democrats, we observe a decrease in the approval rate of approximately 5
percentage points on average, relative to a baseline probability of 43 percent. For Republicans,
however, when neither party whips there is an increase in bill approval of approximately 4
percentage points on a baseline of 22 percent. The reasons the Republicans benefit from a
lack of whipping by both parties, but the Democrats suffer, are that the Democrats exert
more discipline (see first step estimates in Table 2) and are the majority party. For both
reasons, when discipline is shut down for both parties, the Democrats lose more votes than
the Republicans do, making proposals by Republicans more likely to pass and proposals by
Democrats less so.
     The lack of ability to discipline also impacts the size of the mass of bills that are never
pursued (see Table 6). For the Democrats, we observe small increases in the missing mass,
consistent with it being more difficult for them to pass legislation, lowering the value of pursuing
a policy alternative. For the Republicans, the opposite occurs - the value of pursuing a bill
increases because bills are passed more easily, enlarging the set of status quo policies that it
pursues.




7.2.2. Increased Ideological Polarization. Our final counterfactual consider the effects of an
increase in ideological polarization. In particular, holding everything else constant, we shift the
Democratic party median left the the Republican party median right, increasing the distance
                         max +y max
                        yD
between medians by           2
                               R
                                    .   We consider the same measures as in the previous section:
probability of bill approval, distance between alternative and status quo policies, and missing
                                  UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                       33

mass. Table 8 presents the results for the first two measures and Table 6 reports the missing
mass results.
  We find that an increase in ideological polarization has very different effects from changes
in party discipline. The probability that a bill passes is relatively unchanged, but alternative
policies are set further left by Democrats and further right by Republicans. The polarization
in ideologies translates directly to polarization in the bills pursued. The magnitudes of these
changes are quantitatively significant, ranging from six to fifteen percent of the distance be-
tween the party medians, an order of magnitude larger than the changes resulting from a lack
of party discipline, relative to where they would have been. Interestingly, the missing mass
changes are also opposite to those under the counterfactual of no party discipline. The missing
mass decreases for the Democrats and increases for the Republicans, suggesting that the value
of pursuing a policy alternative increases for the majority party, but decreases for the minority
party as ideological polarization increases.
  Taken together, our counterfactual results suggest that an increase in polarization, either
through an increase in party discipline (opposite to our first exercise) or through ideologi-
cal polarization, increases the value of pursuing an alternative policy for the majority party
(lowers the missing mass for the Democrats), but decreases the value for the minority party
(increases the missing mass for the Republicans). The results therefore suggest that increases
in polarization via either channel benefit the majority party at the expense of the minority
party. However, the channel matters - ideological polarization produces more polarized policies
while party discipline affects many the probability of bill approval. The benefit of explicitly
modeling party discipline, optimal policy selection, and bill pursuit decisions simultaneously
is that it demonstrates the complex interactions between these factors. Omitting any single
factor would lead to very different and biased conclusions.


                                          8. Conclusion

  Polarization of political elites is an empirical phenomenon that has recently reached historical
highs. It has consequential implications, ranging from heightened policy uncertainty (and its
deleterious consequences on investment and trade) to gridlock and the inability of political
elites to respond to shocks and crises.
  The literature has suggested competing views of the drivers of polarization and what can
be done to counter this phenomenon. Some researchers point squarely at the ideological po-
larization of legislator types, arguing that it is a result of more polarized electorates electing
34                   NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

extremists. In this view, polarization is a result of deep drivers linked to secular trends in
the electorate for which policy response seems arduous, if at all, warranted. Other researchers
caution about the role of ideology and instead emphasize changes in the rules of controlling
the legislative agenda, gains in the leadership’s grip over policy, and the capacity of parties
to more precisely reward and punish their own members through committee appointments
and campaign donations. Differently from ideology, these drivers appear more technologically
driven and amenable to reversal.
     We provide an identification strategy useful for separating these different drivers, both of
which, we show, are at play. We provide a theoretical and structural economic assessment of
the role of preferences and parties over the initial phase of modern congressional polarization,
at its inflection point between the 95th to 99th Congresses. This exercise requires an effort
to solve extant political economy problems speaking to the internal organization of parties –
particularly internal aggregation of the information from the rank-and-file, and persuasion of
party members on the fence. Our theoretical setting attempts to rationalize these problems
within an internally coherent and unified structure. It offers a tractable, but realistic envi-
ronment that we estimate based on a novel identification approach. A series of counterfactual
exercises indicate a quantitative relevant role for party discipline, almost as important as leg-
islator ideology in explaining polarization dynamics, and a crucial role of parties in driving
endogenous agenda setting. Empirically, we also show that the policies pursued by parties
depend upon the sources of polarization. Therefore, studies of the economic effects of policy
uncertainty may differ in their conclusions, depending upon the prevailing mechanism at the
time of the study.
     Future research should pursue the possibility of extending our estimation methodology to
time periods where identifying information as precise and comprehensive as that we employ
here is not available. In a separate paper, we are working on an approach to project some of
the methods developed in this paper beyond the 99th Congress. With more extensive data
coverage, one would also be able to apply our analysis to the relationship between political
polarization and financial crises. In this case, our methodology offers a structure for predicting
policy changes and legislative success in the presence of changing party strengths and ideological
extremism.
                                  UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                      35

                                         References

Aldrich, J. H. (1995). Why parties?: The origin and transformation of political parties in
  America. University of Chicago Press. 4
Ansolabehere, S., Snyder, J. M., and Stewart III, C. (2001). The effects of party and preferences
  on congressional roll-call voting. Legislative Studies Quarterly, pages 533–572. 11
Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., Canes-Wrone, B., Davis, S. J., and Rodden, J. (2014). Why has us
  policy uncertainty risen since 1960? American Economic Review, 104(5):56–60. 1
Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., and Davis, S. J. (2016). Measuring economic policy uncertainty*.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4):1593–1636. 1
Ban, P., Moskowitz, D. J., and James M. Snyder, J. (2016). The changing relative power of
  party leaders in congress. mimeo. 2
Bateman, D. A., Clinton, J., and Lapinski, J. S. (2017). A house divided? political conflict
  and polarization in the u.s. congress, 1877- 2011. American Journal of Political Science,
  61(3):698–714. 1
Binder, S. (2003). Stalemate: Causes and consequences of legislative gridlock. Brookings DC.
  1
Bonica, A. (2014). Mapping the ideological market place. American Journal of Political
  Science, 58(2):367–386. 1
Burden, B. C. and Frisby, T. M. (2004). Preferences, partisanship, and whip activity in the us
  house of representatives. Legislative Studies Quarterly, 29(4):569–590. 6
Caillaud, B. and Tirole, J. (2002). Parties as political intermediaries. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 117(4):1453–1489. 4
Clinton, J., Jackman, S., and Rivers, D. (2004). The statistical analysis of roll call data.
  American Political Science Review, 98(2):355–370. 10, 11
Clinton, J., Katznelson, I., and Lapinski, J. (2014). Where measures meet history: Party
  polarization during the new deal and fair deal. Governing in a Polarized Age: Elections,
  Parties, and Representation in America. 1
Cox, G. W. and McCubbins, M. D. (1993). Legislative Leviathan: Party Government in the
  House, volume 23. Univ of California Press. 4
Cox, G. W. and McCubbins, M. D. (2005). Setting the agenda: Responsible party government
  in the US House of Representatives. Cambridge University Press. 4
Deering, C. J. and Smith, S. S. (1997). Committees in congress. Sage. 33
36                    NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

Dodd, L. C. (1979). Expanded roles of the house democratic whip system - 93rd and 94th
     congresses. In Congressional Studies - A Journal of the Congress, volume 7 (1), pages 27–56.
     US Capitol Historical Society, 200 Maryland AVE NE, Washington, DC 20515. 6
Evans, C. L. (2012). Congressional whip count database. In College of William and Mary,
     mimeo (Online). 1, 4
Evans, C. L. and Grandy, C. E. (2009). The whip system of congress. In Congress Reconsidered,
     volume 9. CQ Press Washington, DC. 6
Forgette, R. (2004). Party caucuses and coordination: Assessing caucus activity and party
     effects. Legislative Studies Quarterly, 29(3):407–430. 4
Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., and Taddy, M. (2017).             Measuring polarization in high-
     dimensional data: Method and application to congressional speech. NBER Working Paper
     No. 22423. 1
Gourieroux, C., Monfort, A., and Trognon, A. (1984). Pseudo maximum likelihood methods:
     Theory. Econometrica, 52(3):681–700. 5.2
Heckman, J. J. and Snyder, J. M. (1997). Linear probability models of the demand for at-
     tributes with an empirical application to estimating the preferences of legislators. The RAND
     Journal of Economics, 28. 10
Jenkins, J. A. (2000). Examining the robustness of ideological voting: evidence from the
     confederate house of representatives. American Journal of Political Science, pages 811–822.
     11
Kelly, B., Pástor, L., and Veronesi, P. (2016). The price of political uncertainty: Theory and
     evidence from the option market. The Journal of Finance, 71(5):2417–2480. 1
Krehbiel, K. (1993). Where’s the party? British Journal of Political Science, 23(2):235–266.
     5, 1, B.1
Krehbiel, K. (1999). Paradoxes of parties in congress. Legislative Studies Quarterly, pages
     31–64. 5, 1
Krehbiel, K. (2000). Party discipline and measures of partisanship. American Journal of
     Political Science, pages 212–227. 3, 5
Lee, D., Moretti, E., and Butler, M. (2004). Do voters affect or elect policies? evidence from
     the u.s. house. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3):807–860. 15
Levitt, S. D. (1996). How do senators vote? disentangling the role of voter preferences, party
     affiliation, and senator ideology. The American Economic Review, 86(3):425–441. 3
                                  UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                      37

McCarty, N. (2016-2017). Polarization, congressional dysfunction, and constitutional change
  symposium. Indiana Law Review, 50:223. 1, 1
McCarty, N., Poole, K. T., and Rosenthal, H. (2001). The hunt for party discipline in congress.
  American Political Science Review, 95(3):673–687. 1
McCarty, N., Poole, K. T., and Rosenthal, H. (2006). Polarized America: The Dance of
  Ideology and Unequal Riches. Cambridge: MIT Press. 1, 3, 1, 4
Meinke, S. R. (2008). Who whips? party government and the house extended whip networks.
  American Politics Research, 36(5):639–668. 1, 12
Mian, A., Sufi, A., and Trebbi, F. (2010). The political economy of the us mortgage default
  crisis. American Economic Review, 100(5). 3
Mian, A., Sufi, A., and Trebbi, F. (2014). Resolving debt overhang: Political constraints in
  the aftermath of financial crises. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(2):1–28.
  1
Minozzi, W. and Volden, C. (2013). Who heeds the call of the party in congress? The Journal
  of Politics, 75(3):787–802. 1
Moskowitz, D. J., Rogowski, J., and James M. Snyder, J. (2017). Parsing party polarization.
  mimeo. 1, 11, 15
Nokken, T. P. (2000). Dynamics of congressional loyalty: Party defection and roll-call behavior,
  1947-97. Legislative Studies Quarterly, pages 417–444. 11
Pastor, L. and Veronesi, P. (2012). Uncertainty about government policy and stock prices.
  The journal of Finance, 67(4):1219–1264. 1
Piketty, T. and Saez, E. (2003). Income inequality in the united states 1913 - 1998. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 118(1):1–39. 1
Poole, K. T. and Rosenthal, H. (1984). The polarization of american politics. Journal of
  Politics, 46(4):1061–1079. 1
Poole, K. T. and Rosenthal, H. (1997). Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll Call
  Voting. New York: Oxford University Press. 5, 10, 4
Poole, K. T. and Rosenthal, H. (2001). D-nominate after 10 years: A comparative update
  to congress: A political-economic history of roll-call voting. Legislative Studies Quarterly,
  pages 5–29. 3, 1, 4
Ripley, R. B. (1964). The party whip organizations in the united states house of representatives.
  American Political Science Review, 58(3):561–576. 6
38                   NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

Rohde, D. W. (1991). Parties and Leaders in the Postreform House. The University of Chicago
     Press. 6.1
Snyder, J. M. and Groseclose, T. (2000). Estimating party influence in congressional roll-call
     voting. American Journal of Political Science, pages 193–211. 3, 1
Theriault, S. M. (2008). Party Polarization in Congress. New York: Cambridge University
     Press. 1
Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT press.
     5.2
                                       UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                               39

                                        9. Tables and Figures


                          Figure 3. Majority Party Votes with Leadership




Notes: Kernel densities of the number of Democratic votes with their party leadership at the whip count and
roll call stages. Includes only bills with both whip counts and roll call.The vertical line at 218 indicates the
majority needed to pass a bill in the House of Representatives.
40                    NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI



                             Figure 4. Estimates of Ideological Points




Notes: Each graph (one per Congress) provides the kernel density of the estimated ideological points for each
party (solid lines). For comparison (dashed lines), the graphs show the kernel density estimates under a mis-
specified model that assumes no party discipline.




            Figure 5. Estimated Ideologies Compared to DW-Nominate Estimates




Notes: Correlations between our estimates of ideologies to those of DW-Nominate. In the left panel, the
estimates are for a misspecified model with no party discipline (correlation = 0.976). In the right panel, the
estimates are for the full model (correlation = 0.957).
                                       UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                               41



                               Figure 6. Estimates of Party Discipline




Notes: Time series of the estimates of the party discipline (whipping) parameters for each party. Each parameter
is in units of the single-dimension ideology.




                               Figure 7. Estimated Aggregate Shocks




Notes: Histogram of the estimated aggregate shocks between whip count and roll call.
42                     NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI



                        Figure 8. Pursued Status Quo Policies: Democrats




Notes: Estimated status quo distributions by Congress (dashed lines). Status quo policies that are pursued by
the Democrats with whip counts are shown in gray. The remaining gap in the distribution is the ‘missing mass’
of status quo policies that are not pursued by the Democrats at all. For reference the ideologies of Democrats
are shown as solid lines.




                       Figure 9. Pursued Status Quo Policies: Republicans




Notes: Estimated status quo distributions by Congress (dashed lines). Status quo policies that are pursued by
the Republicans with whip counts are shown in grey. The remaining gap in the distribution is the ‘missing mass’
of status quo policies that are not pursued by the Republicans at all. For reference the ideologies of Republicans
are shown as solid lines.
                                       UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                             43



                      Figure 10. Marginal Voter Distributions: Democrats




Notes: Optimal marginal voters (voters indifferent between status quo and optimal alternative) for Democrats
as proposer (solid lines), with the status quo distribution (dashed lines) for reference.




                      Figure 11. Marginal Voter Distributions: Republicans




Notes: Optimal marginal voters (voters indifferent between status quo and optimal alternative) for Republicans
as proposer (solid lines), with the status quo distribution (dashed lines) for reference.
44                    NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

                           Table 1. Summary Statistics on Bill Selection


                                                                                       Congress
                                                                              95      96 97* 98* 99*

               A: Total Number of Bills Whip Counted                         131      58   28      50   48

      B: Number of Bills Whip Counted, but not Roll Called                    50      16   8       15   13

                 C: Total Number of Bills Roll Called                        1540 1276 812 906 890

Notes: Number of bills whip counted, whip counted but not roll called, and roll called over Congresses 95-99.
*We do not have data for Republican Whip Counts for Congresses 97-99 (see Section 4).




                                     Table 2. First Step Estimates


                              Parameter                                   Congress
                                                           95       96      97        98   99

                           Party Discipline               0.383   0.526   0.366   0.658   0.865
                           y max , Democrats             (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) (0.007)

                           Party Discipline               0.342   0.373   0.482   0.600   0.440
                          y max , Republicans            (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) (0.005) (0.004)

                 Standard Deviation of Aggregate Shock                      0.859
                                  ση                                       (0.230)

                                                m
                     Party Median - Democrats, θD         -1.431 -1.431 -1.420 -1.435 -1.462
                                                         (0.038) (0.038) (0.042) (0.040) (0.095)

                                                 m
                    Party Median - Republicans, θR        -0.036  0.042   0.134   0.181   0.236
                                                         (0.049) (0.138) (0.139) (0.034) (0.049)

                                                    N : 711
                                 T : 315 Whip Counted bills, 5424 Roll Called bills

Notes: Estimates of the first step parameters. Asymptotic standard errors are in parentheses. Non time-varying
parameters are centered in the table, but apply to all five Congresses.
                               Table 3. Decomposition of Polarization


                                                                                 Congress
                                                                   95       96     97     98            99


    Implications of Table 2 for Polarization

                                         m − θm )
       A: Polarization due to ideology (θR                       1.395 1.473 1.554 1.615 1.698
                                              D

                                      max + y max ) 0.725 0.899 0.848 1.258 1.305
    B: Polarization due to whipping (yR      D

     C: Share of Perceived Ideological Polarization              0.342 0.379 0.353 0.438 0.435
            due to whipping (B/(A+B))

Notes: Decomposition of perceived polarization (polarization in ideologies from a misspecified model that ignores
party discipline) into that due to ideological polarization and that due to party discipline, by Congress.



                                           Table 4. Model Fit



         Model                Variable            % Correctly Predicted Votes (“Yes/No")

       Full Model       Roll Call Votes                                  0.855
                       Whip Count Votes                                  0.628


Notes: Fraction of correctly predicted votes at the whip count and roll call stages.




                                                       45
46                     NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

                                    Table 5. Second Step Estimates


                                                                                Congress
                                                              95        96        97         98        99

             Probabililty Democrat is Proposer, γ                                0.427
                                                                                (0.018)

             Status Quo Distribution (Mean), µq              -0.285    -0.353    -0.226     -0.136    -0.205
                                                            (0.107)   (0.106)   (0.148)    (0.137)   (0.108)

      Status Quo Distribution (Standard Deviation), σq       2.206     1.813     1.905      1.136     1.095
                                                            (0.146)   (0.132)   (0.168)    (0.177)   (0.129)



Notes: Estimates of the second step parameters. Asymptotic standard errors, accounting for estimation error
from the first step, in parentheses. Standard errors are computed by drawing 100 samples from the asymptotic
distribution of first step estimates, recomputing the second step estimates, and using the Law of Total Variance.
                                       UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                             47

                                        Table 6. Missing Mass


                                                                        Congress
                                                           95      96     97     98          99

            Democrats

                          Main Model                     0.004 0.007 0.005 0.248 0.105

               Counterfactual: No Whipping               0.004 0.006 0.004 0.262 0.116

            Counterfactual: Polarized Ideologies 0.004 0.006 0.005 0.203 0.071


            Republicans

                          Main Model                     0.064 0.132         -       -        -

               Counterfactual: No Whipping               0.060 0.122         -       -        -

            Counterfactual: Polarized Ideologies 0.069 0.147                 -       -        -


Notes: Mass of status quo policies (‘missing mass’) that are not pursued by the party at all. For the counter-
factuals, Cb and Cw are determined from the second step estimates and held fixed, allowing new thresholds to
be calculated.
                                                                                                                                                                                  48
                                                Table 7. Counterfactual: Voting Outcomes on Salient Bills


                                              Bill                                                Yes Votes (Data) Yes Votes (Model Predicted) Yes Votes (Counterfactual, No Whipping)


                                                                 Security, International Relations and Other Policies

              Aid to Turkey/Lifting of Arms Embargo (H.R. 12514, Congress 95)                             212                  193                               147




                                                                                                                                                                                  NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI
             Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (H.R. 7308, Congress 95)                       261                  283                               280
                      National Energy Act, 1978 (H.R. 8444, Congress 95)                                  247                  271                               258
                      Panama Canal Treaty, 1979 (H.R. 111, Congress 96)                                   224                  243                               180
                           Contra Aid, 1984 (H.R. 5399, Congress 98)                                      294                  279                               343


                                                                                      Economic Policies

                   Increase of Temporary Debt Limit, (H.R.9290, Congress 95)                              221                  242                               185
                  Increase of Temporary Debt Limit, (H.R.13385, Congress 95)                              210                  235                               201
                   Increase of Temporary Debt Limit, (H.R.2534, Congress 96)                              220                  239                               208
Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980, (H.R. 4986, Congress 96)           369                  404                               391
    Increase of Public Debt Limit,Make it part of Budget Process (H.R. 5369, Congress 96)                 225                  244                               217
                  Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 (H.R. 4242, Congress 97)                              284                  329                               276
         Garn-St. Germain Depository Institutions Act of 1982 (H.R.6267, Congress 97)                     263                  279                               327
                  Social Security Amendments of 1983 (H.R.1900, Congress 98)                              282                  299                               230
                        Tax Reform Act of 1984 (H.R. 4170, Congress 98)                                   319                  370                               292


Notes: Counterfactual vote outcomes on certain key bills absent party discipline (whipping). The policies are assumed fixed.
                                      UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                            49

                             Table 8. Counterfactual: Agenda Setting


                                                                     Congress
                                                      95      96       97        98      99



                   Panel A: Average Change in the Probability of Bill Approval

                        Democrats

           Baseline Probability (Main Model)        0.378    0.492    0.437     0.314   0.502

               Main Model - No Whipping             0.035    0.066    0.009     0.037   0.098

             Main Model - Polarized Ideology        -0.006 -0.011     0.011     -0.009 -0.022


                       Republicans

           Baseline Probability (Main Model)        0.237    0.210      -         -       -

               Main Model - No Whipping             -0.033 -0.040       -         -       -

             Main Model - Polarized Ideology        0.027    0.030      -         -       -




                         Panel B: Average Change in Pursued Policies, xt

                        Democrats

               Main Model - No Whipping             -0.011 -0.017 -0.003 -0.020 -0.041

             Main Model - Polarized Ideology        0.093    0.178    0.119     0.113   0.254


                       Republicans

               Main Model - No Whipping             -0.010 -0.015       -         -       -

             Main Model - Polarized Ideology        -0.058 -0.045       -         -       -


Notes: Estimated and counterfactual probabilities of bill approval and average distance between the proposed
policy alternative and the status quo, for status quo policies that lie between the party medians.
50                     NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

                                           Appendix A. Proofs

     Proof of Lemma 1:
                            0
     Consider first kt > kt . Given the increasing cost of exerting influence, a whip exerts the
minimum amount of influence necessary to ensure a vote for kt , provided this amount is
less than or equal to ypmax . The minimum amount of influence is such that the member is
                                       0                                                   0
indifferent, u(kt , ωti + yti ) = u(kt , ωti + yti ) or |ωti + yti − kt | = |ωti + yti − kt |. This equality
                                                            0
                                                       kt +kt
is satisfied if and only if ωti + yti = M Vt =            2 .   If ωti ≥ M Vt , the required influence is
weakly negative (absent influence, the member votes for kt ) and so no influence is exerted.
If ωti < M Vt , a positive amount of influence, yti = M Vt − ωti > 0 is required which increases
linearly in M Vt − ωti . Therefore, a member is whipped if and only if their ideology is such that
                                               0
M Vt − ypmax ≤ ωti < M Vt . For kt < kt , the argument is reversed: only members for which
M Vt < ωti ≤ M Vt + ypmax are whipped.

     Proof of Lemma 2:
     Consider the mass, f (θ), of members at some θ, each of whom has an independent signal of
η̂1,t due to their independent ideological shocks. The average number of Yes reports from N at
θ members is given by limN →∞ fN   (θ) PN                  i                           i
                                                                                                    
                                         i=1 I u(xt , θ + δ1,t + η̂1,t ) ≥ u(qt , θ + δ1,t + η̂1,t ) where

I() represents the indicator function. By the law of large numbers, as N → ∞, this average
converges to:



f (θ)E I u(xt , θ + δt1 + η̂1,t ) ≥ u(qt , θ + δt1 + η̂1,t )   = f (θ)P r u(xt , θ + δt1 + η̂1,t ) ≥ u(qt , θ + δt1 + η̂1,t )
                                                                                                                           


                                                               = f (θ)P r θ + δt1 + η̂1,t ≥ M Vt
                                                                                                   

                                                                                                   
                                                               = f (θ) 1 − G(M Vt − θ − η̂1,t ) .

     Therefore, after observing the number of Yes reports for a given θ, η̂1,t is known with
probability one.

     Proof of Lemma 3:
                                                       i + δ i (with corresponding pdf, g
     Consider xt > qt . Let G1+2 () denote the cdf of δ1,t  2,t                          1+2 ()).

For a given M Vt , the number of votes for xt from a given party’s members is known with
probability one due to independent idiosyncratic shocks and a continuum of members. To see
this fact, consider the continuum of party p’s members located at each θ, each with independent
         i and δ i . With N voters at θ, the average number of votes from these members
shocks, δ1,t    2,t
                                          UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                           51

                           f (θ)   PN         i                    i + δ i ≥ M V ± y max ), where the sign
is given by limN →∞         N       i=1 I(θ       + η1,t + η2,t + δ1,t  2,t     t   p

with which ypmax enters depends upon the direction that party p whips. By the law of large
numbers, as N → ∞, this average converges to:



f (θ)E[I(θ + η1,t + η2,t + δt1 + δt2 ≥ M Vt ± ypmax )] = f (θ)P r(θ + η1,t + η2,t + δt1 + δt2 ≥ M Vt ± ypmax )

                                                                  = f (θ)(1 − G1+2 (M Vt − η1,t − η2,t ± ypmax − θ)).

   Given the realized marginal voter after the aggregate shocks, M˜V t = M Vt − η1,t − η2,t , the
number of votes for xt from party D’s members is given by
                 hR                                     i
                    ∞
YD (M˜V t ) = ND −∞ 1 − G1+2 (M˜V t − θ ± yDmax ) f (θ)dθ . The corresponding expression
                                                    D
                               hR                                    i
                                  ∞
for party R is YR (M˜V t ) = NR −∞ 1 − G1+2 (M˜V t − θ ± yR
                                                          max ) f (θ)dθ . The total num-
                                                                 R

ber of votes for xt is then given by Y (M˜V t ) ≡ YD (M˜V t ) + YR (M˜V t ).
   Y (M˜V t ) is strictly decreasing in xt . To see this, consider the votes from party D’s members,
YD (xt ):


            ∂YD (M˜V t )
                                           Z ∞                                      
                              1 ∂                             ˜           max
                                                                              
                            =           ND        1 − G1+2 (M V t − θ ± yD ) fD (θ)dθ
               ∂xt            2 ∂ M˜V t      −∞
                                ND ∞
                                    Z
(A.1)                       = −          g1+2 (M˜V t − θ ± yD
                                                            max
                                                                )fD (θ)dθ
                                  2 −∞

   (A.1) is strictly less than zero given that that ideological shocks are unbounded, independent
of the (finite) amount or direction of whipping. The same is true of the derivative of YR (M˜V t ),
ensuring Y (M˜V t ) strictly decreases in xt for xt > q. For xt < qt , we have YD (M˜V t ) =
    hR                                    i                   hR                                      i
       ∞                                                         ∞
ND −∞ G1+2 (M˜V t − θ ± yD    max )f (θ)dθ and Y (M˜V ) = N
                                    D            R     t    R      G
                                                                 −∞ 1+2  ( M˜V t − θ ± y max )f (θ)dθ
                                                                                         R     R

so that Y (M˜V t ) increases in xt . Since for qt < θpm we must have xt > qt and for qt > θpm we
must have xt < qt , we see that the number of votes for xt strictly decreases the closer it gets
to the proposing party’s ideal point.




   Proof of Proposition 1:
             m , clearly xcount = xno
   For qt = θD                                      count      m are the unique optimal alternative policies
                                                            = θD
                          t        t

because party D can do no better than its ideal point.
52                            NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

                                             m so that x > q , we can rewrite party D’s expected
     In the case of no whip count, and qt < θD          t   t

utility as
                                                                         !!
       no     count                                 M Vt − MˆV R,R                      m             m              m
     EUD              (qt , xt ) =    1−Φ                                      (u(xt , θD ) − u(qt , θD )) + u(qt , θD ) − Cb
                                                          σ

The derivative with respect to xt is given by

                                          !!                                                       !
                  M Vt − MˆV R,R                           m     1          M Vt − MˆV R,R                      m             m
       1−Φ                                       ux (xt , θD )−    φ                                   (u(xt , θD ) − u(qt , θD ))
                        σ                                       2σ                σ

     where φ() denotes the pdf of the standard normal distribution. At xt = qt , the derivative
                                 m and the fact that MˆV
is strictly positive given qt < θD                                               m
                                                         R,R is finite. At xt = θD , it is strictly
                       m ) < 0. Together these facts ensure an interior solution, which we now
negative given u(qt , θD
show is unique. Any interior solution must satisfy the first-order condition,

                                                                                 !!
                                                M Vtno      count    − MˆV R,R
                                     1−Φ                                               ux (xno
                                                                                            t
                                                                                                  count      m
                                                                                                          , θD )
                                                                 σ
                                                                  !
                        1       M Vtno    count     − MˆV R,R
                                                                       u(xno   count      m             m
                                                                                                           
(A.2)            −        φ                                               t            , θD ) − u(qt , θD ) = 0
                       2σ                       σ

                                     M Vtno   count −MˆV
     Defining ztno      count   ≡               σ
                                                           R,R
                                                                 , we can re-write the first-order condition as:


                                 1 − Φ(ztno count )    1 u(xno
                                                            t
                                                               count , θ m ) − u(q , θ m )
                                                                        D           t D
(A.3)                                 no  count     =              no   count    m
                                   φ(zt         )     2σ      ux (xt          , θD )

     The left-hand side of (A.3) is the inverse hazard rate of a standard normal distribution and
so is strictly decreasing in ztno               count     (and therefore xno
                                                                          t
                                                                                    count      since xno
                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                            count   strictly increases
in ztno   count ).
                The sign of the derivative of the right-hand side with respect to xno          t
                                                                                                  count is

given by ux (xno count , θ m )2 − u (xno count , θ m ) u(xno count , θ m ) − u(q , θ m ) which is strictly
                                                                                        
              t           D        xx t           D       t           D         t D

positive because uxx (xno
                       t
                                        count , θ m )
                                                 D      < 0 and u(xno
                                                                   t
                                                                               count , θ m )
                                                                                        D
                                                                                                          m ). Thus, the right-
                                                                                                > u(qt , θD
hand side is strictly increasing in xno
                                     t
                                                           count .   Together, these facts guarantee a unique solution,
xno   count            m ).37
              ∈ (qt , θD
 t
                                               m , we can rewrite the party’s expected utility:
     In the case of a whip count and and qt < θD


37The second-order condition at xno               count
                                               is also easily checked, but must be satisfied given that marginal
                                 t
                                                                m
expected utility is increasing at xt = qt , decreasing at xt = θD  and the solution is unique.
                                                 UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                       53




              count
          EUD       (qt , xt )
                                                                                                      
                                                                 m             m              m
        = P r(η1,t ≥ η 1,t ) P r(xt wins|η1,t ≥ η 1,t ) (u(xt , θD ) − u(qt , θD )) + u(qt , θD ) − Cb
                                       m
            +P r(η1,t < η 1,t )u(qt , θD )
                                                m             m                                     m
        = P r(η1,t ≥ η 1,t , xt wins) (u(xt , θD  ) − u(qt , θD )) − P r(η1,t ≥ η 1,t )Cb + u(qt , θD )
                                                   !
                          M Vt − MˆV R,R − η
          Z ∞
                                                      1      η             m              m
        =        1 − Φ(                           )      φ( )dη (u(xt , θD    ) − u(qt , θD ))
           η 1,t                   σ η               σ η    σ η
                    η 1,t 
                                           m
          − 1 − Φ(          ) Cb + u(qt , θD   )
                      ση

Taking the derivative with respect to xt yields:38

                                                                            
   count (q , x )
dEUD       t t
                            dη 1,t 1 η 1,t           M Vt − MˆV R,R − η 1,t
                                                                                        m             m
                        = −         φ(     ) 1 − Φ(                        ) (u(xt , θD ) − u(qt , θD ))
     dxt                     dxt ση ση                       ση

                                         M Vt − MˆV R,R − η
                                           ∞
                                       Z
                                 1                              η            m             m
                            −                    φ(         )φ( )dη (u(xt , θD ) − u(qt , θD ))
                                2ση2
                                 η 1,t           σ η           σ η
                                                                            !
                                                        M Vt − MˆV R,R − η)
                                            Z ∞
                             1          m                                         η
                            + ux (xt , θD )      1 − Φ(                       φ( )dη
                             ση              η                  σ  η             σ η
                                                       1,t

                             1 dη 1,t η 1,t
                          +           φ(      )Cb
                            ση dxt        ση
                                                                                !
                          1
                                           Z ∞
                                                         M V t − M ˆV  R,R − η)       η
                                       m
                        =    ux (xt , θD )        1 − Φ(                          φ( )dη
                          ση                η 1,t                  ση                ση

                                           M Vt − MˆV R,R − η
                                 Z ∞
                              1                                     η              m             m
  (A.4)                   − 2          φ(                       )φ( )dη (u(xt , θD   ) − u(qt , θD ))
                            2ση η                   ση              ση
                                           1,t


   where the second equality uses the fact that η 1,t satisfies
                                                             
                                M Vt − MˆV R,R − η 1,t
                    1 − Φ(                                              m             m
(A.5)                                                        ) (u(xt , θD ) − u(qt , θD )) = Cb
                                                  ση




38The necessary conditions for applying the Leibniz Integral Rule with an infinite bound are satisfied. Specifi-
cally, the integrand and its partial derivative with respect to xt are both continuous functions of xt and η, and
it is possible to find integrable functions of η that bound the integrand and it’s partial derivative with respect
to xt .
54                            NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

     Consider the limit as Cb → 0. From (A.5), we can see that, provided xt is bounded away
                        m ) − u(q , θ m ) > 0 (which we subsequently confirm), we must have
from qt so that u(xt , θD        t D

η 1,t → −∞ as Cb → 0. But, as η 1,t → −∞, the party always continues to pursue the bill after
the first aggregate shock. In this case, the optimal alternative policy is identical to the case of
no whip count. Formally,

                                                                                                      !
                                                                                  M Vt − MˆV R,R − η)
             count (q , x )                                         Z ∞
          dEUD       t t                           1            m                                           η
     lim                                        =     ux (xt , θD )       1 − Φ(                        φ( )dη
η t t →−∞      dxt                                ση                 −∞                     ση             σ η

                                                                    M Vt − MˆV R,R − η
                                                           Z ∞
                                                      1                                      η           m             m
                                                  − 2            φ(                     )φ( )dη (u(xt , θD ) − u(qt , θD ))
                                                     2ση −∞                 ση               ση
                                                                                           !
                                                                         M  V t − MˆV R,R
                                                            m
                                                = ux (xt , θD  ) 1 − Φ(                   )
                                                                                 σ

                                                         1    M Vt − MˆV R,R            m             m
 (A.6)                                              −      φ(                ) (u(xt , θD ) − u(qt , θD ))
                                                        2σ          σ

     where the equality follows from the fact that the convolution of two standard normal distri-
butions is a normal distribution with the sum of the variances and using σ 2 = 2ση2 . Comparing
(A.6) with (A.2), we can see immediately that, in the limit, the first-order condition for the
whip and no whip cases are identical, and it therefore follows that xcount
                                                                     t     is unique and interior
                                                       m ) − u(q , θ m ) > 0 in the limit, confirming
as in the no whip case. This fact ensures that u(xt , θD        t D

that we must have η 1,t → −∞ as Cb → 0.
     We now show that xcount
                       t     is unique and interior for strictly positive Cb . From (A.4), we see
          count (q ,x )
       dEUD
that              t t                                                                        m , ensuring an
                              is strictly positive at xt = qt and strictly negative at xt = θD
            dxt
interior optimum, xcount
                   t     which must satisfy the first-order condition39


                                    M Vtcount −MˆV R,R −η
                                                           
                   R∞
                                                             φ( ση )dη               u(xcount     m ) − u(q , θ m )
                                                                                                                   
                    η          1−Φ(           σ
                                                          )                                   , θD
                        1,t                             η                η              t                   t D
(A.7)                                         M Vtcount −MˆV R,R −η
                                                                                   =
                     1
                    2ση
                              R∞
                               η         φ(             ση
                                                                    )φ( ση   )dη          ux (xcount
                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                          m)
                                                                                                       , θD
                                   1,t                                   η


     As in the case of no whip count, the right-hand side of (A.7) strictly increases in xcount
                                                                                          t     . It
remains to show that, in the limit as Cb → 0, the left-hand side of (A.7) strictly decreases in
xcount
 t     , which, by continuity of the left-hand side in Cb , ensures there exists a strictly positive
value of Cb , Ĉb > 0, such that for all Cb < Ĉb , the left-hand side continues to strictly decrease.


39These statements require η                    < ∞, which, by continuity, is true for Cb sufficiently small given that η 1,t → −∞
                                          1,t
as Cb → 0.
                                                  UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                                    55


It then follows that xcount
                      t     is unique for all Cb < Ĉb . The sign of the derivative of the left-hand
                                                                            40
side of (A.7) with respect to xcount
                               t     , is determined by

                                                                       
         dη 1,t        η 1,t                  M Vt − MˆV R,R − η 1,t       1
                                                                                   Z   ∞
                                                                                                 M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η    η
    −     count φ(             ) 1 − Φ(                               )                   φ(                           )φ( )dη
        dxt             ση                              ση                2ση       η 1,t                   ση              ση
                                      count   − MˆV R,R − η 1,t
                                                                                                                       !
         dη 1,t
             1     M Vt                           η 1,t Z ∞                                   M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η     η
    + count     φ(                            )φ(      )                               1 − Φ(                         ) φ( )dη
     dxt    2ση                 ση                ση     η 1,t                                           ση               ση
                                                       !2
                    M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η
             Z ∞
           1                                    η
    −            φ(                         )φ( )dη
          2ση η                ση              ση
                      1,t
                                                                                                                  !
                  ∞
                         M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η                            ∞
                                                                                         M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η
              Z                                                         Z
       1                0                           η                                                                η
    −                 φ(                         )φ( )dη                          1 − Φ(                         ) φ( )dη
      4ση     η 1,t                 ση              ση                   η 1,t                      ση               ση
          (A.8)
                                                      dη 1,t
  By the implicit function theorem,                    dxt     must satisfy (from (A.5))

                                                            
                      M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η 1,t
                                                                                       !
                                                                         dη 1,t
                                                              1     1
                                                                                            u(xcount    m             m
                                                                                                                         
           −φ                                                         − count                 t     , θD ) − u(qt , θD )
                                        ση                     ση    2 dxt
                                                                  
                                   M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η 1,t
           + 1 − Φ                                                 ux (xcount
                                                                            t
                                                                                     m
                                                                                  , θD )=0
                                                 ση

  or


                                                     M Vtcount −M VˆR,R −η 1,t
                                                                             
                      dη 1,t           ση 1 − Φ                  ση                ux (xcount
                                                                                        t
                                                                                                 m)
                                                                                              , θD
                                    1
(A.9)                              = − 
                  dxcount                M Vtcount −MˆV R,R −η 1,t
                                                                   
                    t               2
                                                                     u(xcount      m ) − u(q , θ m )
                                                                                                     
                                      φ             ση                   t      , θD        t D


  In the limit as Cb → 0, η 1,t → −∞, in which case the second term of (A.9) approaches zero
because xcount
         t
                                            m , and the inverse hazard rate of a standard
               is bounded away from qt and θD
normal random variable approaches zero as its argument approaches infinity.41 The limit of
(A.8) as Cb → 0 is then determined by the limit of its second two terms because the first two
                                                          M Vtcount −MˆV R,R
terms approach zero. Defining ztcount ≡                           σ          ,   this limit is given by


40Again, the necessary conditions for applying the Leibniz Integral Rule with an infinite bound are satisfied.
41lim     1−Φ(x)            −φ(x)             −φ(x)
      x→∞ φ(x) = limx→∞ φ0 (x) = limx→∞ −xφ(x) = 0 where the first equality uses L’Hôpital’s rule.
56                       NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI



                                                                               !2
                                   ∞
                                          M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η
                               Z
                          1                                          η
           lim       −                 φ(                         )φ( )dη
         η 1,t →−∞       2ση   η 1,t                 ση              ση
                                                                                                          !
                 Z   ∞
                            M V  count − MˆV       − η
                                                                Z ∞
                                                                               M V  count − MˆV      − η
            1                                  R,R         η                                     R,R           η
         −             φ0 (     t
                                                       )φ( )dη          1 − Φ(     t
                                                                                                         ) φ( )dη
           4ση   ηt t                    ση               ση     η 1,t                     ση                 ση
                                                                 !   2
                              M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η
                  Z ∞
               1                                             η
     =   −                 φ(                            )φ( )dη
             2ση −∞                        ση                ση
                                                                                                          !
                Z ∞
                            M  V  count − MˆV      − η
                                                                Z ∞
                                                                                M V  count − M Vˆ    − η
            1                                  R,R         η                                     R,R           η
         −             φ0 (      t
                                                       )φ( )dη           1 − Φ(     t
                                                                                                         ) φ( )dη
           4ση −∞                        ση                ση    −∞                        ση                 ση
                                               !2                                                                !
              1      M Vtcount − M VˆR,R              1 0 M Vtcount − MˆV R,R               M Vtcount − MˆV R,R
     =   −       φ(                           ) − 2φ (                          ) 1 − Φ(                        )
             2σ                  σ                  4σ                σ                              σ
                             2
              1                        1
                      count
                            ) − 2 φ0 (ztcount ) 1 − Φ(ztcount )
                                                                  
     =   −       φ(zt
             2σ                      4σ
                             2
              1                        1
                 φ(ztcount ) + 2 ztcount φ(ztcount ) 1 − Φ(ztcount )
                                                                         
     =   −
             2σ                      4σ
                             2
              1                        1
     <   −       φ(ztcount ) + 2 φ(ztcount )2
             2σ                      4σ
     = 0

     where the second equality uses properties of the convolution of normal distributions, and the
inequality follows from the fact that, for a standard normal random variable, x (1 − Φ(x)) <
φ(x).
               m so that x < q , we assume party R whips against the bill (supports q ). In case
     For qt > θD          t   t                                                      t

of no whip count, we can write party D’s expected utility as

                                                           !
           no count                       M Vt − MˆV L,R                m             m              m
         EUD        (qt , xt )     =Φ                          (u(xt , θD ) − u(qt , θD )) + u(qt , θD ) − Cb
                                                σ

     With a whip count, it is
                                              UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                                                  57




                       count
                   EUD        (qt , xt )
                              M Vt − MˆV L,R − η 1
                   Z η1,t
                                                    η             m             m
                 =        Φ(                    ) φ( )dη (u(xt , θD ) − u(qt , θD ))
                    −∞                   ση      ση ση
                        η 1,t               m
                   −Φ(        )Cb + u(qt , θD )
                         ση

  Using these expressions, the optimal policy candidates, xcount
                                                           t     and xno
                                                                      t
                                                                                                              count ,   can be shown
to be unique (provided Cb is not too large) as in the previous case.
  To prove Lemma 4, we first define and prove Lemma A1.




  Lemma A1: Fix Cb < Ĉb such that the optimal alternative policies, xcount
                                                                      t     and xno
                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                            count ,   are
unique. Then, the alternative policies that satisfy the first-order conditions with and without a
whip count ((A.7) and (A.3) are such that:

                  m , the optimal alternative policy with a whip count, xcount , lies strictly closer
   (1) For qt 6= θD                                                      t
                                     m , than that without, xno
          to party D’s ideal point, θD                                                  count .
                                                             t

   (2) M Vtcount (qt ) and M Vtno            count (q )
                                                     t
                                                                                      m and strictly increase for
                                                          strictly increase for qt < θD
                m .
          qt > θD




  Proof of Lemma A1:
                                     m . We can write the first-order condition in the case of
  Part 1. Consider the case of qt < θD
no whip count as an integration over the second aggregate shock (as in the case of the whip
count):


                                     R∞ h                 M Vtno     count −MˆV
                                                                                  R,R −η
                                       −∞     1 − Φ(                      ση               )
                            M Vtno   count −MˆV                    u(xno  count ,θ m )−u(q ,θ m )
                                                                                                   i
                                                  R,R −η
                − 2σ1η φ(               ση                 )          t
                                                                        u0 (xno
                                                                                  D         t D
                                                                                 count ,θ m )            φ( σηη )dη = 0
                                                                             t           D


  Consider the left-hand side of this expression, evaluated instead at xcount
                                                                        t     :
58                     NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI




                                     R∞ h            M Vtcount −MˆV R,R −η
                                       −∞ 1 − Φ(               ση               )
                               M V count −MˆV R,R −η
                                                        count m                  m)
                                                                                     i
                                                         u(xt      ,θD )−u(qt ,θD
                      − 2σ1η φ( t        ση          )         0
                                                              u (xt count   m
                                                                          ,θD )
                                                                                        φ( σηη )dη
                                      R∞ h           M Vtcount −MˆV R,R −η
                  =                    η 1,t 1 − Φ(            ση               )

                               M V count −MˆV R,R −η
                                                        count m                  m)
                                                                                     i
                                                         u(xt      ,θD )−u(qt ,θD
                      − 2σ1η φ( t        ση          )        u0 (xcount    m)
                                                                          ,θD
                                                                                        φ( σηη )dη
                                                                    t
                                       R η1,t h        M V count −MˆV R,R −η
                                    + −∞        1 − Φ( t          ση              )
                               M V count −MˆV R,R −η     u(xcount     m )−u(q ,θ m )
                                                                                    i
                                                                   ,θD
                      − 2σ1η φ( t        ση          )      t
                                                              u0 (xcount    m)
                                                                          ,θD
                                                                              t D
                                                                                        φ( σηη )dη
                                                                    t
                                       R η1,t h        M V count −MˆV R,R −η
                  =                 + −∞        1 − Φ( t          ση              )
                               M V count −MˆV R,R −η
                                                        count m                  m)
                                                                                     i
                                                         u(xt      ,θD )−u(qt ,θD
(A.10)                − 2σ1η φ( t        ση          )         0
                                                              u (x  count   m
                                                                          ,θ )
                                                                                        φ( σηη )dη
                                                                           t       D


     where the last equality follows from the fact that xcount
                                                         t     satisfies the first-order condition for
the case of a whip count. Consider the sign of the integrand in (A.10):

                M V count −MˆV R,R −η                    count −MˆV                        u(xcount    m )−u(q ,θ m )
         h                                                                                                             i
                                                   M Vt                   R,R −η                     ,θD
          1 − Φ( t        ση          )−     1
                                            2ση φ(                ση               )          t
                                                                                              u0 (xno
                                                                                                                t D
                                                                                                       count ,θ m )          φ( σηη ) ≷ 0
                                                                                                   t           D

                                   M Vtcount −MˆV R,R −η
                             1−Φ(            ση
                                                         )        
                                                                       u(xcount    m )−u(q ,θ m )
                                                                                 ,θD        t D
                                                                                                      
⇐⇒                                  M Vtcount −MˆV R,R −η
                                                              −           t
                                                                          ux (xno  count ,θ m )                                      ≷0
                              1                                                t           D
                             2ση
                                 φ(           ση
                                                          )


     The left-hand side of this inequality is a strictly increasing function of η, so that there is at
most one value of η at which the integrand is zero. As η → ∞, the integrand approaches 1.
Thus, to satisfy the first-order condition for the case of a whip count at xcount
                                                                            t     , the integrand
evaluated at η 1,t must be strictly negative so that the single zero-crossing is contained in
[η 1,t , ∞) (otherwise the integrand is positive over the whole range and cannot integrate to
zero). Thus, the integrand in (A.10) must be strictly negative over [−∞, η 1,t ] so that the
integral is strictly negative: the marginal expected utility for the case of no whip count must
be negative when evaluated at the optimal alternative policy for the case of a whip count. But,
then we must have xno
                   t
                           count   < xcount
                                      t     to ensure that the first-order condition for the case of no
whip count is satisfied (given that xno
                                     t
                                                 count    is the unique optimum, for every xt < xno
                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                                  count ,

                                                              m can be shown similarly.
the marginal expected utility is positive). The case of qt > θD
                                        m when a whip count is conducted. M V count is determined
     Part 2. Consider the case of qt < θD                                    t

implicitly by the first-order condition, (A.7). Taking its derivative with respect to qt , we have
                                                          UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                                          59




                                     M Vtcount −MˆV R,R −η
         R                                                                                                                
              ∞
                          1 − Φ(                           )            φ( σηη )dη       u(xcount    m ) − u(q , θ m )
                                                                                                  , θD
                                                                                                                         
      ∂      η 1,t                            ση                                           t                    t D
                                                                                     −                                        = 0
                                                                                                                             
     ∂qt
                     R∞            M V count −MˆV R,R −η                                     ux (xt count    m
                                                                                                           , θD )
                1
               2ση        η 1,t   φ( t        ση          )φ( σηη )dη


                                                                  M Vtcount −MˆV R,R −η
                                      R                                                                  
                                             ∞
                                                         1 − Φ(                         )      φ( σηη )dη
                    ∂                        η 1,t                          ση     ∂M Vtcount
         ⇐⇒
                            
                 ∂M Vtcount                                       M Vtcount −MˆV R,R −η      ∂qt
                                                    R∞                           
                            1                                          η
                           2ση η 1,t φ(                         )φ(   ση  )dη
                                                                            ση

                                                  u(xcount      m ) − u(q , θ m ) 
                                                                                            ∂xcount
                                               
                                         ∂             t     , θD              t D             t
                                  − count                       count      m                         = 0
                                     ∂xt                 ux (xt        , θD )                  ∂qt
                                        M Vtcount −MˆV R,R −η
                      R                                                        
                         ∞                                                η
                               1  −  Φ(                          )   φ(      )dη
               ∂       η1,t                       ση                    ση        ∂M Vtcount
       ⇐⇒
          ∂M Vtcount                    M Vtcount −MˆV R,R −η                                ∂qt
                              R∞                                                 
                            1                                          η
                           2ση η 1,t φ(            ση           )φ(   ση  )dη

                                   u(xcount      m ) − u(q , θ m )  
                                                                              ∂M Vtcount
                                                                                                  
                         ∂             t     , θD           t D
                     − count                                                2                  −1    = 0
                       ∂xt               ux (xcount
                                                t
                                                         m)
                                                      , θD                         ∂qt
                                                      M Vtcount −MˆV R,R −η
                                 R                                                            
                                       ∞                                                   η
              count                          1 −   Φ(                            )    φ(      )dη
         ∂M Vt            ∂        η1,t                          ση                      ση
      ⇐⇒
                                                                                                 
           ∂qt
                    
                      ∂M Vt count 
                                               ∞      M  V count −MˆV         −η        η
                                                                                                  
                                         1
                                            R             t              R,R
                                        2ση η 1,t  φ(             ση             )φ(   ση )dη

                                                           u(xcount        m ) − u(q , θ m ) 
                                                         
                                                  ∂             t      , θD              t D
                                         −2 count                          count     m
                                             ∂xt                   ux (xt        , θD )
                                                           
                                                             u(xt  count      m
                                                                          , θD ) − u(qt , θD    m) 
                                                    ∂
                                             − count                                                 = 0
                                                ∂xt                  ux (xcount
                                                                             t      , θDm)


  As shown in the proof of Proposition 1, the term in brackets on the left-hand side is strictly
negative for Cb < Ĉb . But, the term on the right-hand side is also strictly negative so that
∂M Vtcount                  ∂M Vtno count                                   m , we can similarly establish                   ∂M Vtcount
   ∂qt      > 0. Similarly,      ∂qt                         > 0. For qt > θD                                                   ∂qt       <0
     ∂M Vtno count
and        ∂qt     < 0. 




  Proof of Lemma 4:
  VDcount (qt ) > VDno            count (q
                                             t)   because, for Cb sufficiently small, η 1,t < ∞ and η 1,t > −∞ (see
footnote 39) so that an alternative policy is pursued for a non-zero measure of the support of
η1,t . Therefore, for the same alternative policy, party D’s expected utility with a whip count
must strictly exceed that without because over this support of η1,t , the cost, Cb , is avoided and
the probability of the alternative passing is the same. If party D pursues a different alternative
policy with a whip count (which it generally does), then it must because it does even better.
60                         NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

                                m . We claim both value functions decrease with q , but the
     Consider the case of qt < θD                                                t

difference VDcount (qt ) − VDno        count (q )
                                               t     increases. By the envelope theorem, the derivative of the
value function for the case of no whip count with respect to qt is given by

                                                                                      !
     ∂VDno   count (q )
                     t                             M Vtno   count    − MˆV R,R                m
                            = − 1 − Φ(                                            ) uq (qt , θD )
             ∂qt                                                 σ
                                                                             !
                                     1          M Vtno   count   − MˆV R,R
                                                                                      u(xno   count      m             m
                                                                                                                             
                                   − φ                                                   t            , θD ) − u(qt , θD )
                                    2σ                       σ
                                                                                      !
                                                   M Vtno   count    − MˆV R,R                m
                            = − 1 − Φ(                                            ) uq (qt , θD )
                                                                 σ
                                                                                      !
                                                   M Vtno   count    − MˆV R,R
                                   − 1 − Φ(                                       ) ux (xno
                                                                                         t
                                                                                                 count      m
                                                                                                         , θD )
                                                                 σ
                                                                                      !
                                                   M Vtno   count    − MˆV R,R                      m
                                                                                                      ) + ux (xno   count       m
                                                                                                                                      
                            = − 1 − Φ(                                            )       uq (qt , θD          t             , θD )
                                                                 σ

     where the first equality follows from applying the first-order condition. With unbounded
aggregate shocks and qt , xno
                           t
                                           count      m , this derivative is strictly negative so that the value of
                                                   < θD
pursuing an alternate policy strictly decreases with qt .
     In a similar manner, for the case of a whip count, we have


∂VDcount (qt )                         ∞
                                        M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η
                                   Z
                             1                                       η           m             m
                   = −                     φ(                   )φ( )dη (u(xt , θD ) − u(qt , θD ))
    ∂qt                     2ση2η 1,t              ση               σ η
                                                                                !
                                                       M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η
                                          Z ∞
                           1          m                                              η
                          − uq (qt , θD )       1 − Φ(                         ) φ( )dη
                           ση              η                      ση                 ση
                                                   1,t
                                                                                                                      !
                                                                             ∞
                                                                                             M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η
                                                                         Z
                       1            m                                                                                    η
                                      ) + ux (xcount    m
                                                            
                   = −    uq (qt , θD          t     , θD )                           1 − Φ(                         ) φ( )dη
                       ση                                                 η 1,t                         ση               ση

     which is also strictly negative, given η 1,t < ∞.
     Finally, consider the marginal difference in the value functions:
                                         UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                                   61




         ∂ VDcount (qt ) − VDno   count (q )
                                               
                                          t
                         ∂qt
                                                                                           !
                                                           ∞
                                                                  M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η
                                                       Z
         1            m                                                                       η
                        ) + ux (xcount    m
                                             
     = −    uq (qt , θD          t     , θD )              1 − Φ(                         ) φ( )dη
         ση                                          η 1,t                   ση               ση
                                                                                     !
                     m                                       M Vtno count − MˆV R,R
                       ) + ux (xno      count m
                                                   
         + uq (qt , θD          t            , θD ) 1 − Φ(                          )
                                                                        σ

From the first part of Lemma A1, xno
                                  t
                                                      count    < xcount
                                                                  t     , which ensures ux (xno
                                                                                             t
                                                                                                   count , θ m )
                                                                                                            D      >
ux (xcount
     t
              m ). Furthermore,
           , θD

                                    M Vtno     count   − MˆV R,R
                           1 − Φ(                     )
                                          σ
                               M Vtcount − MˆV R,R
                      > 1 − Φ(                     )
                                        σ
                                                                  !
                                         M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η
                           Z ∞
                         1                                            η
                      =           1 − Φ(                         ) φ( )dη
                        ση −∞                        ση              ση
                                                                  !
                                         M Vtcount − MˆV R,R − η
                           Z ∞
                         1                                           η
                      >          1 − Φ(                          ) φ( )dη
                        ση η                        ση               ση
                                  1,t

                      > 0

given η 1,t < ∞. Therefore, the difference in expected utility strictly increases with qt .
            m , we can establish that both value functions increase in q , but their difference
  For qt > θD                                                           t

decreases, in an identical manner. 


  Proof of Proposition 2:
  Assume Cb < Ĉb so that, from Proposition 1, xcount
                                                t
                                                                                m . We first
                                                      is unique. Consider qt < θD
                   m , V no
show that as qt → θD           count (q )   → −Cb and VDcount (qt ) → 0. The first follows from simple
                        D              t
                no
inspection of EUD     count (q , x ),   noting that xno         count                  m as q → θ m because
                                                                        must approach θD
                              t t                    t                                       t   D
                                        m ), by Proposition 1. Similarly, inspecting EU count (q , x ),
it is contained in the interval, (qt , θD                                              D        t t
                                       η 1,t 
we see that VD count                                             m
                     (qt ) → − 1 − Φ( ση ) Cb . But, as qt → θD , we can see from (A.5) that η 1,t
                                            η 1,t
must approach infinity such that Φ(         ση      ) → 1.
  Given these facts, strictly positive costs, and the result of Lemma 4 that both value functions
                              m |, there exists a status quo cutoff, q < θ m , such that for all
strictly decrease with |qt − θD                                       l   D
             m ), no alternative policy is pursued. Specifically, q is given by the larger of the two
qt ∈ (q l , θD                                                     l

policies, q1 and q2 which satisfy VDno       count (q )
                                                     1       = 0 and VDcount (q2 ) = Cw , respectively.
62                         NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

     For qt < q l , there are two possibilities. If q1 > q2 , then set q l = q l = q1 with VDcount (q1 ) < Cw
and VDno    count (q )
                    1     = 0. In this case, for any qt < q1 , an alternative policy is pursued without
a whip count: by Lemma 4, over this range,VDno                       count (q
                                                                                1)   > 0 so that an alternative policy
without a whip count is preferred over not pursuing an alternative policy and, as qt decreases
from q1 , VDcount (qt ) − VDno     count (q )
                                           t    decreases so that not conducting a whip count remains more
valuable than conducting one.
     If q1 < q2 , then set q l = q2 and define q l < q l to be the policy for which VDcount (q l ) −
Cw = VDno      count (q
                          l
                           ). Such a point must exist because, by Lemma 4, as qt decreases from
q l , VDcount (qt ) −   VDno count (qt )   decreases and so must eventually approach zero. Thus, for qt
sufficiently small,       VDcount (qt )   − Cw < VDno    count (q ).
                                                                 t     With these cutoffs, for qt ∈ (−∞, q l ], an
alternative policy is pursued without a whip count because VDno                         count (q
                                                                                                   t)   > VDcount (qt )−Cw > 0
for all qt < q l . For qt ∈ (q l , q l ], an alternative policy is pursued with a whip count because
VDcount (qt ) − Cw > 0 and, by Lemma 4, VDcount (qt ) − VDno                     count (q
                                                                                            t)   increases with qt over this
range so that VDcount (qt ) − Cw > VDno            count (q
                                                              t ).

     Symmetric arguments establish cutoffs, q r and q r , for the bill pursuit decisions over the
            m .
range qt > θD




         Appendix B. Identification and Estimation Supplementary Material

B.1. Formal Treatment of Identification.
     We provide a more formal treatment of the proof of identification of the parameters governing
voting decisions (member ideal points, party discipline, and the variances of the aggregate
shocks). From equation (5.1), we have that, at the time of the whip count, for every i and t:



(B.1)                                     Φ−1 (P (Y eai,wc         ˜         i
                                                      t,p = 1)) = M V 1,t − θ .


     The difference of equation (B.1) across politicians i and 0 in period t is:



(B.2)                         Φ−1 (P (Y ea0,wc         −1       i,wc         i
                                          t,p = 1)) − Φ (P (Y eat,p = 1)) = θ ,


     where we have used that θ0 = 0 (Assumption 1). Because θi is known, we have that M˜V 1,t
is known for an arbitrary t from equation (B.1). At roll call, equation (5.2) can be rewritten
                                  UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                      63




                                                    M˜V 2,t − θi ± yD
                                                                    max
(B.3)                     Φ−1 (P (Y eai,rc
                                      t,p = 1)) =           √           ,
                                                              2
  for every i, t. By definitions of the realized marginal voters,



(B.4)                                M˜V 1,t − M˜V 2,t = η2,t

  Therefore, using equations (B.1), (B.3) and (B.4), we have that for an arbitrary bill t:


                             √ −1
   Φ−1 (P (Y eai,wc
               t,p = 1)) −    2Φ (P (Y eai,rc         ˜         i    ˜         i   max
                                         t,p = 1)) = M V 1,t − θ − (M V 2,t − θ ± yD )

                                                                 max
(B.5)                                                  = η2,t ± yD

  Taking the expectation over t of both sides implies that:


                                         √ −1                    
(B.6)         Et Φ−1 (P (Y eai,wc
                             t,p  = 1)) −  2Φ  (P (Y ea i,rc
                                                        t,p  = 1))      max
                                                                    = ±yD   ,

  since η2,t is mean zero. Thus, the party discipline parameters are identified up to their sign
which is pinned down by the direction of whipping (known from the theory).
         max , we obtain the individual values of M˜V
  Given yD                                            2,t from equation (B.3). Then, once

M˜V 1,t and M˜V 2,t have been identified, equation (B.4) implies that the distribution of η2,t is
semiparametrically identified. It follows that we can recover its variance, ση .
  We can also formally demonstrate the criticality of the whip count data. In its absence,
 max is not identified (the essence of Krehbiel’s critique (Krehbiel (1993)). From (5.2), if we
yD
do not know θi and had to estimate it from roll call data only, we could redefine θ̃i = θi ± yD
                                                                                              max

so that:


                                               M˜V 2,t − θi ± yDmax
                          P (Y eai,rc
                                 t,p = 1) = Φ(          √           )
                                                          2
(B.7)                                      = Φ(M˜V 2,t − θ̃i ).

  Hence, with roll call data alone, we cannot separate a shift in everyone’s (true) ideology
from the party discipline effect due to whipping.
64                     NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

B.2. Governing Equations for Party R.
     In our description of the theory and estimation, we focused on party D. Here we provide the
key equations for party R, beginning with the probabilities of observing a member of party R
voting Yes (corresponding to (5.1) and (5.2) for party D). The difference stems from the fact
that, when the two parties prefer different policies, members of D to the left of the marginal
voter vote Yes while members of R to the left vote No. At the whip count stage:



                           P (Y eai,wc           i      i
                                  t,p = 1) = P (δ1,t + θ ≥ M Vt − η1,t )

(B.8)                                             = 1 − Φ(M˜V 1,t − θi ).

     At the roll call stage,



                 P (Y eai,rc           i      i      i                        max
                        t,p = 1) = P (δ1,t + δ2,t + θ ≥ M Vt − η1,t − η2,t ± yR )
                                                                !
                                            M˜V 2,t − θi ± yR
                                                            max
(B.9)                            = 1−Φ               √            ,
                                                       2

     The likelihood of a sequence of votes by members of party R is therefore derived from (5.3)
by substituting these expressions for the probabilities.
     The other key equation is that which governs the optimal policy alternative chosen by party
R in case of no whip count (corresponding to (A.3) for party D). For a status quo policy to
the left of party R’s median, party R chooses an alternative further to the right so that the
first-order condition is identical to (A.3) except that MˆV R,R is replaced by MˆV L,R because
the parties whip in opposite directions. For a status quo policy to the right of party R’s median
(so that the alternative is left of the status quo and both parties whip left), It is given by


                        M Vtno count −MˆV L,L
                                             
                  −Φ                                    1 u(xno count , θ m ) − u(q , θ m )
                                                                                           
                                   σ                         t           R            t R
(B.10)                                             =
                       M Vtno count −MˆV L,L                   ux (xno   count , θ m )
                                            
                   φ                                   2σ           t             R
                                 σ
                                      UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                             65

                        Appendix C. Additional Tables and Figures

                               Table 9. Number of Whips per Party



                                   Whips                       Congress
                                                           95 96 97 98 99

                        Democrats (appointed)              14 14 20 26 41
                         Democrats (elected)               21 23 23 23 23

                       Republicans (appointed) 16 17 23 22 25


Notes: The table presents the number of whips per Party over the different Congresses. Data is from Meinke
(2008). Both party leaderships appointed whips, however, the Democrats also elected a number of whips.
Between the 95th and 106th Congresses, the Democrats also elected assistant/zone whips independently of the
party leaders (Meinke (2008)).




                       Table 10. Likelihood Ratio Test for Constant ymax


                         Model                Estimated ymax           Log-Likelihood

                 Time Varying ymax               See Table 3            −7.940 × 105

                    Constant ymax         Dem: 0.523, Rep: 0.439        −8.441 × 105


                       p-value for LR test, with 8 degrees of freedom: 0.00

Notes: We test whether the whipping parameter, y max , is constant across all Congresses in our sample. To do
so, we fit a restricted version of our model where each party’s y max is the same throughout all periods. We
compare it to our original model, and reject the hypothesis of a constant y max with a Likelihood Ratio test.
66                     NATHAN CANEN, CHAD KENDALL, AND FRANCESCO TREBBI

           Table 11. Counterfactual with polarized ideologies: Decomposition


                                                                                  Congress
                                                                       95      96   97     98            99



                                            m − θm )
          A: Polarization due to ideology (θR                        1.758 1.923 1.978 2.244 2.351
                                                 D

                                         max + y max )
       B: Polarization due to whipping (yR                           0.725 0.899 0.848 1.258 1.305
                                                D

     C: Share of Polarization due to whipping (B/(A+B)) 0.292 0.319 0.300 0.359 0.357


Notes: The table shows how polarization changes over Congresses, in the counterfactual where we assume
ideologies are further away than they actually are (we add yPmax /2 to each partymembers’ ideologies). The
change in polarization may be driven by both party discipline and by ideological drifts across parties. The
counterfactual that we consider has party discipline accounting for around 30% of polarization, compared to
40% in the main model (See Table 3).




         Figure 12. Probability of Bill Approval for the Democrats, Main Model and
         Counterfactuals




Notes: We show the distribution of the predicted probability of the alternative policy proposed by the Democrats,
x(q), winning at each value of q for each Congress 95-99. We show the results for both the main model and the
counterfactuals. The counterfactuals are: (i) keep the estimated ideologies and set y max = 0 for both parties,
and (ii) keep the estimated y max and set the ideologies to more polarized values (new ideology equals θi +yR
                                                                                                            max
                                                                                                                /2
                        max
for Republicans, θi − yD    /2 for Democrats).
                                      UNBUNDLING POLARIZATION                                             67



        Figure 13. Probability of Bill Approval for the Republicans, Main Model and
        Counterfactuals




Notes: We show the distribution of the predicted probability of the alternative policy proposed by the Repub-
licans, x(q), winning at each value of q for each Congress 95-99. We show the results for both the main model
and the counterfactuals. Compared to our main model, the absence of whipping increases the probability of
winning for values to the left of the Republican party median, but decreases it for those on the right.
