NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHO CREATES NEW FIRMS WHEN LOCAL OPPORTUNITIES ARISE?
Shai Bernstein
Emanuele Colonnelli
Davide Malacrino
Timothy McQuade
Working Paper 25112
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25112

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

We are grateful to Nick Bloom, Giacomo De Giorgi, Rebecca Diamond, Florian Ederer, Callum
Jones, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Ross Levine, Song Ma, Luigi Pistaferri, Josh Rauh, David
Robinson, Amit Seru, Andrei Shleifer, Per Stromberg, as well as seminar participants at
Alabama, Brigham Young, Columbia, Duke, EEA meetings, Fondazione Rodolfo DeBenedetti
workshop, IFN, IMF, Statistics Norway, Stockholm School of Economics, Red Rock Finance
conference and Stanford University. We are grateful to the Stanford Institute for Innovation in
Developing Economies (SEED), the Private Enterprise Development in Low-Income Countries
(PEDL) Initiative by the Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR), the Stanford Center for
International Development (SCID), and the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL)
Governance Initiative for financial support. The views expressed in this article are those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of the IMF, its Executive Board, IMF management,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Shai Bernstein, Emanuele Colonnelli, Davide Malacrino, and Timothy McQuade. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Creates New Firms When Local Opportunities Arise?
Shai Bernstein, Emanuele Colonnelli, Davide Malacrino, and Timothy McQuade
NBER Working Paper No. 25112
September 2018
JEL No. E26,J24,L26,O12,O13,O17,O20
ABSTRACT
New firm formation is a critical driver of job creation, and an important contributor to the
responsiveness of the economy to aggregate shocks. In this paper we examine the characteristics
of the individuals who become entrepreneurs when local opportunities arise due to an increase in
local demand. We identify local demand shocks by linking fluctuations in global commodity
prices to municipality level agricultural endowments in Brazil. We find that the firm creation
response is almost entirely driven by young and skilled individuals, as measured by their level of
experience, education, and past occupations involving creativity, problem-solving and managerial
roles. In contrast, we find no such response within the same municipalities among skilled, yet
older individuals, highlighting the importance of lifecycle considerations. These responsive
individuals are younger and more skilled than the average entrepreneur in the population. The
entrepreneurial response of young individuals is larger in municipalities with better access to
finance, and in municipalities with more skilled human capital. These results highlight how the
characteristics of the local population can have a significant impact on the entrepreneurial
responsiveness of the economy.
Shai Bernstein
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
shaib@stanford.edu
Emanuele Colonnelli
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
emanuele.colonnelli@chicagobooth.edu

Davide Malacrino
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431
DMalacrino@imf.org
Timothy McQuade
Stanford Graduate School of Business School
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
tmcquade@stanford.edu

I.

Introduction

Entrepreneurship plays a critical role in aggregate job creation, with new businesses responsible for
the majority of new employment in the economy (Decker et al. (2014); Haltiwanger et al. (2013b)).
At the same time, entrepreneurship and the creation of new firms is a multi-faceted phenomenon.
Some types of entrepreneurship might best be described as Schumpeterian, in which talented individuals create new technologies or products that facilitate a creative destruction process in the
economy disrupting existing organizations (Schumpeter (1942)). Other types of entrepreneurship
would better be described as Kirznerian, in which alert individuals identify the existence of new and
exogenous investment opportunities created by changing market conditions, and take advantage of
them by forming new businesses (Kirzner (1973, 1985)).
This latter form of entrepreneurship is increasingly recognized as an important driver of economic
dynamics. A growing theoretical and empirical literature shows that new business formation is key to
understanding how economies respond to aggregate shocks. For example, a variety of macroeconomic
studies have emphasized the role new firm creation plays in the amplification and propagation of
exogenous economic shocks (e.g., Bilbiie et al. (2012); Clementi and Palazzo (2016); Sedláček and
Sterk (2017)). At the micro level, Adelino et al. (2017) show that new firms are responsible for the
majority of jobs created in response to changes in investment opportunities driven by local demand,
and Decker et al. (2017) find that new firms account for most of the employment growth in regions
that experienced a significant economic expansion due to the discovery of shale oil and gas.
While recognizing the importance of the firm entry response to local economic shocks, little is
known about the characteristics of the individual entrepreneurs who identify and act upon such
opportunities when they arise. Do such entrepreneurs share similar defining traits with other entrepreneurs in the economy, or do they diﬀer in substantive and meaningful ways? This issue is
particularly salient. If these entrepreneurs are concentrated in a particular segment of the population, then characteristics of the local population and long-term demographic trends may have
significant implications for the entrepreneurial responsiveness of the economy. Moreover, understanding the key traits of such individuals may be important to policymakers in thinking how to
foster vibrant, dynamic local economies. In this paper, we fill this gap and explore the personal
and career characteristics of the individuals who create new firms in response to changes in local
economic opportunities.
Tackling this question empirically poses two challenges. First, exploring this question requires

1

employer-employee matched data that follow individuals over time and that allow for identifying
when individuals choose to become entrepreneurs. Second, in order to study the entrepreneurial
response of individuals to opportunities, we need a source of plausibly exogenous variation in local
economic opportunities. For both these reasons, we choose to study the Brazilian economy.
First, our study relies on administrative employer-employee matched data from the Brazilian
Ministry of Labor, which capture all the employees in the formal sector, and include information
on their work history, wages, education, gender, and occupation. These data allow us to not only
identify the founders of new firms, but also to observe a rich set of information regarding their
personal characteristics before the creation of the new firm. Second, the large agribusiness sector
in the Brazilian economy allows us to identify exogenous local income and demand shocks arising
from global commodity price fluctuations, and to study the firm creation response.1 Specifically,
we interact municipality level historical production endowments of agricultural crops with contemporaneous changes in global commodity prices, a strategy similar in nature to Allcott and Keniston
(2017) in the context of US oil and gas booms and Benguria et al. (2018) in the context of Brazil’s
commodity cycles. These historical concentrations of agricultural crops are persistent due to the
accumulation of expertise and economic activity over long time periods, as well as physical characteristics of the regions such as climate and soil. Similar to methods employed by Bartik (1991)
and Blanchard and Katz (1992), this strategy overcomes the reserve causality problems inherent in
a simple regression of firm creation on changes in local income. In our case, the primary concern is
that unobserved shocks to investment opportunities of a particular segment in the population could
mechanically impact local income.
We start by formulating our hypotheses through a novel three sector model of a local economy
which combines the Lucas (1978) insights of individual entrepreneurial choice with models of heterogeneous firms and firm entry, such as Krugman (1979), Melitz (2003a), and Chaney (2008). The
model shows theoretically that commodity price shocks can lead to increased local employment and
aggregate income, which in turn increases the profitability of firms in the non-tradable sector catering to the local economy. This increased profitability can in turn lead employees to transition from
paid employment to entrepreneurship, generating new firm creation in the non-tradable sector. The
model emphasizes individual heterogeneity of the local population and the extent to which new firm
creation depends on the willingness of individuals to transition to entrepreneurship. This motivates
1

Brazil is among the largest producers in the world of coﬀee, sugarcane, orange juice, soybean, corn and ethanol,
among others. These crops provide the basis for the large agribusiness industry in Brazil, which represents 22% of
Brazil’s GDP, a third of its employment, and almost 40% of its export (PwC, 2013).

2

the main analysis of the paper, in which we explore the characteristics of individuals responsible for
local entrepreneurial responsiveness.
We explore the model’s predictions empirically and find that increases in commodity prices in
aﬀected municipalities do lead to a significant increase in local employment and aggregate income.
Our estimated eﬀects are economically meaningful. At the top 10% of commodity price increases,
municipalities experience a 7.8% increase in local aggregate income and a 6.9% increase in local
employment. As shown explicitly in our model, this increase in local aggregate income may create
new investment opportunities in the non-tradable sector, which is heavily dependent on local demand
(Basker and Miranda, 2016; Mian and Sufi, 2012b; Stroebel and Vavra, 2014), and may lead some
paid employees to switch into entrepreneurship. Consistent with the predictions of the model,
we find that the local demand shock does trigger significant firm entry, driven almost entirely by
increases in the non-tradable sector, with the number of local firms increasing by 4.9%.2
We then turn to our main question, and explore the characteristics of those entrepreneurs who
respond to local demand shocks by forming new firms. We find that such entrepreneurs are almost
exclusively young individuals. Specifically, we find that within municipalities that experience a
commodity price shock, entrepreneurship increases by almost 15% among individuals at the bottom
quartile of the age distribution, while there is essentially no response for older individuals. These
results are robust to the inclusion of industry fixed eﬀects and a variety of covariates controlling for
other demographic characteristics which may be correlated with age.
These results are consistent with the idea that lifecycle considerations strongly influence an
individual’s decision to respond to new local economic opportunities. In particular, younger individuals have been shown to have higher degrees of risk tolerance than older individuals, and thus
may be better able to tolerate the risk associated with a fast transition to entrepreneurial activity (Kihlstrom and Laﬀont, 1979b; Miller, 1984b; Levesque and Minniti, 2006). Likewise, young
individuals may have less constraints in the form of family or looming retirement needs, and may
therefore have suﬃcient flexibility to quickly respond to changes in economic opportunities. Finally,
younger individuals, being at the early stage of their career, may have less attractive outside options,
which may enhance their flexibility to respond to new economic opportunities. These eﬀects appear to outweigh other potentially countervailing lifecycle forces, such as younger individuals being
relatively less experienced or more financially constrained.
2

This result reflects the increase in the number of formal sector firms. Using an annual large scale survey of the
Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, we find that firm entry response to the local demand shock is fully
concentrated in the formal sector. There is no apparent response by firms in the informal sector.

3

Interestingly, we find that entrepreneurs who respond to local economic shocks are significantly
younger than the average entrepreneurs in the economy. While roughly 40% of the new entrepreneurs
in Brazil are at the bottom quartile of the age distribution, we find this to be the case for more than
60% of the entrepreneurs responding to the demand shock. This is again consistent with the notion
that the ability to rapidly respond to exogenous changes in market conditions requires a degree of
flexibility and risk tolerance that is uniquely possessed by the young.
While the results so far suggest that lifecycle considerations are important, it turns out that being
young in itself is insuﬃcient to explain the entrepreneurial response. Instead, we find that skills
matter as well. First, we find that among the young, more educated individuals are more responsive
to local economic shocks by forming new firms. Moreover, following Autor et al. (2003) and Levine
and Rubinstein (2017) we use occupational data to identify occupations that involve significant nonroutine cognitive skills, such as creativity and problem solving, as well as complex interpersonal skills
such as negotiation and management. We find that among the young, individuals who previously
worked in positions requiring such managerial and general business skillsets are significantly more
responsive to the local demand shock. We finally provide evidence that it is not simply innate skill
which seems to matter. Those individuals with greater occupational experience are more responsive
than those with less. On the other hand, we find that skilled but older individuals are not responsive
to the local shock.
Next, we compare the skills of the entrepreneurs who respond to local demand shocks with the
skills of the average new entrepreneur and the overall population. Focusing on young individuals,
we find that the average new young entrepreneur is slightly more skilled when compared to the
average young person in the population, as measured by experience, education, and engagement
in cognitive non-routine occupations. However, these skill traits are considerably more pronounced
among the responsive entrepreneurs who form businesses when local opportunities arise.
In sum, we find that entrepreneurial responsiveness to local economic opportunities is concentrated among the young and the skilled. These findings are consistent with various theories that
argue that entrepreneurship requires a variety of general business and managerial skills (Evans and
Leighton, 1989; Lazear, 2005).
Our finding that both age and skill matter for the individual-level decision of whether to become an entrepreneur when new opportunities arise suggest that several characteristics of the local
economy may aﬀect its entrepreneurial responsiveness. First, since the ability to create new firms
hinges on access to finance (Evans and Jovanovic, 1989; Hurst and Lusardi, 2004), and since young
4

individuals have less time to accumulate wealth, we posit that in municipalities with better access to
finance, we are likely to find an even stronger entrepreneurial response of the young. Moreover, Lucas (1988) and Gennaioli et al. (2012) argue that the presence of other skilled individuals generates
human capital externalities and knowledge spillovers, making it easier for potential entrepreneurs to
learn how to start a business. Given the importance of skill we document in our empirical findings,
these theories suggest that the overall stock of entrepreneurial knowledge might impact the firm
creation response.
We find support for both of these hypotheses by comparing the individual response across
municipalities. Younger individuals are indeed more responsive in municipalities with better access
to finance, as proxied for by the per capita number of banks. Consistent with the importance of
human capital externalities, younger individuals are also more responsive in municipalities where
the population is endowed with more skilled individuals, measured by the average number of years
of education, and the share of entrepreneurs in the population.
We conclude by discussing some additional considerations related to our findings. We first
evaluate the role of the informal sector in the entrepreneurial response. Using an annual largescale survey dataset, we find no evidence that the number of informal firms and informal workers
increase following the local demand shock, in sharp contrast to the formal sector response. This
result, along with our previous findings, are consistent with the findings of La Porta and Shleifer
(2008) and La Porta and Shleifer (2014). Using data from World Bank surveys, these studies show
that informal firms in developing countries tend to be small and are significantly less productive than
formal sector firms. They argue their results support a dual view of developing economies, in which
informal sector firms arise primarily out of poverty, while economic growth and dynamism comes
from a formal sector comprised of productive firms run by skilled, highly educated entrepreneurs.
This is exactly what our study documents. When new economic opportunities arise due to increases
in local demand, it is almost exclusively young, educated, and experienced entrepreneurs in the
formal sector with the requisite business and cognitive skillsets who take advantage of them, just
as the dual view of formality and informality would suggest.
Finally, we consider the implications of our findings for the impact of demographic change
on entrepreneurial responsiveness. Over the past 50 years, there has been a marked trend in both
developed and developing economies towards aging populations. This trend is widespread, stemming
from both declines in fertility rates and increased longevity. Our findings that young individuals are
more responsive to local opportunities when they arise suggest that this phenomenon may impact
5

the entrepreneurial responsiveness of the economy. Moreover, the importance of acquired skills as
well as age implies the possibility of additional indirect equilibrium eﬀects amplifying the direct
eﬀect. These could arise, for example, from the local knowledge spillovers proposed by Gennaioli
et al. (2012) or the slower speed in an aging population move up the equilibrium job ladder and
thereby acquire the requisite business and managerial skills (Liang et al., 2014).
Our work relates to several strands of literature. First, as mentioned above, a variety of macroeconomic studies have emphasized the crucial role that new firm creation plays in the amplification
and propagation of aggregate economic shocks.3 To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first
to shed light on the characteristics of the entrepreneurs who respond to economic shocks by creating
new firms. Our micro-level evidence highlights the importance of individual level heterogeneity, suggesting that the demographic characteristics of the local population may aﬀect the entrepreneurial
responsiveness of the economy.
Second, our paper contributes to a long-standing literature on the nature and characteristics
of entrepreneurs.4 Closely related to ours is Levine and Rubinstein (2017) who find that the firms
run by (incorporated) entrepreneurs are likely to engage in tasks requiring comparatively strong
non-routine cognitive abilities and that entrepreneurs who incorporate had higher test scores and
engaged in more illicit activities in their youth. Relatedly, Azoulay et al. (2017) find that successful
entrepreneurs are experienced and middle-aged, rather than young. We complement these studies
by focusing instead on responsive (Kirznerian) entrepreneurs who start a business in reaction to
exogenous local economic shocks. We find that these individuals are significantly younger than the
average entrepreneur in the population, and that they are also more skilled and experienced. Our
evidence highlights the importance of both life-cycle considerations and human capital as important
drivers of the entrepreneurial responsiveness of the economy to aggregate shocks.
Third, our paper relates to a vast literature studying the role of entrepreneurship in developing
3

General equilibrium models of monopolistic competition linking firm entry and exit to aggregate fluctuations
indicate the presence of various channels. Devereux et al. (1996), Chatterjee and Cooper (2014), and Bilbiie et al.
(2012) are examples of models where entry of new firms generates greater product variety, while in Jaimovich and
Floetotto (2008) entry works through increased competition and lower markups. In related recent work, Clementi
and Palazzo (2016) argue that increases in firm entry in response to aggregate shocks lead to large and persistent
expansions because of lifecycle considerations. Sedlácek (2014) suggest the lack of startups during a downturn can
lead to persistent employment declines in the economy, and Sedlacek et al. (2017) show that firm heterogeneity,
and particularly the presence of high-growth startups, are key for aggregate gains. Several empirical studies further
highlight how new and young firms act as important sources of job creation and employment (Haltiwanger et al.,
2013b; Pugsley and Sahin, 2015). In particular, Adelino et al. (2017) use US Census micro-data and regional variation
in investment opportunities through Bartik shocks to show that it is the young and new firms that create the most
jobs in response to positive local demand shocks.
4
See, for example, Kihlstrom and Laﬀont 1979b; Blanchflower and Oswald 1998; Hamilton 2000; Moskowitz and
Vissing-Jorgensen 2002; Hurst and Lusardi 2004; Hombert, Schoar, Sraer and Thesmar 2014; Humphries 2016.

6

economies. Important contributions to this literature include De Mel et al. (2008b); Bruhn et al.
(2010); Naudé (2010); Schoar (2010b); Desai (2011); Bianchi and Bobba (2012) and McKenzie and
Woodruﬀ (2013). As mentioned, of particular note are La Porta and Shleifer (2008) and La Porta
and Shleifer (2014), which use World Bank surveys to study the characteristics of entrepreneurs
and the businesses they run in the formal and informal sectors of developing economies. Relatedly,
Ulyssea (2018) focuses on Brazil and integrates various theories of informality.
Finally, our paper contributes to a growing strand of literature that seeks to understand how
demographic changes aﬀect macroeconomic patterns and labor market dynamics.5 Our findings
that young individuals are more responsive to local opportunities when they arise suggest that this
trend may impact the entrepreneurial responsiveness of the economy. In that regard, our paper
is also related to Kopecky (2017), who explores the relationship between aging populations and
entrepreneurship in the United States.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II provides our theoretical framework.
Section III describes the various data sources used in the analysis, while Section IV describes the
empirical strategy that combines local historical endowments of agricultural production with current
movements in global commodity prices. Section V presents our municipality-level aggregate results.
Section VI describes the individual-level analysis and reports the key results of the paper. Finally,
Section VII builds on our main findings and tests several theories suggesting that characteristics
of local economies may aﬀect entrepreneurial responsiveness. We test these theories using crossmunicipality diﬀerences. This section also discusses the eﬀects of demographic change and the role
of the informal sector. Section VIII concludes.

II.

Theoretical Framework

To motivate our empirical analysis, we construct a two-period, three sector model of a local economy
which combines the Lucas (1978) insights of entrepreneurial choice with models of heterogeneous
firms and firm entry (Krugman (1979); Melitz (2003a); Chaney (2008)). The model features exogenous profitability shocks to the local resource sector. We provide the exact mathematical details
of this model in the appendix. Here, we describe the basic structure of the model and its key
predictions.
The local economy comprises three sectors, producing commodity goods, tradable goods, and
5

For example, see Jaimovich and Siu (2009); Jones (2010); Backus et al. (2014); Gagnon et al. (2016); Engbom
(2017).

7

local non-tradable goods. The commodity and tradable sectors provide a single homogenous good,
while the local non-tradable sector is comprised of a continuum of goods diﬀerentiated by varieties.
We assume that all individuals in the local economy have Cobb-Douglas preferences over the
tradable and non-tradable goods, with non-tradable consumption being given by a standard CES
aggregator. This implies that all individuals spend a constant fraction of their total income on
tradable goods and a constant fraction on the non-tradable composite. For simplicity, we assume
that they do not consume the commodity product. Each individual inelastically supplies one unit
of labor. A fraction ' of individuals, however, have a choice over their occupation along the lines of
Lucas (1978). They can either provide a single unit of labor, earning the prevailing wage, or choose
to become an entrepreneur in the non-tradable sector, producing a single diﬀerentiated variety.
Intuitively, these individuals faced with the entrepreneurial choice are those who are either
suﬃciently capable or suﬃciently willing to become entrepreneurs in response to new economic
opportunities. Of course, they will only choose to actually become entrepreneurs if it is suﬃciently
profitable. A key aspect of our empirical work will be to determine the characteristics of those
individuals who become entrepreneurs when opportunities arise.
We assume that this fraction ' of the population face heterogeneous non-pecuniary fixed costs
associated with becoming an entrepreneur. We interpret non-pecuniary costs broadly, as these could
arise from risk aversion related to entrepreneurship, family obligations, mental stress, etc.6
Finally, we assume that labor is perfectly mobile within the overall economy, which essentially
means that we take the local wage as exogenous. We further assume, however, that entrepreneurs
must come from the existing local population at the beginning of the model’s timeline.7
We assume that the commodity and tradable sectors are perfectly competitive, each with a
composite firm hiring workers to produce a single homogeneous good. The prices of the commodity
and tradable goods are set by global demand and are thus taken to be exogenous. As is standard
in models of heterogeneous firms, entrepreneurs operating in the non-tradable sector compete via
monopolistic competition. Each entrepreneur hires labor and operates a CRS production technology.
6

Specifically, we assume that for the fraction ' of individuals capable of becoming an entrepreneur, the distribution
on non-pecuniary fixed costs F is given by G (F ) . Of course, the initial binary determination of whether one can be
an entrepreneur or not, represented by ', likely also depends on non-pecuniary costs, in addition to characteristics
related to one’s ability to engage in entrepreneurship. Allowing for this second form of heterogeneous non-pecuniary
costs is simply useful for tractability and expositional reasons.
7
Intuitively, we are assuming that only the local population have suﬃcient local knowledge so as to be able to
take advantage of new local economic opportunities when they arise. Indeed, empirically we find that individuals
outside the municipality do not contribute to firm creation in response to the local commodity shocks. Nevertheless,
relaxing this assumption would not change the results or key implications of the model at all, but would complicate
matters since it would involve modeling the rest of the overall economy as a closed system.

8

In equilibrium, firms and individuals optimize, supply equals demand for labor, and the marginal
entrepreneur must be indiﬀerent between labor and entrepreneurship.
Now suppose that there is an exogenous increase in the price of the commodity good in period
2. We find the following result. All proofs are in the appendix.
Proposition 1. An increase in the price of the local commodity good leads to increased employment
and new firm creation in the local non-tradable sector.
To understand this result, first suppose that the number of entrepreneurs is fixed at its initial
level. The higher price raises the marginal revenue productivity of the commodity sector . In the
absence of labor mobility, this would raise wages. However, since workers are perfectly mobile,
the increased revenue productivity leads to in-migration of workers until the marginal revenue
productivity of the commodity sector is equal to the exogenous wage. The amount of labor employed
by the tradable sector remains unchanged. This inflow of workers raises aggregate income in the
local economy, which increases the demand for non-tradable goods by the local population. Since
demand is homothetic and marginal costs are unchanged, the price of the non-tradable goods does
not change. Therefore, there is an increase in output and higher employment in the non-tradable
sector. Under the assumption that the number of entrepreneurs does not change, this would lead
to higher entrepreneurial profits.
However, this in turn would then imply that entrepreneurial profits are now higher than worker
wages, which remain fixed. Thus, if we now allow for the number of entrepreneurs to adjust, there
will be firm entry. Local workers who are capable/willing of entrepreneurship, i.e. those in the
fraction ' of the initial local population, and those with suﬃciently low non-pecuniary costs will
become entrepreneurs, increasing the number of diﬀerentiated varieties and reducing entrepreneurial
profits through greater competition. This will continue until the the marginal entrepreneur is again
indiﬀerent between entrepreneurship and labor.
We explore these dynamics in Section V in the paper, illustrating how local demand shocks
aﬀect local income and employment across sectors, as well as the dynamics of firm entry. We find
that local commodity shocks do indeed lead to increased employment (driven partly by employee
migration) and local aggregate income, as well as increased firm entry in the non-tradable sector.
The model also implies the following proposition:
Proposition 2. If the stock of potential entrepreneurs increases, there is more firm entry and the
employment increase occurs more on the extensive margin than the intensive margin. That is, more
9

of the employment creation occurs within new firms rather than within incumbent firms
This result is intuitive. The larger the population willing and capable of entrepreneurship, the
larger the number of individuals that are able to take advantage of new economic opportunities,
leading to higher firm entry. If there is more firm entry, then the increase in output and employment
will be to a greater extent accommodated by new non-tradable firms, rather than existing ones.8
This second proposition indicates that local demographics can aﬀect the firm entry response, to the
extent that those individuals willing and capable of starting a new business in response to economic
opportunities are concentrated among certain demographic segments of the population.
This motivates our key goal, which is to explicitly characterize the demographic determinants of
those individuals characterized by '. In Section VI, we study this question at the individual level,
relating the propensity to respond to new opportunities through entrepreneurship to age, education,
and various skills acquired through previous employment. In Section VII, we further address the determinants of ', evaluating how municipality-level characteristics such as local financing constraints
and local human capital and knowledge spillovers might impact the ability of individuals to create
new businesses when opportunities arise. In Section VII, we also address how recent widespread
demographic trends might impact the entrepreneurial responsiveness of an economy.

III.

Data

In this section we discuss the main datasets used in our analysis. We start by describing the RAIS
dataset, which provides matched employer-employee information on all employees in the formal
sector in Brazil. We supplement this data with data on municipal agricultural crop endowments, as
well as data on global commodity prices. Additional data are discussed in the analysis part of the
paper.

A. Employer-Employee Data
The RAIS database (Relacao Anual de Informacoes Sociais) is an administrative database from the
Brazilian Ministry of Labor (MTE), which provides individual level data on the universe of formal
sector employees in Brazil. RAIS is widely considered a high quality Census of the Brazilian formal
8
In this model, the increase in output and employment is independent of the amount of firm entry. Firm entry
determines the margin on which the increases occur. Consumer welfare, however, does depend on the amount of firm
entry, since consumers benefit from greater product diversity. That output and employment increases are independent
of firm entry is due to the model’s constant markups. If markups decrease as competition increases, as in Jaimovich
and Floetotto (2008), then more firm entry would be associated with a larger employment and output boom.

10

labor market (Dix-Carneiro, 2014). The database, created in 1976, is used by several Brazilian
government agencies (such as the Brazilian Central Bank) to generate statistics for the Brazilian
economy. The RAIS database also forms the basis for national unemployment insurance payments
and other worker benefits programs. As a result, ensuring the accuracy of the information is in
the interest of both firms (who would otherwise be subject to monetary fines) and individuals (who
want to be eligible to receive government benefits), as well as the central government.
RAIS contains information on the firm and the establishment of each employee, including tax
identifiers, location, industry, and legal status. At the individual level, RAIS includes employeespecific identifiers, which allow individuals to be tracked over time and across firms (as well as
across establishments of the same firm).9 Similar to other employer-employee matched data, for
each employee we observe payroll, tenure in the firm, and hiring and firing dates. RAIS additionally
has rich personal data on gender, nationality, age, and education, as well as a few less commonly
available variables such as hours worked, reasons for hiring and firing, and contract details. Finally,
each employee is assigned to an occupational category specific to her current job. There are 2,511
such categories, which follow the detailed Brazilian’s classification of jobs (Classificacao Brasileira
de Ocupacoes - CBO), which is similar to the International Standard Classification of Occupations
(ISCO-88).
Using data on occupations, we are able to identify individuals that are managers or CEOs of a
firm, as well as lower ranked workers, both blue collar and white collar.10 Following standard practice
in the entrepreneurship literature (e.g. Kerr et al. 2015; Babina 2015), we define an entrepreneur
as the CEO or the top paid manager of a new firm in the year of birth. If no worker is classified
as CEO or manager, we use the highest paid worker in the firm. In the text, we use the terms
“entrepreneur” and “founder” interchangeably.
Furthermore, following Autor et al. (2003), Gathmann and Schönberg (2010), and Levine and
Rubinstein (2017), we distinguish between workers who perform diﬀerent types of tasks. Non-routine
cognitive tasks require creativity and problem-solving ability, as well as negotiation, management,
and coordination skills. Non-routine manual tasks require physical work together with the ability
9

Individuals with multiple jobs in a given year therefore appear multiple times. Following standard practice in
the literature (Menezes-Filho, Muendler and Ramey, 2008), we keep only the highest paying job of the individual in
a given year. If there are two or more such “highest paying” jobs, we break ties by keeping the earlier job.
10
We match the CBO classification to the International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-88) using
the procedure outlined in Muendler et al. (2004). This correspondence allows us to categorize workers into four
organizational layers, following a framework close to Caliendo and Rossi-Hansberg (2012). From bottom to top layers
they are: Blue Collar, White Collar, Managers, CEOs. Occupation data are missing for about 6% of the sample.
Please see Colonnelli and Prem (2017) for more details on the data construction.

11

to adapt to diﬀerent situations. Finally, routine tasks are all other tasks based on well-specified
processes and activities.
The analysis samples are constructed as follows. We focus on individuals that are within the
ages of 18 and 65, and who have wage data in RAIS for at least 3 years during the period 19932014, to reduce the eﬀects on our results of individuals who are not strongly attached to the
labor market. Under these restrictions, the sample includes roughly 80 million individuals. In the
municipality-level analysis, we aggregate these data across the 5,570 municipalities in Brazil, and
we restrict the sample further to municipalities with a population less than 500,000.11 We then
focus on municipalities that have positive crops production at any point in time and derive a final
sample of 5,443 municipalities. In the individual-level analysis, we additionally restrict the sample
to individuals who we can clearly link to a specific municipality at the time of the shock; that is,
at any given year, we keep individuals who were working in the same municipality the previous
year as well. From this set, we finally extract a random 10% sample of the these data to overcome
computational barriers. All analysis focuses on the period 1998-2014, since we rely on the prior
5 years (1993-1997) to construct the agricultural historical endowment for each municipality, as
discussed in Section IV. All statistics in the paper refer to these samples.
In Panel A of Table V.B, we provide summary statistics information on the relative importance
of Brazilian industries. The two largest industries in the economy are the non-tradable and services
sectors, which capture 48.9% and 26.3% of the annual number of firms, and 24.8% and 37.2% of
annual employment, respectively. Panel A also documents the annual creation of new firms across
industries, with most new firms being created in the non-tradable and services sectors.
In the empirical analysis, we focus on municipalities as the local economic unit and explore how
municipalities respond to plausibly exogenous economic shocks triggered by fluctuations in global
commodity prices. Panel B of Table 1 provides municipality level summary statistics. The average
municipality in the sample has a population of 23,680 and a GDP per capita of 3,093 (USD 2000).
There is an average (median) of 274 (64) firms and an average (median) total number of formal
private sector employees of 4,214 (850) per municipality, with significant dispersion in size across
regions. The average (median) number of new businesses created in a given municipality in a given
year is 33 (7). Once again, there is a significant heterogeneity across municipalities.
Panel C of Table 1 provides summary statistics at the individual level. On average, we find that
11

This restriction drops 30 municipalities and has essentially no impact on the results. We use this restriction to
overcome computational constraints in the individual level analysis.

12

in any given year there are 2.9 founders per each 1,000 employees. Moreover, 61% percent of all
workers are male (57% among the founders). Based on the occupational status of the workers, we
find that most workers can be characterized as either Blue Collar (48%) or White Collar (42%),
while only a small fraction consists of Managers and CEOs (4%). Founders have similar occupational
characteristics, as computed in the year before founding a firm. Additionally, we find that 32% of the
workers have less than high school education, 47% of the workers graduated from high school, and
the remaining 21% have higher education. The set of entrepreneurs appears to be more educated, as
seen in the significant diﬀerences among the set of individuals having less than high school education.
Finally, the median (average) worker is 34 (35.6) years old, while the median new entrepreneur is
significantly younger at 30 (31.9) years old.

B.

Agricultural Crops in Brazil

The Brazilian economy relies heavily on agriculture. For example, Brazil is among the largest producers in the world of coﬀee, sugarcanes, orange juice, soybean, corn and ethanol. These crops,
and others, provide the basis for the large agribusiness industry in Brazil, which represents 22% of
Brazil’s GDP, a third of its employment, and almost 40% of its export (PwC (2013)). The agribusiness industry captures not only farming production, but also the supply of farming inputs such as
machinery and seeds, as well as the selling and marketing of farm products, such as warehouses,
wholesalers, processors, and retailers.
The empirical strategy in this paper relies on local demand shocks caused by fluctuations in
the profitability of the local agricultural sector driven by global commodity prices. We obtain
information on agricultural crops from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE),
which is responsible for the census as well as most of the statistical analyses of the Brazilian economy.
The data provide the annual production of all diﬀerent agricultural crops, at the municipality level,
for the period 1993-2014. We standardize the diﬀerent crops to the same unit measure (i.e., tons) to
construct a panel dataset of the universe of agricultural crops production by Brazilian municipalities.
Panel B of Table 1 illustrates that the average aggregate dollar value of local crops in a municipality is equal to approximately 120% of local GDP, with the median equal to 15.6% of local
GDP. Similarly, the value of local crops per capita is on average $3,038. Figure 1 illustrates the
wide spatial distribution of agricultural resources across municipalities. Municipalities are divided
into quintiles based on the production value of natural resources relative to GDP in the year 2000.
The bottom quintile has production values of roughly 1% to 5% of municipality GDP. In contrast,
13

in the top quintile, municipalities have production values worth more than 45% of local GDP. The
figure illustrates significant heterogeneity across municipalities. In fact, the heterogeneity across
municipalities is even wider, given that diﬀerent municipalities specialize in diﬀerent portfolios of
agricultural products, but this is not reflected in the figure.
International commodity prices are obtained from the Global Economic Monitor (GEM) Commodities database of the World Bank, which covers our full sample period. For each crop, we create
a yearly measure of commodity prices by taking the average price within the year. In some cases,
there may be a single price that matches to multiple crops. For example, the price of tea is assigned
to both “indian tea” and “yerba mate.” Hence, we consolidate several agricultural crops to match
prices, and drop cases where we cannot establish a match between crops and commodities. We
standardize all units of measure to US dollars per ton. In the final dataset, we have 17 diﬀerent commodities present in Brazil which are traded on the international commodity markets. The
detailed presence of these agricultural commodities across municipalities and their total value per
municipality is provided in Table A.1.

IV.

Empirical Strategy

We aim to study the entrepreneurial response to new local opportunities generated by fluctuations
in local income. Simply running regressions of new firm creation on local income, however, is
confounded by reverse causality concerns. In particular, unobserved shocks to the investment opportunities of particular sets of individuals could mechanically impact local income. For example,
the introduction of local government programs providing start-up incentives to the young would
likely increase both the firm creation rate of the young as well as local income. To the extent that
such programs are unobserved by the econometrician, regressions of firm creation on local income
would reflect this reverse causality.
To address this issue, we create a measure that isolates exogenous changes in municipality level
local income over time. To do so, we identify fluctuations in the value of locally produced agricultural
commodity crops, and thus also in the profitability of the local agricultural sector, by interacting the
local agricultural endowment with movements in global commodity prices. Such commodity price
fluctuations are an important source of economic variability for emerging economies, as well as for
developed economies rich with natural resources (Fernández et al. (2018), Allcott and Keniston
(2017)). Moreover, as shown by Allcott and Keniston (2017) in the context of US oil and gas booms

14

and by Benguria et al. (2018) in the context of Brazil, such shocks do appear to increase local
demand, leading to increased employment in the local non-tradable sector.
The agribusiness sector in Brazil is large, highly developed, and highly diversified. Diﬀerent
municipalities are endowed with diﬀerent types of agricultural crops that they can grow locally. We
calculate the local value of a crop in a given year as the product of the local crop quantity (Q)
with its unit price (P ) in international commodity markets. While international prices are likely
exogenous to current municipality-specific economic conditions, quantities are less likely to be so.
We therefore hold endowments fixed, prior to the start of our sample period, so as to remove the
endogenous component in the fluctuations of commodity values. We construct a proxy for the local
endowment by averaging production quantities in the five years preceding the beginning of our
analysis sample, i.e. between 1993-1997. Using this approach circumvents potential endogeneity
concerns because historical production is likely to capture the (exogenous) spatial endowments of
agricultural crops, rather than potentially endogenous production activity, which may correlate
with unobserved local shocks. This approach is standard in the literature (see, for example, Dube
and Vargas (2013)). These historical endowments of agricultural crops are persistent due to the
accumulation of local expertise and economic activity over long periods of time, and because of the
physical characteristics of the regions such as climate and soil.
Specifically, let Qkj,98 be our proxy for the regional endowment of crop k in municipality j,
measured by the average production in the years 1993-1997. Let Pkt be the international price of
crop k in year t. The annual Crops Index (CI) for municipality j in year t is the sum over all
crops of time-invariant local agricultural endowments, multiplied by the respective time-varying
international prices:

CIjt =

X
k

Qkj,98 ⇤ Pkt

(1)

The endowment part of the formula, Qkj,98 , generates cross-sectional variation in the pre-existing
exposure of diﬀerent municipalities to diﬀerent agricultural resources. International commodity
price fluctuations generate time-series variation that is plausibly independent of shocks to local
investment opportunities. Together, they provide a municipality-year varying series of exogenous
demand shocks generated by the diﬀerential exposure of diﬀerent Brazilian municipalities to the
changing global value of agricultural commodities.
Our empirical strategy is inspired by the shift-share approach of Bartik (1991) and Blanchard

15

and Katz (1992), which interacts local manufacturing shares with national trends in manufacturing
employment to identify local income and demand shocks.12
The primary identification concern with this approach is that unobserved municipality level
shocks in Brazil could impact global commodity prices, biasing the results. For example, one such
concern is that local government programs designed to incentivize new firm creation in specific
municipalities might also lead to increased local agricultural output, driving down international
prices. We address this concern in Section V.B, finding that this is unlikely to be a problem in our
context.
We examine the impact of local endowment shocks in the top 10th percentile of crops index
fluctuations within a municipality. Specifically, we estimate the model:

ln (CIjt ) = ↵j +

t

+ ujt ,

(2)

and for each municipality year we define the shock as ûjt , which allows us to capture deviations
from municipality averages and aggregate variations over time. Figure 2 illustrates the variation we
observe in the value of municipal endowments of crops, as captured by this index. The thin grey
lines provide the time series for a 10% random sample of municipalities in our sample. The other
lines are median (solid line), 10th and 90th percentiles (dashed lines) of the distribution of residuals
in each year. As the figure illustrates, there is both significant cross-sectional variation within a
given year and considerable time variation within a given municipality in the value of agriculture
commodities.
We then let let Zjt be equal to one if ûjt is in the top 10th percentile of its distribution, and equal
to zero otherwise. We consider municipality j to be “treated” in year t if Zjt = 1. As we discuss
in Section VI, the choice of a binary shock allows us to transparently estimate the characteristics
of the individuals who create new businesses in response to local demand shocks, and to compare
these characteristics both to the average worker and the average entrepreneur in the economy. This
choice, however, is not driving any of our findings. Both at the municipality and individual level,
the results are extremely robust to the use of a continuous measure of the index ln (CIjt ), as well as
alternative binary versions of the shock that rely on diﬀerent thresholds (e.g. top 25th percentile).
We further discuss these and other robustness tests in Section V.B.

12

This strategy has been widely adopted by the economics literature. See, for instance, Gallin (2004); Saks and
Wozniak (2011); Diamond (2016), and Adelino et al. (2017).

16

V.

Municipality-Level Analysis

We start by estimating the impact of global commodity price fluctuations on municipality level
economic activity. As discussed above, our strategy interacts this time-series variation with crosssectional diﬀerences in municipal endowments of agricultural crops; that is, we use municipality-year
level variation in our crops index from equation 2 as a source of plausibly exogenous fluctuations in
local income and demand. Specifically, we estimate the following model:

Yjt = ↵j +

t

(3)

+ Zjt + Xjt + ujt ,

where Yjt is the outcome of interest, ↵j are municipality fixed eﬀects,

t

are year fixed eﬀects, Zjt

is the binary shock described earlier, and Xjt control for log-population.13

A. Local Employment and Firm Creation
The main results are presented in Table 2. We find that positive shocks to the value of local
crops generate both higher income and higher employment in the treated municipalities. Treated
municipalities experience a highly significant increase of 6.9% in the level of formal employment
(column 1). In Table A.2 in the Appendix, consistent with the model of Section II, we find that
part of the increase in employment is driven by both migration to the municipality from other
regions, as well as entry of new individuals into the labor force. In column 2 of Table 2, we find
that the increase in local employment translates into a highly significant increase of 7.8% in total
local income, as measured using aggregate payroll across all local firms.
As we illustrated through the theoretical framework of Section II, higher levels of local income
suggest new profit opportunities available to be exploited by potential entrepreneurs, particularly in
those sectors which are highly dependent on local demand conditions. We see that the commodity
price shock does indeed lead to an increase in the total number of local firms. As reported in
column 3 of Table 2, there is a statistically significant increase of 4.5% in the number of local firms
following the shock. This increase is primarily driven by the creation of new firms, rather than a
higher likelihood of survival of existing firms, which instead seems unaﬀected given the small and
statistically insignificant eﬀect on firm closures (column 4).
13
In most specifications, we use the natural logarithm of the variable of interest. The sign and significance of our
results are robust to using ln (1 + x) as dependent variable (where x is the outcome of interest in levels): while the
latter variable definition has the advantage of keeping the number of observations constant across specifications, it
also makes it harder to quantitatively interpret the coeﬃcients. For this reason, we present results where the simple
natural logarithm is used instead.

17

Table 3 illustrates the impact of the shock by economic sector, which we categorize using the
Brazilian CNAE industry codes into Agriculture and Mining (columns 1), Manufacturing (columns
2), Non-tradable (columns 3), and Services (columns 4).14 Panel A focuses on employment, and
shows a statistically significant increase in employment levels in all sectors. As illustrated in column
1, this finding is consistent with rising commodity prices having a positive direct eﬀect (11.6%) on
the sectors responsible for the production of these commodities (Agriculture and Mining). Moreover,
the evidence points to the presence of positive spillover eﬀects to other sectors. The rise in local
income seems to lead to an increase in demand for local goods and services, as illustrated by the
rise in employment in the non-tradable and services sectors. When studying the aggregate sectoral
impact on number of firms, in Panel B, we find that the vast majority of new firm creation is
accounted for by firms in the non-tradable sector (column 3), where we observe a highly statistically
significant increase of 5.8%, compared to a small 1.8% in Agriculture and Mining and even smaller
and statistically insignificant eﬀects on other sectors.
Our aggregate results emphasize the importance of entrepreneurship for the dynamics of local
economic activity. All of these findings, moreover, are consistent with the model presented in
Section II, in which shocks to the commodity sector increase local employment and local income,
subsequently leading to a strong entrepreneurial response in the local non-tradable sector. Our
findings are also consistent with Adelino et al. (2017), who study the US and similarly find that
local income shocks lead to a significant response by new firms in the non-tradable sector. All
together, these findings provide a preliminary step towards our main analysis, in which we study
the individual entrepreneurs who account for the firm creation response.
Finally, we also explore the characteristics of the newly created firms following the shock. This
test aims to understand whether these new firms are short-lived, and therefore contribute little to
long-run employment creation, relative to the average new firms in the economy. We explore these
concerns in Table 4. We construct a dataset at the firm-level covering all firms in the economy at
their year of entry. We then estimate a specification where the dependent variable is an indicator
(scaled by 1,000) for whether the firm survives for at least 1, 2, 3, and 5 years.15
14

In particular, we start from the classification used by Dix-Carneiro (2014), but combine High and Low
Tech Manufacturing into Manufacturing, and Construction and Trade into Non-tradable. We drop Transportation/Utilities/Communications from the analysis.
15
The precise specification is:
Sf jt = ↵j + t + Zjt + uf jt
where ↵j are municipality fixed eﬀects, t are year of entry fixed eﬀects, and Zjt is our top 10% binary shock.
Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level.

18

We find that, if anything, firms created in response to the local demand shock are (slightly)
more likely to survive after 2, 3 and 5 years. While survivorship just proxies for firm success, these
results provide suggestive evidence that new firms created in response to local demand shocks play
an important role in driving the persistence and propagation of aggregate economic fluctuations.
Such findings are consistent with Sedláček and Sterk (2017), who find that firm success is influenced
by aggregate conditions at the time of entry.

B.

Robustness and Additional Results

In this subsection, we describe additional tests to probe the robustness of the results and provide
further characterization of the main aggregate eﬀects. All tests are reported in the Appendix.
Influencing Global Commodity Prices
The key endogeneity concern with our approach is that the local agricultural sector is suﬃciently
large relative to global production so as to potentially influence international prices. If this were
true, then unobserved municipality level shocks impacting local firm creation, such as government
incentive schemes, might also impact global commodity prices and thus bias the results. Indeed,
Brazil is a leading global player in the production of crops, accounting for more than 10% of world’s
exports for some of them (e.g., sugar cane, coﬀee, soybeans, yerba mate, tobacco). Nevertheless, it
is useful to note that our unit of analysis is at the municipality level, rather than at the national
level.
To test the robustness of our results, we re-estimate the main specifications dropping municipalities with high levels of production of specific crops, who may be able to aﬀect global commodity
prices. In particular, we complement our municipality level data with data from the United Nations
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) to compute the share of world production of municipalities across diﬀerent crops. Panel A of Table A.3 in the Appendix reports the results after dropping
64 municipalities that have ever produced, in any given year, 1% or more of the world production
of any commodity in the period 1996-2015. In Panel B we report even more conservative results,
obtained after dropping 167 municipalities with at least a 0.5% share of world production at some
point in our sample. The results remain unaﬀected in both cases.

19

Alternative Definitions of the Shock
Table A.4 in the Appendix reports the main estimation results when we vary our definition of the
intensity of local commodity price shocks. We find that all of the main findings continue to hold,
when we focus on more moderate local endowment shocks defined as being in the top 25th percentile
relative to the municipality mean (second row).
We also find statistically significant negative eﬀects on local economic outcomes when we instead
look at negative endowment shocks. In particular, as reported in the third row of Table A.4, when
defining a negative endowment shock to be in the bottom 10% of the shock defined as ûjt in equation
2, we find a 6.5% decline in local employment and a 6.8% decline in local total income. The number
of firms falls by 4.0%, driven again by a decline in firm entry instead of increased closures of existing
firms. We find very similar findings if we define a negative endowment shock to be in the bottom
25%. These results are reported in row 4 of Table A.4.
Finally, and importantly, all of our results are robust to using a continuous log version of the
shock (fifth row), namely ln (CIjt ), which estimates the elasticity of new firm creation and other
outcomes to the value of the local agriculture endowment. For example, a 10% increase in the value
of the local endowment is associated with a 2.1% increase in employment and a 1.4% increase in the
number of firms. All estimated eﬀects are highly significant, except for the small and insignificant
eﬀects on firm closures.
Persistence of Treatment Eﬀects
Finally, we explore the persistence of the eﬀects generated by the local endowment shocks. We find
that the response of new firm creation, and economic activity more generally, to local economic
shocks, is persistent but, as we may expect, decreases gradually over time. Table A.5 reports our
main results for diﬀerent lagged definitions of the binary treatment variable. While the response is
strongest in the year of the shock (especially for new firms), we find that local economic activity
continues to positively respond one to four years after the commodity endowment shocks, and then
gradually declines.

20

VI.

Individual-Level Analysis

In this section we move to our primary analysis, motivated by Proposition 2 of section II, which
aims to determine the key characteristics of those individuals who respond to local demand shocks
by creating a new firm. We model the decision to start a business using a binary choice linear
probability model. Let the binary indicator variable Tijt denote the decision in year t of an individual
i in municipality j to become an entrepreneur, as defined in Section III.16 Analogous to the previous
analysis, we again let Zjt = 1 denote an exogenous increase in local demand in municipality j, as
proxied for by the local agricultural endowment shocks described earlier. We estimate the following
linear probability model:
Tijt = ↵j +

t

+

where ↵j denotes municipality fixed eﬀects, and

t

· Zjt + "ijt ,
denotes year fixed eﬀects. Here,

(4)
captures the

direct eﬀect of the local endowment shock on individual firm creation. Standard errors are clustered
at the municipality level. Importantly, in this analysis, we focus on individuals that are already
working in the region rather than individuals that migrate from a diﬀerent region, so as to ensure
that we can cleanly identify individuals who directly experience the change in local demand and
investment opportunities.
In this section, we focus on the role of age and an individual’s life cycle on the one hand, and skill
and experience on the other hand, as potential determinants that can explain the entrepreneurial
responsiveness of individuals to local opportunities.

A. The Importance of Lifecycle Considerations
What determines individuals’ entrepreneurial response to aggregate shocks? According to standard
models such as Lucas (1978), ability is the relevant dimension along which individuals sort into
entrepreneurship. In this type of model, to the extent that ability is an innate characteristics, the
age profile of the population does not matter per se. Other theories, however, would predict that
age does play a prominent role in the decision to start a business in response to changes in local
opportunities.17
On the one hand, if ability reflects skills accumulated over time as individuals move up in
their career, and such skills are necessary to take advantage of changes in local opportunities, it
16

In all analysis, we multiply these indicator variables for entrepreneurs by 1,000, to ease the interpretation of the
coeﬃcients.
17
See Parker (2018) for a comprehensive review.

21

is reasonable to expect that individual responsiveness to aggregate shocks would increase with age
(Lazear, 2005; Evans and Leighton, 1989). Similarly, to the extent that downpayment and financing
constraints aﬀect the ability to start a new business, older individuals again may be more responsive
to new opportunities, having had more time to develop the necessary personal wealth (Quadrini,
1999). On the other hand, young individuals may be the most responsive if, for example, they
have a greater tolerance for risk, limited outside options, an overall higher degree of flexibility in
their personal and family circumstances, or if they find the time and eﬀort involved in creating a
business less costly.

18

Ultimately, the extent to which any of these forces matter, and their relative

magnitudes, is an empirical question.
Relying on the econometric framework outlined in the previous section, we take this question to
the data by investigating the heterogeneous response of diﬀerent types of individuals to our specific
local demand shocks. In this sub-section, we center our analysis squarely around the role of age.
Figure 3 reports the increase in entrepreneurial rates in response to the shock, estimated according
to model (4), for diﬀerent age quartiles. The 25th percentile of the age distribution in the analysis
sample is 27, the median is 34, and the 75th percentile is 43.19 The results clearly illustrate that
it is young individuals -those in the bottom quartile of the age distribution- who respond strongly
to the shock. The likelihood of becoming an entrepreneur increases by 0.39 (out of 1000) under a
positive shock. When compared to the average flow of entrepreneurs in the economy (2.91 out of a
1000), this reflects a 13.4% increase. The response decreases significantly in the second quartile and
becomes statistically insignificant by the third quartile. These findings are consistent with lifecycle
considerations playing a key role in the individual entrepreneurial response.
We refine this analysis in Table 5, in which we show that the impact of age on the firm creation
response is robust to the inclusion of a variety of other demographic characteristics. Column 1 shows
the simple entrepreneurial responsiveness to the shock, controlling only for year and municipality
fixed eﬀects. As the table reports, the shock leads to an increase of 0.145 (out of a 1000) in the
probability of becoming an entrepreneur. This reflects a 5% increase in entrepreneurial activity
compared to the average flow of entrepreneurs. In column 2, we add an interaction term between
the treatment variable and the young indicator, which is equal to one in the bottom quartile of the
age distribution. This column relays the same message as Figure 3. This group of young individuals
18

See, for example, Miller 1984a; Reynolds and White 1997; Levesque and Minniti 2006; Delmar and Davidsson
2000; Arenius and Minniti 2005; Rotefoss and Kolvereid 2005; Wagner 2006; Bergmann and Sternberg 2007; Uusitalo
2001.
19
As discussed earlier, our original sample is restricted to individuals between 18 and 65 years old.

22

exhibit a striking responsiveness, more than 13 times larger, when compared to the rest of the
population.20
We next show that this result is robust in sign and magnitude to the inclusion of other controls.
In particular, in column 3, we add controls for sector fixed eﬀects, an indicator variable for whether
the individual as a high school diploma, one for higher education, and an indicator variable for
having a white collar occupation.21 The estimated coeﬃcients barely change. In column 4 we
further control for individual outside options prior to the shock, as proxied by the rank of the
individual within the wage distribution in the given year; the coeﬃcient on the interaction term
remains almost unchanged, and strongly significant, thus suggesting that diﬀerent outside options
between young and old individuals are not driving the higher responsiveness of the young to the
shock. Finally, in column 5, we report a specification where we additionally include municipality
by year fixed eﬀects, as well as all the individual controls included in column 4, thus comparing
similar individuals within the same municipality and the same year who diﬀer in age. The resulting
coeﬃcient, albeit smaller than those from the previous specifications, remains positive and strongly
statistically significant.
We next compare the distributional characteristics of the responsive entrepreneurs to the average
new entrepreneurs in the population. The procedure for doing this is described Section A.2. We
find that the average individual who starts a business tends to be younger relative to the overall
population, but that this feature is significantly more pronounced among responsive entrepreneurs.
As Figure 4 illustrates, roughly 40 percent of individuals who start a new business are in the bottom
quartile of the age distribution. However, more than 60 percent of entrepreneurs who respond to the
demand shocks are in this same quartile of age. As Figure 4 illustrates, the entire age distribution of
the responsive entrepreneurs is tilted towards younger demographics, when compared to the average
new entrepreneur in the economy. These results are consistent with the notion that the ability to
respond quickly to new economic opportunities depends crucially on flexibility and the willingness
to take risks, traits that younger individuals are significantly more likely to possess.

B.

Do Skill and Experience Matter?

So far we have illustrated that young individuals are disproportionally more likely to start a business in response to local economic shocks. Lifecycle considerations therefore seem important in
20

Specifically, the magnitude is obtained as: 0.032+0.391
⇡ 13.22.
0.032
All these variables refer to the individual occupations in year t 1. Sectors are based on the main categorization
into five sectors discussed in Section V.
21

23

understanding entrepreneurial dynamics and shock propagation mechanisms. Do skills also aﬀect
individuals’ entrepreneurial responsiveness to local economic opportunities, as suggested by Evans
and Leighton (1989), Lazear (2004), and many others? We evaluate this question by exploring heterogeneity in firm creation within the population of young individuals, focusing on several proxies
for an individual’s skill set.
Table 6 shows that skill and experience are significant determinants of individual responsiveness
within the young individuals population. Specifically, we estimate the main specification 4 across
various sample splits, with the aim of characterizing skilled versus unskilled individuals within the
young population. First, columns 1 and 2 show that responsive entrepreneurs are more likely to
have at least a high school diploma. Furthermore, individuals who were previously working in
non-routine cognitive occupations are significantly more responsive than others to the rise of local
opportunities. Recall that these occupations are those that require creativity and problem-solving
and involve tasks related to communcation, negotiation, and managmenent. The eﬀects for this
subpopulation, documented in column 3, are significantly larger than the eﬀects for the remaining
subpopulation that have not engaged in these types occupations, as shown in column 4. Given this
finding, one natural question is whether individuals who already have these skills sort into these
occupations or whether individuals gain important relevent entrepreneurial skills from working in
such occupations. That is, does experience matter? We test this in columns 5 and 6. We find that
having more experience (being in the upper half of the within firm experience distribution in their
previous job) makes young people almost 4 times more responsive than those with less experience.
All these results are consistent with Lazear (2004) and other empirical studies emphasizing the
importance of ability and acquired skills for entrepreneurial responsiveness.22
Strikingly, but conceptually in line with our previous results, Table A.7 shows that there is no
statistically significant heterogeneous response when we perform the analogous analysis for older
individuals. That is, within individuals in the top three quartiles of the age distribution, we do
not find that higher skill levels increase entrepreneurial responsiveness to local economic shocks, in
contrast to our findings with respect to the younger population. This result nicely highlights the
joint importance of lifecycle considerations together with experience and skills in allowing individuals
to form new businesses in response to rapid changes in opportunities.
Finally, as we did for age, we compare the skill characteristics of those young individuals who
22

To ensure correct inference on the heterogeneity, we re-estimate our main specification by interacting the shock
with the characteristics capturing individual skills and experience. The results are reported in the appendix Table
A.6, where we find that the diﬀerences across samples are indeed statistically significant.

24

start a firm in response to local demand shocks with the skill characteristics of the average young
entrepreneur. The results are shown in Figure 5. We first note that the average young entrepreneur
is, in fact, quite similar to the average young individual in the population in terms of skill. While
the average young entrepreneur is slightly more educated, she has similar levels of general business,
communication, and managerial skills as the average individual in the population, as measured by
working in cognitive non-routine occupations, and only slightly more experience.
In contrast, all of these traits are significantly more pronounced among those entrepreneurs who
specifically create new firms in response to the local demand shocks. For example, while only 18% of
all entrepreneurs in the population worked previously in occupations that we classify as non-routine
cognitive, strikingly, almost 50% of the responsive entrepreneurs have done so. Similar findings
apply to individual experience. We find that almost 80% of the responsive entrepreneurs have more
experience than the median. In contrast, among all entrepreneurs in the population, this applies to
only 62% of individuals.
In summary, within the young population, responsive entrepreneurs are more likely to be experienced, educated, and to have general business and managerial skills developed through working
in occupations specifically requiring those capabilities. However, skill in itself is not suﬃcient to
enhance individuals’ entrepreneurial responsiveness, as we find that among the older population,
the more skilled individuals still remain unresponsive. Again, this finding highlights the joint importance of age and lifecycle considerations, in addition to experience and skills, as important
determinants of an individual’s ability and willingness to become an entrepreneur in response to
exogenous economic shocks.

C. Robustness and Additional Results
Alternative Definitions of the Shock
As previously discussed for the municipality-level analysis, our results are strongly robust to alternative treatment definitions. In Table A.8, we further explore the individual responsiveness to both
positive and negative, as well as continuous shocks. In specification 1 and 2, we show that individual
responsiveness of the young is significantly higher both when using the continuous definition of the
shock and when using shocks defined as being in the top 25th percentile within a municipality. The
results are robust to the addition of the same set of controls (including the municipality by year
fixed eﬀects) as in the main specification of Table 5. In specifications 3 and 4, we show that the

25

likelihood of becoming an entrepreneur is lower (though not always statistically significant) when
the treatment is negative, defined as the bottom 10th or 25th percentile change in the price distribution in year t within a municipality. Interestingly, when we interact the negative treatment eﬀect
with age, we find that the young are less likely to start new businesses when economic conditions
decline. These results illustrate that young individuals are particularly responsive to changes in
local opportunities, both when such opportunities arise and when they decline.
Attrition due to Early Formation of Businesses
One additional consideration with respect to the interpretation of the results is the issue of attrition.
It might be the case that the results are mechanically driven by compositional changes in the set
of potential entrepreneurs that occur over time. For example, older individuals may be less likely
to start a business because they already operate a business they started when they were younger.
Older individuals would therefore appear to be less responsive to exogenous local opportunities,
but the finding would simply reflect the fact they many of them had already responded to previous
opportunities.
To explore whether this can explain our findings, we re-define the dependent variable F ounder,
as F ounderP re, to be equal to 1000 in a given year if the individual has founded a firm in the past
and that firm is still operating (0 otherwise). In that case, we consider individuals who already
started businesses as if they always respond to local demand shocks. We do so to explore whether,
under this most extreme case, we could reverse our findings. The results with this modified definition
of the dependent variable are reported in Table A.9. We find that both the baseline findings on
individual firm creation and the strong responsiveness of young individuals remain unchanged even
when we apply this modified version of an entrepreneur. Therefore, such a mechanical explanation
seems unlikely to drive our findings.

VII.

Discussion and Additional Implications

Our results so far indicate that within a municipality, the individuals driving the firm creation
response are both young and skilled. In this section, we discuss some additional considerations
related to these individual-level findings, including the impacts of local municipal characteristics,
the role of the informal sector in the economy’s entrepreneurial response, and finally the potential
implications of aging demographics.
26

A. Local Characteristics and the Entrepreneurial Response
The concentration of responsive entrepreneurs within the segment of young and skilled in the population suggests that the demographic characteristics of local economies may have important implications for their entrepreneurial responsiveness. In this section we discuss two diﬀerent theories
that may aﬀect the responsiveness of young individuals in the economy. Specifically, we explore
the importance of local financing constraints and the local stock of human capital. In both cases,
we provide evidence consistent with these theories using individual level analysis that compares
individuals’ entrepreneurial responsiveness across diﬀerent municipalities
To do so, we estimate the baseline individual specification, which we augment with an interaction term that aims to capture the specific characteristic of interest of the local economy. The
specification is the following:

Tijt = ↵j +

t

+

0

· Zjt +

2

· Zjt · Kj + "ijt

(5)

where everything is as in equation 4, while Kj is an indicator equal to 1 if municipality j is
in the upper 50th percentile (i.e. above median) of the distribution of a specific characteristic of
interest. All these municipality level measures to construct Kj are based on data that are fixed
at the beginning of the sample, to alleviate reverse causality concerns of the interaction term.23
We study three specific measures, as discussed in more details below. We proxy for local access to
finance using the total number of unique bank institutions per capita (so as to account for scale
eﬀects).24 We then proxy for the local stock of human capital using the average education levels
(in years) in the population. Finally, we proxy for entrepreneurial knowledge using the number of
founders per capita. In Table 7 we report the results of this estimation without additional controls
(columns 1, 3, and 5), as well as adding individual level controls (columns 2, 4, and 6).25
A.1.

Local Financing Constraints

The ability to create new firms in response to new economic opportunities may hinge on access
to finance (Evans and Jovanovic (1989); Hurst and Lusardi (2004)). Wealth required to satisfy
downpayment or collateral demands would likely be needed to form a new business. Given that
23

Data on education and founders come from RAIS, and are therefore based on the 1998 distribution, while the
dataset on banks start in 2002.
24
Data on the location of all banks across Brazil come from the Brazilian Central Bank.
25
The set of controls includes all controls of column 4 of Table 5.

27

young individuals have less time to accumulate wealth, they may be more financially constrained,
and we therefore posit that in municipalities with better access to finance the young should be even
more responsive to local demand shocks.
Our results in Table 7 (columns 1 and 2) confirm this hypothesis. We find that young individuals
are disproportionally more likely to start a new firm in areas with above median access to finance,
as defined by the number of unique banks in the municipality. These results are consistent with
the interpretation that local availability to finance enhances the ability of young individuals, who
are more responsive but more likely to be financially constrained, to start a new business and take
advantage of local opportunities.
A.2.

Local Human Capital

Given the importance of skill in explaining individuals’ entrepreneurial responsiveness, we hypothesize that local knowledge spillovers and the local stock of human capital might impact the ability of
individual entrepreneurs to start new companies. Such human capital externalities have been documented in a number of diﬀerent settings (Acemoglu and Angrist (2000); Iranzo and Peri (2009);
Moretti (2004); Rauch (1993)). Gennaioli et al. (2012) formalize this logic in the context of entrepreneurship using what they call a Lucas-Lucas model, combining the Lucas (1978) model of
entrepreneurship with the Lucas (1988) model of human capital externalities. Using regional data
from 100 countries, they provide evidence that human capital externalities are essential in accounting for regional diﬀerences in development.
In our setting, given the potential importance of local knowledge spillovers and associated human
capital externalities, we would expect young individuals to be more responsive in municipalities
with a greater stock of educated and entrepreneurial individuals. We proxy for these characteristics
using the average education of the workforce and the intensity of entrepreneurial activity, as defined
earlier. Using either measure, in columns 3 and 5 of Table 7 we find an enhanced responsiveness of
young individuals in municipalities with a high level of human capital, consistent with the theories.
Importantly, we find that these results hold also when controlling for individual characteristics.
That is, columns 4 and 6 show that individuals with similar levels of skill, measured by education
and characteristics of past occupations, respond more strongly in municipalities with a greater
concentration of human capital.

28

B.

The Informal Sector

In the analysis and discussion up until this point, we have focused exclusively on firm creation
responses in the formal sector, and shown that these new formal firms are founded primarily by young
and skilled individuals. Brazil, however, also has large levels of informality (Ulyssea (2018)). This
raises the question of whether the informal sector is also important in driving the entrepreneurial
response to new local economic opportunities.
Addressing this issue is naturally challenging due to the obvious challenges of measuring informality. For example, our primary dataset RAIS only covers the universe of Brazilian formal sector
firms. To address this issue, we utilize an alternative data source, namely the Brazilian National
Household survey (PNAD), which is an annual survey representative at the national level. This
survey aims to capture various labor market statistics and, importantly, contains information on
both formal and informal firms and workers. As a result, the survey allows us to to study the
responsiveness to local commodity price shocks of both the formal and informal sector. Since the
survey is at the state-level, counts of formal and informal employers and employees are assigned to
municipalities based on population shares in the state.26
Table 8 reports the elasticity of the number of formal and informal firms and employees in
response to the local demand shock. In column 1 we find that the number of firms in the formal
sector is highly responsive to local demand shocks, with an elasticity equal to 7.3%. The eﬀect is
highly statistically significant. In contrast, in column 2, when we explore how the number of firms
in the informal sector change in response to local demand shocks, we find that the coeﬃcient is
statistically insignificant and of extremely small magnitude, equal to -0.1%. In columns 3 and 4
we explore the elasticity of number of workers (including self-employed) with respect to the local
demand shock. Again, we find a highly statistically significant elasticity in the formal sector equal
to 4.4%. In contrast, we find no response in the informal sector, with the elasticity statistically
insignificant and close to zero.
These results show that in response to a positive local commodity shock, there is a significant
firm entry response in the formal sector driven by young, educated, and skilled individuals, with
essentially no response in the informal sector. These findings are consistent with the studies of
La Porta and Shleifer (2008) and La Porta and Shleifer (2014). Using data from World Bank
26

This assumption may impose measurement error that may lead to a downward bias of our estimated elasticities.
As long as the bias similarly aﬀect the formal and informal samples, it will allows us to explore the relative importance
of the two sectors to firm creation in response to the local income shocks.

29

surveys, these studies show that that formal sector firms in developing economies tend to be run by
highly skilled and highly educated entrepreneurs/managers. Informal sector firms tend to be small,
do not grow, and are considerably less productive than formal sector firms, even when controlling
for size. Formal sector firms also bring to bear a more varied business skill set; for instance, firms
in the formal sector make greater use of capital and external finance and engage in marketing.
They argue their results support a dual view of developing economies, in which the informal
sector firms arise primarily out of poverty, while economic growth and dynamism comes from a
formal sector comprised of productive firms run by skilled, highly educated entrepreneurs. This is
exactly what our evidence suggests. When new economic opportunities arise due to increases in
local demand, it is precisely the young, educated entreprenurs in the formal sector with the requisite
business managerial skillsets who seem to take advantage of them.

C. Demographic Change
Finally, we consider some potential implications of our findings with respect to demographic changes.
One of the most profound demographic transitions of the past 50 years has been towards aging populations. This trend is widespread, stemming from both declines in fertility rates and increased
longevity. Of all developed countries, the only one with a replacement level fertility rate is the
United States. Japan has the lowest fertility rate of all developed countries at 1.3 children per household. Such striking demographic changes could have significant implications for the entrepreneurial
responsiveness of these economies going forward.
Indeed, given our previous findings that the firm creation response is almost entirely concentrated
among the young, an older population may directly lead to less firm entry in response to new
economic opportunities. As emphasized by the model in Section II, in an older population there
would be fewer individuals with suﬃciently low non-pecuniary costs so as to find it worthwhile to
switch from paid employment to entrepreneurship due to the shock. As we have discussed, such
diﬀerences in non-pecuniary costs could be driven by a variety of lifecycle considerations, such as
increased family obligations, looming retirement, or less flexibility in general.
Our results emphasize, however, that age alone is not suﬃcient to account for the firm creation
response. Responsive entrepreneurs are also skilled. Given the importance of skill, aging populations
may impose additional indirect equilibrium eﬀects on the entrepreneurial responsiveness of the
economy. For example, in older populations there may be fewer entrepreneurs, and therefore they
may generate weaker human capital externalities (Gennaioli et al. (2012)), thus further reducing
30

the economy’s entrepreneurial responsiveness when opportunities arise.
Another possible equilibrium interaction between age and skills is suggested by Liang et al.
(2014). They argue that, in older populations, young individuals might have a more diﬃcult time
moving up the job ladder into more generalist and managerial positions. That is, moving into senior
positions takes longer in older populations. We have shown evidence that on-the-job training and
the skills acquired in such higher-level positions are important for the ability to take advantage
of new entrepreneurial opportunities. Thus, in older populations, where acquiring entrepreneurial
skills may be more diﬃcult, the entrepreneurial responsiveness of the economy may be even more
limited. We find correlations consistent with this theory in our Brazilian micro data.27

VIII.

Conclusion

In this paper we examine the characteristics of the individuals who become entrepreneurs when
local opportunities arise due to an increase in local demand. We use Brazil as our setting, which
allows us to analyze rich individual-level longitudinal data for the entire formal sector. We identify
plausibly exogenous shocks to local demand by interacting municipality level historical production
endowments of agricultural crops with contemporaneous changes in global commodity prices. These
shocks lead to higher local employment and local income, and increased firm entry in the nontradable sector.
In our main analysis, we explore the demographic and career characteristics of the individuals
leading to the local entrepreneurial response and the creation of new firms. At the individual level,
we find that the entrepreneurial response is almost entirely concentrated among the young, consistent with the idea that early in the lifecycle individuals have greater flexibility or risk tolerance,
thus allowing them to engage in entrepreneurship in response to new local economic opportunities. However, age alone is insuﬃcient to explain the firm creation response. The most responsive
individuals are not only young, but those who also have significant prior industry experience and
who have acquired relevant skills through previous engagement in occupations involving non-routine
cognitive tasks.
When exploring individual heterogeneity across municipalities, we find that the entrepreneurial
response of the young is larger in municipalities with better access to finance, and when more skilled
27

In particular, controlling for year fixed eﬀects, we find that a one standard deviation decrease in the average
age of the municipality increases by 0.16 standard deviations the share of individuals with experience in non-routine
cognitive occupations.

31

human capital is widely available. These results are consistent with the predictions of theories
highlighting the role of local financing constraints, and local knowledge spillovers, which benefit the
local young and skilled individuals. These results further emphasize how the characteristics of the
local population can have a significant impact on the entrepreneurial responsiveness of the economy.
Finally, we illustrate that the entrepreneurial responsiveness of the economy is driven entirely by
the formal sector. Using a large-scale annual survey we find no evidence for entrepreneurial responsiveness within the informal sector, consistent with the arguments of La Porta and Shleifer (2008)
and La Porta and Shleifer (2014). We conclude with a broad discussion of the potential implications
of our findings for how ongoing widespread demographic changes towards aging populations may
impact entrepreneurial responsiveness and economic dynamism.

32

REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist, “How large are human-capital externalities? Evidence
from compulsory schooling laws,” NBER macroeconomics annual, 2000, 15, 9–59.
, Song Ma, and David Robinson, “Firm Age, Investment Opportunities, and Job Creation,”
The Journal of Finance, 2017, 72 (3), 999–1038.
Allcott, Hunt and Daniel Keniston, “Dutch disease or agglomeration? The local economic
eﬀects of natural resource booms in modern America,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2017,
85 (2), 695–731.
Arenius, Pia and Maria Minniti, “Perceptual variables and nascent entrepreneurship,” Small
business economics, 2005, 24 (3), 233–247.
Autor, David H, Frank Levy, and Richard J Murnane, “The skill content of recent technological change: An empirical exploration,” The Quarterly journal of economics, 2003, 118 (4),
1279–1333.
Azoulay, Pierre, BF Jones, Daniel Kim, and Javier Miranda, “Age and High Growth
Entrepreneurship,” NBER Summer Institute. 2017.
Babina, Tania, “Destructive Creation at Work: How Financial Distress Spurs Entrepreneurship,”
2015.
Backus, David, Thomas Cooley, and Espen Henriksen, “Demography and low-frequency
capital flows,” Journal of International Economics, 2014, 92, S94–S102.
Bartik, Timothy J, “Who benefits from state and local economic development policies?,” 1991.
Basker, Emek and Javier Miranda, “Taken by Storm: Business Financing and Survival in the
Aftermath of Hurricane Katrina,” 2016.
,

, and Sergio Urzúa, “The Transmission of Commodity Price Super-Cycles,” Technical

Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.
Bergmann, Heiko and Rolf Sternberg, “The changing face of entrepreneurship in Germany,”
Small Business Economics, 2007, 28 (2-3), 205–221.

33

Bianchi, Milo and Matteo Bobba, “Liquidity, risk, and occupational choices,” Review of Economic Studies, 2012, 80 (2), 491–511.
Bilbiie, Florin O, Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J Melitz, “Endogenous entry, product variety,
and business cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), 304–345.
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Lawrence F. Katz, “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1992, 1, 1–75.
Blanchflower, David and Andrew Oswald, “What Makes an Entrepreneur?,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 1998, 16 (1), 26–60.
, Dean Karlan, and Antoinette Schoar, “What capital is missing in developing countries?,”
American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (2), 629–33.
Caliendo, Lorenzo and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “The Impact of Trade on Organization and
Productivity,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1393–1467.
Chaney, Thomas, “Distorted gravity: the intensive and extensive margins of international trade,”
American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (4), 1707–21.
Chatterjee, Satyajit and Russell Cooper, “Entry and exit, product variety, and the business
cycle,” Economic Inquiry, 2014, 52 (4), 1466–1484.
Clementi, Gian Luca and Berardino Palazzo, “Entry, exit, firm dynamics, and aggregate
fluctuations,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2016, 8 (3), 1–41.
Colonnelli, Emanuele and Mounu Prem, “Corruption and Firms: Evidence from Randomized
Audits in Brazil,” 2017. mimeo.
Decker, Ryan A, Meagan McCollum, and Gregory B Upton Jr, “Firm Dynamics and Local
Economic Shocks: Evidence from the Shale Oil and Gas Boom,” Technical Report, Working Paper
2017.
Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “The secular decline
in business dynamism in the US,” Unpublished draft, University of Maryland, 2014.
Delmar, Frédéric and Per Davidsson, “Where do they come from? Prevalence and characteristics of nascent entrepreneurs,” Entrepreneurship & regional development, 2000, 12 (1), 1–23.
34

Desai, Sameeksha, “Measuring entrepreneurship in developing countries,” in “Entrepreneurship
and economic development,” Springer, 2011, pp. 94–107.
Devereux, Michael B, Allen C Head, and Beverly J Lapham, “Aggregate fluctuations with
increasing returns to specialization and scale,” Journal of economic dynamics and control, 1996,
20 (4), 627–656.
Diamond, Rebecca, “The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers’ Diverging Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2000,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (3), 479–524.
Dix-Carneiro, Rafael, “Trade liberalization and labor market dynamics,” Econometrica, 2014,
pp. 825–885.
Dube, Oeindrila and Juan F Vargas, “Commodity price shocks and civil conflict: Evidence
from Colombia,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80 (4), 1384–1421.
Engbom, Niklas, “Firm and Worker Dynamics in an Aging Labor Market,” Technical Report,
Working Paper 2017.
Evans, David S and Boyan Jovanovic, “An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under
liquidity constraints,” Journal of political economy, 1989, 97 (4), 808–827.
and Linda S Leighton, “Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship,” The American Economic
Review, 1989, 79 (3), 519–535.
Fernández, Andrés, Andrés González, and Diego Rodriguez, “Sharing a ride on the commodities roller coaster: Common factors in business cycles of emerging economies,” Journal of
International Economics, 2018, 111, 99–121.
Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin Kramer Johannsen, and J David Lopez-Salido, “Understanding the New Normal: the role of demographics,” 2016.
Gallin, Joshua Hojvat, “Net migration and state labor market dynamics,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 2004, 22 (1), 1–21.
Gathmann, Christina and Uta Schönberg, “How general is human capital? A task-based
approach,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2010, 28 (1), 1–49.

35

Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,
“Human capital and regional development,” The Quarterly journal of economics, 2012, 128 (1),
105–164.
, Ron S Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Who creates jobs? Small versus large versus young,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, 95 (2), 347–361.
Hamilton, Barton, “Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of the Returns to SelfEmployment,” Journal of Political Economy, 2000, 108 (3), 604–631.
Hombert, Johan, Antoinette Schoar, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, “Can Unemployment Insurance Spur Entrepreneurial Activity?,” Working Paper 20717, National Bureau of
Economic Research November 2014.
Humphries, John Eric, “The Causes and Consequences of Self-Employment over the Life Cycle,”
Technical Report, Mimeo, University of Chicago 2016.
Hurst, Erik and Annamaria Lusardi, “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (2), 319 347.
Iranzo, Susana and Giovanni Peri, “Schooling externalities, technology, and productivity: Theory and evidence from US states,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2009, 91 (2), 420–431.
Jaimovich, Nir and Henry E Siu, “The young, the old, and the restless: Demographics and
business cycle volatility,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (3), 804–26.
and Max Floetotto, “Firm dynamics, markup variations, and the business cycle,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 2008, 55 (7), 1238–1252.
Jones, Benjamin F, “Age and great invention,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2010, 92
(1), 1–14.
Kerr, Sari, William R Kerr, and Ramana Nanda, “House money and entrepreneurship,”
Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2015.
Kihlstrom, Richard E. and Jean-Jacques Laﬀont, “A General Equilibrium Entrepreneurial
Theory of Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion,” Journal of Political Economy, 1979, 87 (4),
719–748.
36

Kirzner, Israel M, “Competition and Entrepreneurship,” 1973.
, Discovery and the capitalist process, University of Chicago Press, 1985.
Kopecky, Joseph Victor, “An aging dynamo: demographic change and the decline of entrepreneurial activity in the United States,” 2017.
Krugman, Paul R, “Increasing returns, monopolistic competition, and international trade,” Journal of international Economics, 1979, 9 (4), 469–479.
Lazear, Edward, “Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2005, 23 (4), 649–680.
Lazear, Edward P, “Balanced skills and entrepreneurship,” The American Economic Review,
2004, 94 (2), 208–211.
Levesque, Moren and Maria Minniti, “The eﬀect of aging on entrepreneurial behavior,” Journal
of Business Venturing, 2006, 21 (2), 177–194.
Levine, Ross and Yona Rubinstein, “Smart and illicit: who becomes an entrepreneur and do
they earn more?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (2), 963–1018.
Liang, James, Hui Wang, and Edward P Lazear, “Demographics and entrepreneurship,”
Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2014.
Lucas, Robert E., “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” The Bell Journal of Economics,
1978, 9 (2), 508–523.
Lucas, Robert E, “On the mechanics of economic development,” Journal of monetary economics,
1988, 22 (1), 3–42.
McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruﬀ, “What are we learning from business training and entrepreneurship evaluations around the developing world?,” The World Bank Research
Observer, 2013, 29 (1), 48–82.
,

, and

, “Returns to capital in microenterprises: evidence from a field experiment,” The

quarterly journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (4), 1329–1372.
Melitz, Marc J, “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry
productivity,” Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.

37

Menezes-Filho, Naercio Aquino, Marc-Andreas Muendler, and Garey Ramey, “The
Structure of Worker Compensation in Brazil, with a Comparison to France and the United States,”
2008, 90 (2), 324–346.
Mian, Atif R and Amir Sufi, “What explains high unemployment? The aggregate demand
channel,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2012.
Miller, Joan G, “Culture and the development of everyday social explanation.,” Journal of personality and social psychology, 1984, 46 (5), 961.
Miller, Robert A, “Job matching and occupational choice,” Journal of Political Economy, 1984,
92 (6), 1086–1120.
Moretti, Enrico, “Workers’ education, spillovers, and productivity: evidence from plant-level
production functions,” American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (3), 656–690.
Moskowitz, Tobias J. and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, “The Returns to Entrepreneurial
Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle?,” American Economic Review, September 2002,
92 (4), 745–778.
Muendler, Marc-Andreas, Jennifer Poole, Garey Ramey, and Tamara Wajnberg, “Job
Concordances for Brazil: Mapping the Classificaçao Brasileira de Ocupaçoes (CBO) to the International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-88),” University of California, San Diego,
unpublished manuscript, 2004.
Naudé, Wim, “Entrepreneurship, developing countries, and development economics: new approaches and insights,” Small business economics, 2010, 34 (1), 1.
Parker, Simon C, The economics of entrepreneurship, Cambridge University Press, 2018.
Porta, Rafael La and Andrei Shleifer, “The Unoﬃcial Economy and Economic Development,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2008, pp. 275–352.
and

, “Informality and development,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2014, 28 (3), 109–26.

Pugsley, Benjamin W and Aysegul Sahin, “Grown-up business cycles,” 2015.
PwC, “Agribusiness in Brazil: an overview,” 2013.

38

Quadrini, Vincenzo, “The importance of entrepreneurship for wealth concentration and mobility,”
Review of income and Wealth, 1999, 45 (1), 1–19.
Rauch, James E, “Does history matter only when it matters little? The case of city-industry
location,” The quarterly journal of economics, 1993, 108 (3), 843–867.
Reynolds, Paul Davidson and Sammis B White, The entrepreneurial process: Economic
growth, men, women, and minorities, Praeger Pub Text, 1997.
Rotefoss, Beate and Lars Kolvereid, “Aspiring, nascent and fledgling entrepreneurs: An investigation of the business start-up process,” Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 2005, 17
(2), 109–127.
Saks, Raven E and Abigail Wozniak, “Labor reallocation over the business cycle: New evidence
from internal migration,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2011, 29 (4), 697–739.
, “The divide between subsistence and transformational entrepreneurship,” Innovation policy and
the economy, 2010, 10 (1), 57–81.
, “Creative destruction,” Capitalism, socialism and democracy, 1942, 825, 82–85.
Sedlácek, Petr, “Lost generations of firms and aggregate labor market dynamics,” Technical Report, Tech. rep., WP 2014.
Sedláček, Petr and Vincent Sterk, “The growth potential of startups over the business cycle,”
American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (10), 3182–3210.
Sedlacek, Petr, Benjamin Pugsley, Vincent Sterk et al., “The Nature of Firm Growth,” in
“2017 Meeting Papers” number 196 Society for Economic Dynamics 2017.
Stroebel, Johannes and Joseph Vavra, “House prices, local demand, and retail prices,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2014.
Ulyssea, Gabriel, “Firms, informality, and development: Theory and evidence from Brazil,” American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (8), 2015–47.
Uusitalo, Roope, “Homo entreprenaurus?,” Applied economics, 2001, 33 (13), 1631–1638.
Wagner, Joachim, “Are nascent entrepreneurs "Jacks-of-all-trades"? A test of Lazear’s theory of
entrepreneurship with German data,” Applied Economics, 2006, 38 (20), 2415–2419.
39

Figure 1

Spatial Distribution of Commodities
The map shows the cross sectional variation in the value of crop production relative to the GDP at the
municipality level. Darker shades of blue indicate municipalities where crops are more relevant, according
to a split by quintiles of the empirical distribution in 2000.

40

Figure 2

Residualized Crops Index
The graph captures the variation in the residuals ûjt , estimated from equation 2 in the paper. We plot
these regression residuals (thin gray lines) for a 10% random sample of all the municipalities in our sample
over 1998-2014. The solid lines indicate the median, while the dashed lines indicate the tenth and ninetieth
percentiles of the empirical distribution.

41

Figure 3

Entrepreneurial Response by Age Group

-.2

0

.2

.4

.6

The coeﬃcients reported in the graphs are estimates of n from the model Tinjt = ↵nj + nt + n · Zjt + "injt ,
estimated on diﬀerent age quartiles n. An observation in the model is an individual i, in age quartile n,
municipality j, and year t. Tinjt is an indicator for being a new entrepreneur. Zjt is the commodity shock.
Age quartiles are computed within the 10% analysis sample. The standard deviation bands are obtained from
standard erros clustered at the municipality level. The magnitudes of the coeﬃcients are in per-thousand
points.

Q1

Q2

Q3

42

Q4

Figure 4

0

.2

.4

.6

Comparison of Age Distribution
The graph reports the probability of being in each of the four diﬀerent quartiles of the age distribution for
individuals in the group of all workers (blue - population), in the group individuals who start a new firm in a
given year (red - entrepreneurs), and individuals in the group of entrepreneurs who start a firm in response
to the commodity shock (green - responsive entrepreneurs). The age quartiles are computed within the 10%
analysis sample. The probabilities for the whole population are 0.25 by construction. The probabilities for
the group of new entrepreneurs are computed from the data as the share of new entrepreneurs in each age
quartile. The probabilities for the group of responsive entrepreneurs are obtained starting from estimates of
n from the model Tinjt = ↵nj + nt + n · Zjt + "injt estimated on the sample of individuals belonging to
the n th age quartile (for n 2 {1, 2, 3, 4}). An observation in the model is an individual i, in subsample
n, municipality j, and year t. Tinjt is an indicator for being a new entrepreneur, ↵ and are municipality
and time fixed eﬀects, Zjt is the commodity shock. Each probability is then computed as the ratio n /
(where is the coeﬃcient from the model above estimated on the whole population) multiplied by 0.25 (the
probability of being in each quartile). More details are discussed in Section A.2.

Q1
population

Q2

Q3
new entrep.

43

Q4
responsive entrep.

Figure 5

Comparison of Skill Distribution
The graph reports the conditional probability of having the characteristics reported on the y-axis, as discussed
in the paper, for individuals in the group of all workers (blue - population), in the group individuals who
start a new firm in a given year (red - entrepreneurs), and individuals in the group of entrepreneurs who
start a firm in response to the commodity shock (green - responsive entrepreneurs). We focus on the set
of “young” individuals only, i.e. in the bottom quartile of the age distribution in the analysis sample. The
conditional probabilities are constructed analogously to Figure 4, and as discussed in Section A.2.

Educ: High school or more

Occ: Non-routine cognitive

Experience > median

0

.2

.4

young
young responsive entrep.

44

.6

.8

1

young new entrep.

Table 1

Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics on the main analysis samples, as described in Section III. All averages
from RAIS therefore refer to the period 1998-2014. Panel A describes the importance (as shares of firms,
employees, and new firms) of each sector in the economy. Panel B describes municipality level data. Panel
C describes describes individual level characteristics for all workers and founders, respectively.
A: Industry Composition - Annual Data (Shares)
Firms

Employees

New Firms
0.034

Agirculture/Mining

0.068

0.095

Manufacturing

0.130

0.235

0.116

Non-tradable

0.489

0.248

0.554

Transp./Utilities/Commodities

0.050

0.050

0.055

Services

0.263

0.372

0.242

B: Municipality Composition - Annual Data
Obs.

Mean

SD

Median

RAIS
# Firms

82,463

274.9

761.1

64

# Employees

82,463

4214.5

13197.1

850

# New Firms

82,463

33.5

91.7

7

Population

82,463

23680.8

45180.7

10676

GDP per capita (2000 US)

82,463

3093.8

3764.037

2217.473

Value of Commodities / GDP

5,443

1.2

3.7

0.156

Value of Commodities / Population

5,443

3038.7

10782.5

254.9

Other Data Sources

C: Individuals - Annual Data
All

Founders

Obs.

Mean

Obs.

Mean

Founders of new firm (every 1000)

23,838,803

2.91

69,351

1000

Males

23,838,803

61%

69,351

57%

Age

23,838,803

35.6

69,351

31.9

Blue collar worker

23,838,803

48%

69,351

40%

White collar worker

23,838,803

42%

69,351

50%

Manager

23,838,803

4%

69,351

4%

Education dummy: less than High School

23,838,803

32%

69,351

17%

Education dummy: High School

23,838,803

47%

69,351

64%

Education dummy: more than High School

23,838,803

21%

69,351

19%

45

Table 2

Aggregate Results
This table reports the estimated eﬀect of commodity price shocks on several municipality-level outcomes. The
analysis sample covers the period 1998-2014 and its construction is described in Section III. The empirical
specification is Yjt = ↵j + t + Zjt + Xjt + ujt , as described in Section V. Total Employment is the total
number of employees, Total Income is the sum of payroll across all firms, Number of Firms is the total
number of firms, and Number of Closures is the total number of firms that exit. All dependent variables are
in logs. Zjt is the top 10% local shock indicator generated from the crops index, as described in Section IV.
All specifications include controls for log-population, year dummies and municipality fixed eﬀects. Standard
errors are clustered by municipality. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.
(1)

Treatment
Year FE

(2)

(3)

(4)

Total

Total

Number

Number

Employment

Income

Firms

Closures

0.069***

0.078***

0.045***

-0.008

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.004)

(0.007)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Municipality FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

80,903

80,903

80,903

66,152

Municipalities

5,443

5,443

5,443

5,420

46

Table 3

Aggregate Results by Sector
This table reports the estimated eﬀect of commodity price shocks on several municipality-level outcomes
across the four main sectors of the economy. The analysis sample covers the period 1998-2014 and its
construction is described in Section III. The empirical specification is Yjt = ↵j + t + Zjt + Xjt + ujt , as
described in Section V. Total Employment is the total number of employees, Total Income is the sum of payroll
across all firms, Number of Firms is the total number of firms, and Number of Closures is the total number
of firms that exit. All dependent variables are in logs. Zjt is the top 10% local shock indicator generated
from the crops index, as described in Section IV. All specifications include controls for log-population, year
dummies and municipality fixed eﬀects. Standard errors are clustered by municipality. *,**, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Panel A: By Sector - Employment
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Agriculture /
Mining

Manufacturing

Non-tradable

Services

0.116***

0.023*

0.049***

0.057***

(0.012)

(0.013)

(0.009)

(0.008)

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Municipality FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Treatment

Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

71,980

66,293

77,971

80,347

Municipalities

5,161

5,086

5,435

5,443

Panel B: By Sector - Number of Firms
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Manufacturing

Non-tradable

Services

0.018***

0.007

0.058***

0.006

(0.007)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.005)

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Municipality FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

71,899

66,243

77,962

80,344

Municipalities

5,161

5,084

5,435

5,443

Agriculture /
Mining
Treatment

47

Table 4

New Firms - Ex-Post Outcomes
This table reports the estimated eﬀects of commodity price shocks on the survival probability of newly
created firms. The analysis sample covers the period 1998-2014 and its construction is described in Section
III. The empirical specification is Sf jt = ↵j + t + Zjt + uf jt . The dependent variable is a variable that
equals 1,000 if the new firm survived more than 1, 2, 3 or 5 years, respectively, and takes value 0 otherwise.
Zjt is the top 10% local shock indicator generated from the crops index, as described in Section IV. All
specifications include controls for year of entry dummies and municipality fixed eﬀects, and f indicates a
firm. Standard errors are clustered by municipality. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.
(1)
Survive
Treatment

(2)
1

Survive

(3)
2

Survive

(4)
3

Survive

-.608

3.02**

5.9***

4.81***

(1.28)

(1.36)

(1.73)

(1.69)

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Municipality FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Survived every 1000

837

708

626

521

Observations

2,440,013

2,256,662

2,056,949

1,643,689

Municipalities

5,409

5,397

5,384

5,321

48

5

Table 5

Young Responsiveness
This table reports the estimated eﬀect of commodity price shocks on the probability of becoming an entrepreneur. The analysis sample covers the period 1998-2014 and its construction is described in Section III.
The basic empirical specification (column 1) is Tijt = ↵j + t + · Zjt + "ijt , as described in Section VI, and
where Zjt is the top 10% local shock indicator generated from the crops index, as described in Section IV.
Columns 2, 3, 4, and 5 add diﬀerent sets of fixed eﬀects, and include an interaction term constructed as an
indicator equal to 1 for individuals in the bottom quartile of the age distribution in the sample. In column
3, we add sector fixed eﬀects, an indicator variable for whether the individual as a high school diploma, one
for higher education, and an indicator variable for having a white collar occupation. In column 4, we also
add a control for the rank of the individual within the wage distribution. The dependent variable, Founder ,
is an indicator equal to 1000 if the individual has founded a firm in year t, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors
are clustered by municipality. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

Treatment

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Founder

Founder

Founder

Founder

Founder

0.145***

0.032

0.037

0.053

(0.046)

(0.046)

(0.046)

(0.046)

0.391***

0.380***

0.347***

0.242***

(0.106)

(0.106)

(0.106)

(0.089)

Treatment X Young
Year

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Municipality

Y

N

N

N

N

Municipality X Age Bottom Quart

N

Y

Y

Y

N

Municipality X Year

N

N

N

N

Y

Sector

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

Individual controls

N

N

Y

Y

Y

Wage at previous job

N

N

N

Y

Y

23.8

23.8

23.8

23.8

23.8

Observations (mil)

49

Table 6

Heterogeneity Within Municipalities
This table reports the estimated eﬀect of commodity price shocks on the probability of becoming an entrepreneur, within the sample of individuals in the bottom quartile of the age distribution in the sample.
The analysis sample covers the period 1998-2014 and its construction is described in Section III. We estimate
the main individual level specification, namely Tijt = ↵j + t + · Zjt + "ijt , across various sample splits,
with the aim of characteriing skilled versus unskilled individuals within the young population. The first
two columns split the sample into individuals with high school or higher education (column 1) versus others
(column 2). The second split is between individuals who engaged in non-routine cognitive occupations in
t 1 (column 3) versus others (column 4). The third split is between individuals with above (column 5) or
below years of within-firm experience in the t 1 and others (column 6). The dependent variable, Founder , is
an indicator equal to 1000 in year t if the individual has founded a firm in year t, and 0 otherwise. Standard
errors are clustered by municipality. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.

Treatment
Partition
Partition Criteria

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Founder

Founder

Founder

Founder

Founder

Founder

0.468***

-0.022

0.813***

0.242**

0.566***

0.147

(0.126)

(0.154)

(0.234)

(0.112)

(0.168)

(0.115)

Education

Non-routine Cognitive

Experience

>=HS

<HS

Yes

No

>median

<median

Year FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Municipality FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

5.342

1.249

1.334

5.256

3.331

3.259

Observations (mil)

50

Table 7

Heterogeneity Across Municipalities
This table reports the estimated eﬀect of commodity price shocks on the probability of becoming an entrepreneur, exploring heterogeneous eﬀects across municipalities. We estimate the specification Tijt =
↵j + t + 0 · Zjt + 2 · Zjt · Kj + "ijt , where Kj is an indicator equal to 1 if municipality j is in the
upper 50th percentile (i.e. above median) of the distribution of a specific characteristic of interest. All
municipality level measures to construct Kj are based on data that are fixed at the beginning of the sample.
Columns 1 and 2 split the sample by the total number of unique bank institutions per capita. Columns
3 and 4 split the sample by the average education levels (in years) in the population. Columns 5 and 6
split the sample by the number of founders per capita. Individual Controls include sector fixed eﬀects, an
indicator variable for whether the individual as a high school diploma, one for higher education, an indicator
variable for having a white collar occupation, and a control for the rank of the individual within the wage
distribution. Standard errors are clustered by municipality. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Treatment
Treatment X PV

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Founder

Founder

Founder

Founder

Founder

Founder

0.190

0.199*

0.306

0.319***

0.062

0.042

(0.117)

(0.115)

(0.109)

(0.108)

(0.177)

(0.175)

0.395**

0.398**

0.701**

0.664**

0.350*

0.380*

(0.197)

(0.197)

(0.331)

(0.333)

(0.205)

(0.202)

Partition Variable (PV)

Banks

Banks

Education

Education

Founders

Founders

Year FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Municipality FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Individual Controls

N

Y

N

Y

N

Y

Observations (mil)

6.590

6.590

6.590

6.590

6.590

6.590

51

Table 8

Aggregate Results: Formal vs Informal Sector
This table reports the estimated eﬀect of commodity price shocks on the number of formal and informal
firms and workers in a given municipality. All the outcomes are obtained starting from PNAD data from
2009-2014, as discussed in the paper. State level counts of formal and informal firms/workers are assigned to
municipalities based on population shares. The count of workers in column 3 and 4 include both employees
and self-employed. All dependent variables are in logs. The Crops Index is the continuous log version defined
in equation 2, so as to capture elasticies. All specifications include controls for log-population, year dummies
and municipality fixed eﬀects. Standard errors are clustered by municipality. *,**, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
(1)

(2)

(3)

Formal

Informal

Formal

Informal

0.073***

-0.001

0.040***

-0.001

(0.009)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.003)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firms
Crop Index
Year FE

(4)

All workers

Municipality FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

21,726

21,726

21,726

21,726

Municipalities

5,435

5,435

5,435

5,435

52

Appendix
Shai Bernstein, Emanuele Colonnelli, Davide Malacrino, and Tim McQuade

A.1.

Theoretical Model

To motivate our empirical analysis, we construct a two-period, three sector model of a local economy
which combines the Lucas (1978) insights of entrepreneurial choice with a model of heterogeneous
firms and firm entry. The model features exogenous profitability shocks to the local commodity
sector in period 2. In the model, the local economy comprises three sectors, producing commodity
goods, tradable goods, and local non-tradable goods, indexed respectively by j 2 {C, T, N } . The
commodity and tradable sectors provide a single homogenous good. The local non-tradable sector
is comprised of a continuum of diﬀerentiated goods, indexed by varieties !.

A. Individuals
All individuals in the local economy have Cobb-Douglas preferences over the tradable and nontradable goods, given by the specification:
U = (1

↵) log Ct,T + ↵ log Ct,N ,

where Ct,N is a composite good given by the Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) CES aggregator

Ct,N

0M
ˆt
@
=
ct,N (!)
0

1

1

d! A

1

,

⇤
This is the substantially revised version of a paper previously titled “Marginal Entrepreneurs”. Shai Bernstein
is with Stanford University, Graduate School of Business, and NBER; Emanuele Colonnelli is with University of
Chicago, Booth School of Business; Davide Malacrino is with the IMF, and Tim McQuade is with Stanford Graduate
School of Business. The views expressed in this article/presentation are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the IMF, its Executive Board or IMF management. We are grateful to Nick Bloom, Giacomo
De Giorgi, Rebecca Diamond, Florian Ederer, Callum Jones, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Ross Levine, Song Ma, Luigi
Pistaferri, Josh Rauh, David Robinson, Amit Seru, Andrei Shleifer, Per Stromberg, as well as seminar participants
at Alabama, Brigham Young, Columbia, Duke, EEA meetings, Fondazione Rodolfo DeBenedetti workshop, IFN,
IMF, Statistics Norway, Stockholm School of Economics, Red Rock Finance conference and Stanford University.
We are grateful to the Stanford Institute for Innovation in Developing Economies (SEED), the Private Enterprise
Development in Low-Income Countries (PEDL) Initiative by the Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR), the
Stanford Center for International Development (SCID), and the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL)
Governance Initiative for financial support.

1

with > 1 and Mt equal to the equilibrium number of varieties produced in the non-tradable sector.
The Cobb-Douglas upper tier implies each individual spends a fraction 1 ↵ of her total income
on tradable goods and a fraction ↵ of her total income on the non-tradable composite. Due to
hometheticitiy of CES preferences, standard results then imply that the total demand for variety !
in the non-tradable sector is equal to:
Ct,N (!) = Yt pt,N (!)

Pt,N 1 ,

where Yt is aggregate local income, pt,N (!) is the price of variety !, and Pt,N is the aggregate price
index:
✓ˆ M t
◆ 11
( 1)
Pt,N =
pt,N (!)
d!
0

dual to the CES aggregator.
Each individual inelastically supplies one unit of labor. Paid employment in any of the sectors
earns a wage wt . We assume that labor is perfectly mobile within the overall economy, which means
that we take the local wage w1 = w2 = w as exogenous and constant through time.
We further assume, however, that entrepreneurs, i.e. those who create a business in the nontradable sector, must come from the existing local population in an initial period 0, i.e. the existing
local population at the beginning of the model’s timeline. We denote the size of this existing
population by L0 . A fraction ' of these individuals have a choice between entrepreneurship and paid
employment along the lines of Lucas (1978). Thus, the size of the pool of potential entrepreneurs
is 'L0 .
These individuals can either provide a single unit of labor, earning the prevailing wage, or choose
to become an entrepreneur in the non-tradable sector, producing a single diﬀerentiated variety !,
earning profits ⇡N . Each entrepreneur produces a single diﬀerentiated variety, so the total number
of entrepreneurs is equal to the number of varieties produced M. Each individual i in the fraction
' of the initial local population capable of entrepreneurship faces a non-pecuniary fixed cost Fi
associated with becoming an entrepreneur. These costs are heterogeneous among this population
and we denote their distribution by G (F ) .
As we discussed in the main text, we are essentially assuming that only the existing local
population has suﬃcient local knowledge so as to be able to take advantage of new local economic
opportunities when they arise. While this strikes us as a reasonable supposition and is indeed
confirmed in the data, it is important to note that relaxing this assumption would not change the
results or key implications of the model at all. However, doing so would complicate the model since
it would involve formalizing the rest of the overall economy as a closed system.

B.

Production

The commodity sector and tradable sector are perfectly competitive, each with a composite firm
producing a homogeneous good. The prices of the commodity good and tradable good are set
by global demand and are thus taken to be exogenous. We normalize the price of the tradable
good Pt,T to be equal to one and denote the commodity good price by Pt,C . The commodity sector
1
hires lt,C unskilled workers at wage w and earns revenue Rt,C = At,C lt,C
, where 0 < < 1 and
At,C = ⌦C Pt,C is the revenue productivity, equal to the physical productivity ⌦C times the price of
the commodity good in period t. The tradable sector hires lt,T workers at wage w and earns revenue
1
Rt,C = At,T lt,T
, where > 0 and At,T = ⌦T Pt,T . Profit maximization requires that the marginal

2

revenue product of inputs be equal to the marginal cost of hiring that input
(1

) At,C lt,C = w

(6)

(1

) At,T lt,T = w

(7)

in each sector.
The non-tradable sector comprises a continuum of diﬀerentiated goods denoted by !, produced
by monopolistically competitive firms run by individual entrepreneurs. Following standard modeling
devices in the heterogeneous firms literature, we assume that an individual entrepreneur operates
the following CRS production technology:
qt,N (!) = lt,N (!) .
That is, one unit of labor produces one unit of diﬀerentiated product. Standard results on monopolistic competition imply that the price is equal to the usual constant markup over marginal
cost.
pt,N (!) =
w
1
For each variety !, the quantity produced / labor employed and entrepreneurial profits are:
lt,N (!) = ↵Yt pt,N (!) Pt,N 1
✓
◆
pt,N (!) 1
1
⇡t,N (!) =
↵Yt
Pt,N

,

where recall Yt is aggregate local income. Note that each diﬀerentiated variety carries the same
price. This implies that the total amount of diﬀerentiated product that consumers demand, and
thus also total employment in the non-tradable sector, is equal to:
1 ↵Yt
.
w

Mt lt,N =

It further implies that each entrepreneur earns the same profits ⇡t,N = ↵Yt / Mt .

C. Equilibrium
In equilibrium, firms and individuals optimize and supply equals demand for skilled and unskilled
labor. Aggregate income in the local economy equals1 :
Yt = lt,C w + lt,T w + lt,N w + Mt ⇡t,N
= lt,C w + lt,T w + ↵Yt ,
which when solved simplifies to:

(lt,C + lt,T ) w
(8)
1 ↵
Finally, the marginal entrepreneur must be indiﬀerent between entrepreneurship and skilled labor.
This pins down the cutoﬀ non-pecuniary fixed cost:
Yt =

⇡t,N
1

Ft⇤ = w.

We assume that the local population does not share in the profits of the commodity or tradable sectors

3

(9)

All individuals in the population 'L0 with Fi < Ft⇤ will find it strictly optimal to work as an
entrepreneur. The total number of entrepreneurs is therefore:
Mt = 'L0 G (Ft⇤ )

(10)

Recall that labor is freely mobile, i.e. labor supply is perfectly elastic, so that lt,T and lt,C are
functions of the exogenous wage w. Equilibrium thus involves solving, in each period t, for the labor
employed in the commodity and tradable sectors, aggregate income Yt , and the equilibrium number
of entrepreneurs Mt .

D.

Proofs

We study the eﬀects of an exogenous increase in the price Pt,C of the commodity good in period 2.
We are particularly interested in the eﬀects of such an increase on employment and firm entry in
the non-tradable sector.
D.1.

Proof of Proposition 1

Suppose that the number of entrepreneurs in period 2 remained fixed at its initial level M1 . The
higher price raises the revenue productivity of the commodity sector A2,C in period 2. In the absence
of labor mobility, this would raise wages. However, since workers are perfectly mobile, the increased
revenue productivity leads to in-migration of workers until the marginal revenue productivity of the
commodity sector is again equal to the exogenous wage w. Also due to perfect mobility, and since
there is no change in the revenue productivity of the tradable sector, the amount of labor employed
by the tradable sector remains the same in period 2 as in period 1. This implies that there is an
increase in the total number of workers employed by the commodity and tradable sectors, which
raises aggregate income Y , which then in turn increases the demand for non-tradable goods. Since
demand is homothetic and marginal costs, i.e. local wages, are unchanged, the price of non-tradable
goods does not change. Therefore, there is increased output and higher employment in the nontradable sector. Under the assumption that the number of entrepreneurs does not change, this
would lead to higher entrepreneurial profits.
However, this would then imply that entrepreneurial profits are now higher than wages. If
we now allow for the number of entrepreneurs to adjust, there must be firm entry, as long as
' > 0. Those in the fraction ' of the initial local population, and those with suﬃciently low
non-pecuniary costs will choose to become entrepreneurs, increasing the number of diﬀerentiated
varieties and reducing entrepreneurial profits through greater competition. This will continue until
the the marginal entrepreneur is again indiﬀerent between entrepreneurship and labor. Due to
perfect mobility, the amount of labor employed by the commodity and tradable sectors will remain
at the same levels, pinned down by the exogenous wage.
Mathematically, from equations (6) and (7), it is clear that:
@lt,C
@lt,T
> 0,
= 0.
@Pt,C
@Pt,C
From equation (8), we therefore know that @Yt /@Pt,C > 0. Since the wages remain unchanged, the
price of the non-tradable good remains unchanged between periods 1 and 2. Furthermore, since all
agents spend a fraction ↵of their income on non-tradable consumption, it follows that the increase
in aggregate local income implies an increase in aggregate non-tradable employment. We also know
from equation (10) that @Mt /@Ft⇤ > 0. The higher the non-pecuniary cutoﬀ, the more entrepreneurs
4

there are. Implicitly diﬀerentiating equation (9), we get:
@Ft⇤
=
@Pt,C

@⇡t,N @Yt
@Yt @Pt,C
@⇡t,N @Mt
@Mt @Ft⇤

1

.

Since ⇡t,N = ↵Yt / Mt , it is clear that entrepreneurial profits are increasing in aggregate income and
decreasing in the number of entrepreneurs. Therefore, both the numerator and the denominator in
the expression above are negative. This implies that @Ft⇤ /@Pt,C > 0, which in turn implies that
@Mt /@Pt,C > 0. Thus if P2,C > P1,C we have M2 > M1 ,which completes the proof.
D.2.

Proof of Proposition 2

First, due to perfect mobility, lt,C and lt,N are completely determined by the revenue productivities
and the exogenous wage. Thus, by equation (8), it is clear that aggregate income is independent of
the number of entrepreneurs Mt . Moreover, since the price of the non-tradable good is a constant
markup over the constant wage, this further implies that aggregate non-tradable employment is
also independent of Mt . The number of entrepreneurs only determines the per-entrepreneur level
of employment/output. Thus, the increase in the number of entrepreneurs determines whether the
increase in employment between periods 1 and 2 occurs on the extensive or intensive margin.
Suppose that for a given potential pool of entrepreneurs 'L0 , the equilibrium cutoﬀ in period 2
is F2⇤ . Now suppose that the potential pool of entrepreneurs is smaller, with '˜ < '. Note then that
'L
˜ 0 G (F2⇤ ) < 'L0 G (F2⇤ ) , which in turn implies:
↵Y2
↵Y2
>
.
⇤
'L
˜ 0 G (F2 )
'L0 G (F2⇤ )
In other words, F2⇤ can no longer be the equilibrium cutoﬀ, because at that cutoﬀ the number of
entrepreneurs would be smaller, which implies higher entrepreneurial profits. But then equation (9)
could not hold. So F̃2⇤ > F2⇤ . But this implies ⇡
˜2,N > ⇡2,N , which requires M̃2 < M2 . That is, there
is a smaller firm entry response between periods 1 and 2 if the potential pool of entrepreneurs is
smaller. This completes the proof.

A.2.

Estimating Entrepreneur Characteristics

In this section, we describe how to formally estimate the distributional charactersitcs of those
entrepreneurs who start a firm in response to local demand shocks. This is be useful in comparing
the characteristics of these entrepreneurs to the characterstics of the average entrepreneur in the
Brazilian population, as discussed in Section VI.
As in the main text, let the binary indicator variable Tijt denote the decision in year t of an
individual i in municipality j to become an entrepreneur. We again let Zjt = 1 denote a time of
exogenous increase in local demand in municipality j, as proxied for by local agricultural endowment
shocks. Let T1ijt and T0ijt denote the choice to become an entrepreneur when Zjt = 1 and Zjt = 0,
respectively. Then we focus on the “responsive entrepreneurs”, namely those individuals who start
a business in response to the endowment shock; that is, an individual i for whom T1ijt = 1 and
T0ijt = 0 or, equivalently, T1ijt > T0ijt . Our goal is to estimate the size and characteristics of this
population.
Towards this end, we investigate heterogeneity in the entrepreneurial response to local demand

5

shocks by sorting on individual characteristics. Specifically, let the variable n index demographic
categories (e.g. quartiles) of a characteristic of interest such as age. We then estimate the following
linear probability model for each subpopulation indexed by n, in particular for young individuals
and then again for old individuals:
Tinjt = ↵nj +

nt

+

n

(11)

· Zjt + "injt .

where ↵nj denote municipality fixed eﬀects and nt denote time fixed eﬀects. We allow each
subpopulation to have its own baseline level of entrepreneurship and to have its own time trend.
Two assumptions are key to our empirical strategy. First, as long as Zjt is uncorrelated with the
error term, this specification provides a consistent estimate of n . Second, we assume monotonicity,
which says that T1ijt
T0ijt for all i. This rules out cases where an individual starts a business
when economic opportunities are weak, but does not start a business when opportunities are strong.
The assumptions of orthogonality and monotonicity imply that:
P (T1injt > T0injt ) = E [T1injt

T0injt ]

= E [Tinjt |Zjt = 1]
=

n.

E [Tinjt |Zjt = 0]

Within this framework, the treatment coeﬃcient n reveals not only the increase in the probability
to become an entrepreneur, but also the proportion of individuals in demographic category n who
are responsive entrepreneurs.
Additionally, we would like to determine the distribution of characteristics conditional on being a
responsive entrepreneur. This will allow us to compare their characteristics to the overall population
of workers and to the overall set of entrepreneurs. We can accomplish this with Bayes’s rule.
Let Xi be the characteristic of interest. Then, conditional on an individual i being a responsive
entrepreneur, the probability that i is in category n can be calculated as follows:
P (Xi = n|T1ijt > T0ijt )
P (T1ijt > T0ijt |Xi = n)
=
=
P (Xi = n)
P (T1ijt > T0ijt )

n

where
is found by estimating equation (11) on the entire population. This implies that the
distribution of characteristics of responsive entrepreneurs is given by:
P (Xi = n|T1ijt > T0ijt ) =

n

P (Xi = n) .

The same statistics for all entrepreneurs in the population are computed directly from the data, as
the fraction of individuals who create a new firm in a given year and that are in a particular age
quartile.

6

Table A.1

Agricultural Endowments Across Municipalities
This table provides a break down of agricultural crops and the number of municipalities in which they are
being produced. The table also provide information on average value of these crops in 2000. We started with
66 crops. We found prices fro 26 crops. Six of these (bean, broadbean, pea, rye, sunflower, triticale) were
discarded as we were only able to find a price for generic “grains”. Among the remaining 20, 3 diﬀerent types
of coﬀee are aggregated into the “Total coﬀee” category in the table below. Similarly two types of cotton are
aggregated in a unique “total cotton” category. As a result from these aggregation we are left with the 17
types of crops listed below.
Crops

Total Municipalities

Total Value (USD Billions)

Sugarcanes

3529

204.38

Total Coﬀee

2030

9.87

Soybeans

1495

9.26

Maize

5003

3.67

Rice

4045

2.43

Cotton

1210

2.06

Tobaccos

973

2.05

Yerba mate

541

1.05

Cocoa

278

0.57

Wheat

815

0.32

Rubber

421

0.09

Sorghums

375

0.07

Indiantea

7

0.06

Orange

3763

0.05

Barley

183

0.03

Oatmeal

411

0.01

Banana

3870

0.01

7

Table A.2

Aggregate Results: Sources of Employment Creation
This table reports the estimated eﬀect of commodity price shocks on several municipality-level outcomes,
splitting across sources of employment creation. The analysis sample covers the period 1998-2014 and its
construction is described in Section III. The empirical specification is Yjt = ↵j + t + Zjt + Xjt + ujt ,
as described in Section V. The dependent variable in column 1 is the total number of employees who were
either unemployed or informal (i.e. who were not in the RAIS dataset) in t 1. The dependent variable
in column 2 is the total number of employees who were working in a diﬀerent municipality in t 1. The
dependent variable in column 3 is the total number of employees who were working in the same municipality
in t 1. All dependent variables are in logs. Zjt is the top 10% local shock indicator generated from the
crops index, as described in Section IV. All specifications include controls for log-population, year dummies
and municipality fixed eﬀects. Standard errors are clustered by municipality. *,**, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
(1)

(2)

(3)

Employment from:
Treatment
Year FE

Unemployment / Informality

Diﬀerent municipaliy

Same municipality

0.066***

0.068***

0.071***

(0.009)

(0.010)

(0.008)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Municipality FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

80,456

79,630

80,845

Municipalities

5,443

5,443

5,443

8

Table A.3

Aggregate Results: Dropping “World Producer” Municipalities
This table reports the estimated eﬀect of commodity price shocks on several municipality-level outcomes,
excluding municipalities who produce a large share of the world production of any crop. The analysis sample
covers the period 1998-2014 and its construction is described in Section III. The empirical specification is
Yjt = ↵j + t + Zjt + Xjt + ujt , as described in Section V. Total Employment is the total number of
employees, Total Income is the sum of payroll across all firms, Number of Firms is the total number of firms,
and Number of Closures is the total number of firms that exit. All dependent variables are in logs. Zjt is the
top 10% local shock indicator generated from the crops index, as described in Section IV. In Panel A (Panel
B), the sample excludes municipalities that ever produced 1% (0.5%) or more of the world production of
any commodity in any year in the period 1996-2015. All specifications include controls for log-population,
year dummies and municipality fixed eﬀects. Standard errors are clustered by municipality. *,**, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A - Dropping 1% World Producers
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Total

Total

Number

Number

Employment

Income

Firms

Closures

0.069***

0.078***

0.045***

-0.007

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.004)

(0.007)

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Municipality FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Treatment

Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

79,943

79,943

79,943

65,271

Municipalities

5,379

5,379

5,379

5,356

(2)

(3)

(4)

Panel B - Dropping 0.5% World Producers
(1)

Treatment
Year FE

Total

Total

Number

Number

Employment

Income

Firms

Closures

0.069***

0.077***

0.045***

-0.006

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.004)

(0.007)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Municipality FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

78,404

78,404

78,404

63,821

Municipalities

5,276

5,276

5,276

5,253

9

Table A.4

Aggregate Results: Heterogeneity by Type of Shock
This table reports the estimated eﬀect of commodity price shocks on several municipality-level outcomes,
using diﬀerent variations of the commodity shock, as defined in Section V.B. The analysis sample covers
the period 1998-2014 and its construction is described in Section III. The empirical specification is Yjt =
↵j + t + Zjt + Xjt + ujt , as described in Section V, but where Zjt is either in the top 10% (row 1), top
25% (row 2), bottom 10% (row 3), or bottom 25% (row 4). In row 5, Zjt is the continuous version of the
shock, as defined by equation 2. Total Employment is the total number of employees, Total Income is the
sum of payroll across all firms, Number of Firms is the total number of firms, and Number of Closures is the
total number of firms that exit. All dependent variables are in logs. All specifications include controls for
log-population, year dummies and municipality fixed eﬀects. Standard errors are clustered by municipality.
*,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Total

Number of

Firm

Employment

Income

Firms

Closures

Treatment - Top 10%

0.069***

0.078***

0.045***

-0.008

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.004)

(0.007)

Treatment - Top 25%

0.057***

0.063***

0.036***

-0.009*

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.003)

(0.005)

-0.065***

-0.068***

-0.040***

0.004

(0.008)

(0.009)

(0.004)

(0.007)

-0.047***

-0.048***

-0.037***

-0.001

(0.005)

(0.006)

(0.003)

(0.005)

0.206***

0.222***

0.143***

-0.009

(0.020)

(0.021)

(0.011)

(0.017)

Treatment - Bottom 10%
Treatment - Bottom 25%
Treatment - Continuous variable

10

Table A.5

Aggregate Results: Persistence of the Shock
This table reports the estimated eﬀect of commodity price shocks on several municipality-level outcomes,
exploring how persistent the eﬀects of the shocks are. The analysis sample covers the period 1998-2014 and
its construction is described in Section III. The empirical specification is as described in Section V. Total
Employment is the total number of employees, Total Income is the sum of payroll across all firms, Number
of Firms is the total number of firms, and Number of Closures is the total number of firms that exit. All
dependent variables are in logs. In column 1, the treatment is the top 10% local shock indicator generated
from the crops index, as described in Section IV. Columns 2 to 5 indicate diﬀerent variations of the main
treatment variable, where the shock refers to 1, 2, 3, or 4 years before year t, respectively. Each row indicates
a diﬀerent dependent variable, and therefore each cell represents the coeﬃcient of one single regression. All
specifications include controls for log-population, year dummies and municipality fixed eﬀects. Standard
errors are clustered by municipality. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.
(1)
Lag treatment
Total employment
Total income
Total number of firms
Number of closures

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0

1

2

3

4

0.069***

0.066***

0.051***

0.041***

0.028***

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.005)

0.078***

0.068***

0.057***

0.049***

0.036***

(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.006)

0.045***

0.038***

0.030***

0.030***

0.021***

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.003)

-0.008

0.000

-0.018**

-0.000

0.003

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.008)

11

Table A.6

Heterogeneity Within Municipality: Interactions
This table reports the estimated eﬀects of commodity price shocks on the probability of becoming an entrepreneur, testing for heterogeneous treatment eﬀects across individuals with diﬀerent skills, within the set
of yong individualas (i.e. in the bottom quartile of the age distribution). The empirical specification is
Tijt = ↵j + t + ↵jP V + tP V + 0 · Zjt + 1 · P Vijt + 2 Zjt P Vijt + "ijt , where Zjt is the top 10% local shock
indicator generated from the crops index, as described in Section IV. P Vijt is an indicator variable that characterizes an individual’s skill. In column 1, P Vijt = 1 if in t 1 the individual has at least a high school level
of education. In column 2, P Vijt = 1 if in t 1 the individual was working in an occupation that required
cognitive non-routine skills. In column 3, P Vijt = 1 if in t 1 the individual had above median within-firm
level of experience. The dependent variable, Founder , is an indicator equal to 1000 if the individual has
founded a firm in year t, and 0 otherwise. All specification includes fixed eﬀects for year, municipality, year
by partition variable, and municipality by partition variable. Standard errors are clustered by municipality.
*,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Treatment
Treatment X Partition Variable (PV)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Founder

Founder

Founder

-0.022

0.242**

0.147

(0.153)

(0.112)

(0.115)

0.490**

0.571**

0.418**

(0.196)

(0.249)

(0.197)

Partition Variable

Education

Non-Routine Cognitive

Experience

Year FE

Y

Y

Y

Municipality FE

Y

Y

Y

Year X PV FE

Y

Y

Y

Municipality X PV FE

Y

Y

Y

Baseline control for PV

Y

Y

Y

Observations

6,590,390

6,590,390

6,590,390

12

Table A.7

Heterogeneity Within Municipalities: Old
This table reports the estimated eﬀect of commodity price shocks on the probability of becoming an entrepreneur, within the sample of individuals in the top three quartiles of the age distribution in the sample.
The analysis sample covers the period 1998-2014 and its construction is described in Section III. We estimate
the main individual level specification, namely Tijt = ↵j + t + · Zjt + "ijt , across various sample splits, with
the aim of characteriing skilled versus unskilled individuals within the old population. The first two columns
split the sample into individuals with high school or higher education (column 1) versus others (column 2).
The second split is between individuals who engaged in non-routine cognitive occupations in t 1 (column
3) versus others (column 4). The third split is between individuals with above (column 5) or below years of
within-firm experience in the t 1 and others (column 6). The dependent variable, Founder , is an indicator
equal to 1000 in year t if the individual has founded a firm in year t, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors
are clustered by municipality. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

Treatment
Partition
Partition Criteria

(3)

(4)

(1)

(2)

(5)

(6)

Founder

Founder

Founder

Founder

Founder

Founder

0.063

0.053

0.144

0.039

0.0232

0.096

(0.063)

(0.055)

(0.110)

(0.049)

(0.067)

(0.061)

Education

Non-routine Cognitive

Experience

>=HS

<HS

Yes

No

>median

<median

Year FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Municipality FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

11.000

6.295

3.488

13.800

8.664

8.583

Observations (mil)

13

Table A.8

Young Responsiveness: Robusteness to Diﬀerent Shock Definitions
This table reports the estimated eﬀect of commodity price shocks on the probability of becoming an entrepreneur, using diﬀerent variations of the commodity shock, as defined in Section VI.C. The analysis
sample covers the period 1998-2014 and its construction is described in Section III. The basic empirical
specification (column 1) is Tijt = ↵j + t + · Zjt + "ijt , as described in Section VI, but where Zjt is either
in the top 10% (specification 1), top 25% (specification 2), bottom 10% (specification 3), or bottom 25%
(specification 4). In specification 5, Zjt is the continuous version of the shock, as defined by equation 2.
Columns 2, 3, 4, and 5 add diﬀerent sets of fixed eﬀects, and include an interaction term constructed as an
indicator equal to 1 for individuals in the bottom quartile of the age distribution in the sample. In column
3, we add sector fixed eﬀects, an indicator variable for whether the individual as a high school diploma, one
for higher education, and an indicator variable for having a white collar occupation. In column 4, we also
add a control for the rank of the individual within the wage distribution. The dependent variable, Founder ,
is an indicator equal to 1000 if the individual has founded a firm in year t, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors
are clustered by municipality. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Founder

Founder

Founder

Founder

Founder

.251**

.239***

.248***

.278***

(.098)

(.090)

(.090)

(.091)

.0204***

.017***

.011***

.069***

(.004)

(.004)

(.004)

(.009)

Continuous Index
Specification 1

Continuous Index X Young
Top 25%

Specification 2

-.010

.007

(.031)

(.031)

(.031)

.301***

.283***

.247***

.196***
(.060)

(.069)

(.069)

(.069)

-.093**

-.072*

-.070*

-.078*

(.042)

(.042)

(.042)

(.043)

-.080

-.100

-.128

-.168**

(.102)

(.103)

(.103)

(.084)

-.077***

-.0549*

-.053*

-.055*

(.029)

(.029)

(.029)

(.029)

Bottom 10% X Young
Bottom 25%

Specification 4

-.017

(.032)
Top 25% X Young
Bottom 10%

Specification 3

.066**

Bottom 25% X Young

-.091

-.112*

-.140**

-.209***

(.067)

(.067)

(.059)

(.059)

Year

Y

Y

Y

N

N

Municipality

Y

N

N

N

N

Municipality X Age Bottom Quart

N

Y

Y

N

N

Municipality X Year

N

N

N

Y

Y

Sector

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

Individual controls

N

N

Y

Y

Y

Wage at previous job

N

N

N

Y

Y

23.8

23.8

23.8

23.8

23.8

Observations (mil)

14

Table A.9

Young Responsiveness: Attrition
This table reports the estimated eﬀect of commodity price shocks on the probability of becoming an entrepreneur, where we consider as vary the definition of entrepreneur to account for attrition. The analysis
sample covers the period 1998-2014 and its construction is described in Section III. The basic empirical
specification (column 1) is Tijt = ↵j + t + · Zjt + "ijt , as described in Section VI, and where Zjt is the top
10% local shock indicator generated from the crops index, as described in Section IV. Columns 2, 3, 4, and
5 add diﬀerent sets of fixed eﬀects, and include an interaction term constructed as an indicator equal to 1
for individuals in the bottom quartile of the age distribution in the sample. In column 3, we add sector fixed
eﬀects, an indicator variable for whether the individual as a high school diploma, one for higher education,
and an indicator variable for having a white collar occupation. In column 4, we also add a control for the
rank of the individual within the wage distribution. The dependent variable, FounderPre, is a variable equal
to 1000 in year t if the individual has founded a firm prior to year t and that firm is still alive in year t, and
0 otherwise. Standard errors are clustered by municipality. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Treatment

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

FounderPre

FounderPre

FounderPre

FounderPre

FounderPre

0.126***

0.016

0.021

0.034

(0.044)

(0.044)

(0.044)

(0.045)

0.380***

0.369***

0.341***

0.238***

(0.101)

(0.101)

(.106)

(.085)

Treatment X Young
Year

Y

Y

Y

N

N

Municipality

Y

N

N

N

N

Municipality X Age Bottom Quart

N

Y

Y

N

N

Municipality X Year

N

N

N

Y

Y

Sector

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

Individual controls

N

N

Y

Y

Y

Wage at previous job

N

N

N

Y

Y

23.8

23.8

23.8

23.8

23.8

Observations (mil)

15

