                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     TRADE AND DOMESTIC PRODUCTION NETWORKS

                                           Felix Tintelnot
                                         Ayumu Ken Kikkawa
                                           Magne Mogstad
                                          Emmanuel Dhyne

                                         Working Paper 25120
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w25120


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2018




We are grateful to Costas Arkolakis, Emmanuel Farhi, Teresa Fort, Matthew Grant, Basile Grassi,
Oleg Itskhoki, Rob Johnson, Harry Li, Alejandra Lopez Espino, Ferdinando Monte, and Andrei Nagornyi
for useful conversations. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bank of Belgium, any other institution with which one of the authors
is affiliated, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Felix Tintelnot, Ayumu Ken Kikkawa, Magne Mogstad, and Emmanuel Dhyne. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade and Domestic Production Networks
Felix Tintelnot, Ayumu Ken Kikkawa, Magne Mogstad, and Emmanuel Dhyne
NBER Working Paper No. 25120
October 2018, Revised January 2019
JEL No. E2,F14,L14

                                              ABSTRACT

We use Belgian data with information on domestic firm-to-firm sales and foreign trade transactions
to study how international trade affects firms' unit cost and the consumer's real wage. We show theoretically
that the gains from trade depend on domestic firm-to-firm linkages. Furthermore, we develop a tractable
model of endogenous network formation, allowing firm-to-firm connections to form or break in response
to import price changes. Quantitatively, we find that for small import price changes, alternative models
that assume a roundabout production structure, despite falsely implying that all firms are connected
within one link, yield similar predictions for the change in the real wage to the model that fits the actual
linkages between firms. For large changes in the price of foreign goods, both the existing network
structure and the endogeneity of the connections between firms are found to be quantitatively important.


Felix Tintelnot                                       Magne Mogstad
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                 University of Chicago
5757 South University Avenue                          1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637                                     Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                              and NBER
tintelnot@uchicago.edu                                magne.mogstad@gmail.com

Ayumu Ken Kikkawa                                     Emmanuel Dhyne
Sauder School of Business                             National Bank of Belgium
2053 Main Mall                                        Boulevard de Berlaimont, 14
Vancouver, BC                                         1000 Brussels
Canada                                                Belgium
ken.kikkawa@sauder.ubc.ca                             emmanuel.dhyne@nbb.be




Online Appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25120/w25120.appendix.pdf
1    Introduction
Over the past few decades, the focus of research on international trade has shifted from
countries and industries towards firms. This shift is in no small part due to the increased
availability of firm-level transaction data on trade. One important insight from these data
is that few firms directly import or export goods (Bernard, Jensen, Redding, and Schott,
2007). Even if firms themselves do not import or export, they may still buy from or sell to
domestic firms that trade internationally. Capturing this channel, however, is challenging
since domestic firm-to-firm transactions are rarely observed. In the absence of such data,
quantification of the effects of foreign trade requires strong assumptions, such as a common
intermediate good (Eaton and Kortum, 2002, and Blaum, Lelarge, and Peters, 2016) or the
same import shares across firms within broad industries (Caliendo and Parro, 2015, and
Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare, 2014).
    The goal of this paper is to combine data on domestic firm-to-firm sales with information
on foreign trade transactions to study how international trade affects the real wage and firms’
unit costs. Our analysis employs a detailed dataset of Belgian firms, which is based on several
data sources that we have linked through identifiers. Annual accounts provide data on input
factors and output, custom records and intra-EU declarations give information on exports
and imports, and a value-added tax (VAT) registry provides information on domestic firm-
to-firm transactions. Using these data, we empirically examine several new dimensions of
firms in international trade before developing and estimating a model of trade and domestic
production networks.
    In Section 2, we describe the data, construct the domestic production (buyer-supplier)
network of the Belgian economy, and provide new empirical findings on firms’ indirect ex-
posure to foreign trade. Our data reveal that most firms are heavily dependent on foreign
inputs, but only a small number of firms show that dependence through the direct imports
observed in firm-level transaction data on trade. For example, in a majority of firms, at
least 39% of input costs are spent on goods that are imported directly or indirectly. By com-
parison, exports are concentrated in a relatively small number of firms, even if one includes
indirect exports through sales to domestic buyers which subsequently trade internationally.
Furthermore, the production network is found to be sparse. The median number of domestic
suppliers is equal to 33 and the median number of domestic buyers is equal to 9.
    In Sections 3 and 4, we develop and estimate a model of domestic production networks
and international trade. In our model, firms combine imports, inputs produced by domestic
firms, and labor to produce differentiated products that can be sold either to households,
other firms, or abroad. In Section 3, we assume a fixed network structure (i.e., the buyer-
supplier links are exogenous). Firms endogenously decide their input purchases from their
suppliers as well as how much labor to hire. We first show that the unit cost change for

                                              1
an individual firm due to a change in the price of foreign inputs depends on the share of
its input costs that is spent on goods that are imported directly or indirectly. Furthermore,
the change in the real wage depends on the firm-level cost increases weighted by firms’ sales
to domestic households. We then demonstrate that two economies with identical firm-level
domestic sales, imports, exports, value added, and intermediate good purchases, can have
different aggregate welfare outcomes in response to changing the barriers to trade. In other
words, firm-level outcomes observed in standard datasets without firm-to-firm transactions
are not sufficient to calculate the welfare gains from trade. The structure of how firms are
connected to each other matters in a small open economy because it affects how much of a
foreign shock is absorbed by the domestic economy.
    We next assess the quantitative effect of domestic firm-to-firm production networks on the
usual gains-from-trade computations. To this end, we compare estimates from our model
with a fixed network structure to those we obtain using existing approaches that either
assume a common or industry-specific intermediate good. For sizable changes in foreign
price, we find that data on and modeling of the domestic production network is quantitatively
important for accurately measuring the impacts on production costs and real wages. By
comparison, for small changes in foreign prices the effect on real wages depends little on
whether we use our model with a fixed network structure or the alternative approaches.
    We note that our results are not just a feature of Hulten (1978)’s theorem or the envelope
theorem applied to an efficient economy. First of all, due to mark-ups our economy is not
efficient. Second, we consider in the baseline a small but not infinitesimal shock to foreign
prices (a 10% increase). Third, and most importantly, we show that to apply the typical
Hulten (1978) formula to a small open economy to gauge the effects of a foreign price change
on real wages, even in an efficient economy, two adjustment terms would be needed: (a) the
response in the domestic wage, which is an equilibrium object that depends on the network
structure and affects the terms of trade; (b) the share of imports used directly and indirectly
in the production of exports, which again depends on the network structure. When we
apply the Hulten formula to evaluate counterfactual changes, we find its predictions to be
inaccurate.
    While assuming a fixed network structure is convenient to take the model to the data, it
does not allow buyer-supplier relationships to change in response to trade shocks. In Section
4, we therefore develop a model of trade with endogenous network formation. In particular,
we let firms optimally choose their set of suppliers (i.e. the firm’s sourcing strategy) subject
to a buyer-supplier-specific fixed cost for adding a supplier. Allowing for endogenous network
formation is challenging for two reasons. First, firms face a large discrete choice problem of
which suppliers to include in their sourcing strategy. Second, firms’ sourcing strategies are
interdependent, creating a large fixed point problem: Firms take into account the expected


                                               2
sourcing strategies of others in order to determine their own optimal sourcing strategy, all
while knowing that other firms are thinking in the same way.
    Building on Jia (2008) and Antras, Fort, and Tintelnot (2017), we overcome the first
challenge by using lattice theory to solve firms’ large combinatorial discrete choice problems.
To address the second challenge, we consider the formation of an acyclic network, postulating
an ordering of firms and restricting the eligible set of suppliers to firms that appear prior
to the buyer.1 While restrictive, this assumption allows us also to solve a model of firm
trade with endogenous formation of domestic buyer-supplier relationships. After estimating
the model, we use it to quantify how international trade affects firms’ production costs and
consumer prices in a small open economy with and without endogenous network formation.
We find that endogenous formation of buyer-supplier relationships tends to attenuate the
costs of a sizable negative trade shock (i.e., a large increase in the foreign price) and amplify
the gains of a sizable positive trade shock (i.e., a large decrease in the foreign price).
    Our paper contributes to a growing literature on the economy-wide effects of foreign
sourcing and the welfare gains from trade.2 The welfare gains from trade formulas derived
by Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012) illustrate
that the gains from trade are higher in models with intermediate goods than in models that
abstract from intermediate inputs. Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2014) discuss that these
are not the same economies from the perspective of the data, as the economy with interme-
diates has higher gross production compared to value added. In this paper, when conducting
comparisons across models, we ensure that the commonly observed firm-level and aggregate
outcomes are all held fixed. Models may differ in the implied linkages between firms. We
illustrate theoretically that these domestic firm-to-firm linkages matter, and illustrate quan-
titatively that they affect counterfactual predictions for large changes to trade costs while
simpler models can still yield useful predictions for small changes to trade costs.
    Many studies use aggregate data only, relying on the assumption that firms’ import in-
tensities are equalized. Using firm-level data on trade transactions, Blaum et al. (2016) show
that accounting for heterogeneity in import exposure significantly affects the measurement of
the gains from international trade. Their model assumes that firms can import directly and
purchase a common intermediate good. Taking advantage of data on domestic firm-to-firm
transactions, we relax the assumption of a common intermediate good and derive a parsimo-
nious sufficient statistics formula for a model with a fixed production network. We also go
beyond the fixed network structure, solving a model of endogenous network formation with
   1
     See Spiegler (2016) for a recent contribution in economics studying belief formation in a directed acyclic
network.
   2
     For related contributions on foreign sourcing, see for example Antràs and Helpman (2004), Antràs and
Helpman (2008), Rodrı́guez-Clare (2010), Garetto (2013), Halpern, Koren, and Szeidl (2015), Gopinath
and Neiman (2014), Amiti and Konings (2007), Goldberg, Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova (2010), De
Loecker, Goldberg, Khandelwal, and Pavcnik (2016), and Amiti, Dai, Feenstra, and Romalis (2017).


                                                      3
a finite number of firms and fixed costs for adding suppliers. This contribution builds on
the global sourcing model of Antras et al. (2017). While they distinguish between final good
and intermediate good sectors, we consider a more general input-output structure between
firms. In addition, our model captures not only the firms’ decisions with respect to foreign
sourcing but also their choices of domestic sourcing strategies.3
    Our paper also relates to a literature on the formation of domestic production networks.4
Oberfield (2018) develops a theory in which the network structure of production forms en-
dogenously among firms that each purchase a single input. Lim (2018) develops a dynamic
model of network formation in which each firm has a continuum of domestic suppliers. How-
ever, with a continuum of suppliers and buyers, the sales from one firm to another are
negligibly small, and a link between two particular firms has no effect on aggregate out-
comes.5 In contrast to these papers, we develop a model of endogenous network formation
with a finite set of suppliers and incorporate both firm exporting and importing decisions.
With a discrete set of firms, we are able to match granular firm-level outcomes such as the
number of domestic suppliers and customers.
    Finally, our paper relates to a literature that analyzes the propagation of idiosyncratic
firm-level shocks. Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), Boehm, Flaaen, and Pandalai-Nayar (2015),
and Carvalho, Nirei, Saito, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2016) use natural disasters to study the
propagation of shocks in production networks. Carvalho and Voigtländer (2015) analyze the
adoption of inputs by innovators and the evolution of the domestic production network.6
Building on this empirical evidence, we extend the analysis of shock propagation to foreign
   3
      Our work is also related to the analysis in Caliendo and Parro (2015) and Ossa (2015). They find the
gains from trade to be larger when taking sectoral input-output linkages into account.
    4
      A growing body of work studies how firms meet international trading partners. See for example Chaney
(2014), Chaney (2016), Morales, Sheu, and Zahler (2015), and Eaton, Kinkins, Tybout, and Xu (2016).
In particular, Bernard, Moxnes, and Saito (2016b) adapt the model of Antras et al. (2017) in which firms
search for domestic suppliers in different locations, where each location has a continuum of intermediate-
good-producing firms. Furusawa, Inui, Ito, and Tang (2017) develop a variant of the global sourcing model
of Antras et al. (2017) and use Japanese buyer-supplier link data to test the model’s predictions. Our work
is also related to the literature on the measurement and formation of global value chains such as Johnson
and Noguera (2012) and Antràs and de Gortari (2017), recently surveyed by Johnson (2018).
    5
      Taschereau-Dumouchel (2018) also considers a finite number of firms in his theory of cascades and
fluctuations in an economy with a fixed set of connections between — potentially inactive — firms and
endogenous firm entry.
    6
      This paper is also related to the literature on how micro-shocks can have aggregate outcomes. Hulten
(1978) provides conditions under which the underlying network structure is irrelevant for quantifying the
propagation of shocks — up to a first-order approximation — as long as firms’ initial size and the mag-
nitudes of the idiosyncratic shocks are observed. Gabaix (2011) provides conditions under which granular
shocks can affect aggregate fluctuations. Acemoglu, Carvalho, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012) study the
transmission of shocks along sectoral input-output networks. Magerman, De Bruyne, Dhyne, and Van Hove
(2016) test both channels with the Belgium domestic firm-to-firm data. In recent work, Baqaee and Farhi
(2017) illustrate that the second-order effects of shock propagation arising from networks can be large, and
Baqaee and Farhi (2018) provide a general framework for aggregating idiosyncratic shocks at the first-order
or second-order approximation, allowing for distortions.


                                                     4
trade shocks and demonstrate that firms that are not directly exposed to international trade
can still be significantly affected by changes in the price of foreign goods. While our theory
assumes simple solutions for the pricing game between firms, Kikkawa, Magerman, and
Dhyne (2018) explore the segmentation of markets for different buyers, with supplier firms
having heterogeneous bargaining power in the supplier-buyer relationships. We additionally
allow buyer-supplier relationships to change in response to these shocks and characterize
how these extensive margins affect firm-level and aggregate outcomes.7


2       Trade and production networks: Data and evidence
This section describes the data and documents firms’ direct and indirect exposure to foreign
trade.


2.1     Data sources and sample selection
Our analysis draws on three administrative data sources from Belgium, accessible only at the
National Bank of Belgium, for the years 2002-2014. These data sources can be linked through
unique identifiers, assigned and recorded by the government for the purpose of collecting
value-added taxes (VAT). Below we briefly describe our data and sample selection, while
additional details are given in Appendix C.
    The first data source is the Business-to-Business (B2B) transactions database. (See also
Dhyne, Magerman, and Rubinova, 2015.) By law, all Belgian firms are required to file
the annual sales to each buyer (provided the annual sales to a given buyer exceeds 250
Euro). Thus, the B2B dataset allows us to measure accurately the identity of the firms’
suppliers and buyers. The second data source is the annual accounts filed by Belgian firms
merged with firms’ VAT tax declarations. These data contain detailed information from
the firm’s balance sheets on output (such as revenues) and inputs (such as capital, labor,
intermediates) as well as 4-digit (NACE) industry codes and geographical identifiers at the
zip code level. In addition, the annual accounts include information about ownership shares
in other enterprises. The third datasource is the Belgian customs records and the intra-EU
trade declarations. These data contain information about international trade transactions


    7
     Other recent contributions to determining the effects of networks include Baqaee (2014), Carvalho and
Grassi (2017), as well as in the context of financial frictions, Bigio and La’o (2016) and Liu (2016). In terms of
studying the structure of the network itself, Atalay, Hortacsu, Roberts, and Syverson (2011) characterize the
buyer-supplier network of the US economy, Bernard, Dhyne, Magerman, Manova, and Moxnes (2018) study
how much of the Belgian firm size heterogeneity is coming from firms’ relationships with their suppliers and
customers, and Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2018) study firm-product-level heterogeneity in supplier-buyer
networks in French customs data.


                                                        5
in each year and for every firm. Both imports and exports are disaggregated by product and
origin or destination.
    One challenge with using the Belgian data is that the information is recorded at the level
of the VAT-identifier. The problem is that a given firm may have several VAT-identifiers
(for accounting or tax reasons).8 While organizational choices and transactions across units
within a firm are of interest, our paper is centered on trade between firms. Thus, if a firm
has multiple VAT-identifiers, we aggregate all data up to the firm level using information
from the balance sheets about ownership structure. Details of the aggregation are outlined in
Appendix C.1. In 2012, for example, the aggregation converts 896,000 unique VAT-identifiers
into 860,000 unique firms. Of these firms, 842,000 had a single VAT-identifier. However, the
18,000 firms with multiple VAT-identifiers are important, accounting for around 60% of the
total output in the dataset.
    After constructing a firm-level dataset, we impose a few sample restrictions. We restrict
our analysis to firms in the private and non-financial sector with positive labor costs, at least
one full-time-equivalent employee, and positive output. Following De Loecker, Fuss, and Van
Biesebroeck (2014), we also restrict our analysis to firms with tangible assets of more than
100 Euro and positive total assets in at least one year during our sample period. Applying
these criteria reduces the number of firms significantly. In 2012, for example, only 98,745
firms satisfy the above criteria. The large reduction in sample size is mostly driven by the
exclusion of local firms without employees (self-employment) from the sample (750,100 firms
in 2012). These criteria also remove foreign firms with no local economic activity in Belgium
from the sample. These account for a sizable fraction of imports and exports but have no
domestic production activity in Belgium.
    Table 1 illustrates that our selected estimation sample of firms provides relatively good
coverage of aggregate value added, gross output, exports, and imports. However, total sales
in our sample is larger than what are reported in the national statistics. The reason is that
the output of trade intermediaries in the national statistics is measured by their value added
instead of their total sales. We refer to Appendix C.2 for the same statistics for all Belgian
firms and to Appendix C.3 for their sectoral composition.9


2.2     Direct and indirect exposure to foreign trade
The Belgian data allow us to construct the buyer-supplier relationships of the Belgian econ-
omy and therefore document firms’ direct and indirect exposure to foreign trade. While

   8
      Existing papers tend to ignore this issue, analyzing the data as if each firm has a single unique VAT-
identifier. See e.g. Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings (2014), Magerman et al. (2016), and Bernard, Blanchard,
Van Beveren, and Vandenbussche (2016a)).
    9
      In Online Appendix C.1 we outline the definition of each variable that we use in the analyses.


                                                     6
                                 Table 1: Coverage of selected sample

      GDP      Output                                                              Selected sample
 Year                               Imports          Exports
      (Excl. Gov. & Fin.)                                          Count        V.A. Sales Imports   Exports
 2002 182        458                   178              193        88,301       119    604     175     185
 2007 230        593                   254              267        95,941       152    782     277     265
 2012 248        671                   317              319        98,745       164    874     292     292
 Notes: All numbers except for Count are denominated in billion Euro in current prices. Belgian GDP and
 output are for all sectors excluding public and financial sector. See Appendix C.2 for the same statistics for
 the total economy. Data for Belgian GDP, output, imports, and exports are from Eurostat. Firms’ value
 added is from the reported values from the annual accounts. This reported value added is not necessarily
 the same as the value added measure used later in the quantitative analysis, which is the sales value minus
 imports and purchases from other Belgian firms in the sample.


the importance of intermediaries in international trade has been well documented (Bernard,
Jensen, Redding, and Schott 2010; Ahn, Khandelwal, and Wei 2011; Bernard et al. 2016a;
Ganapati 2018), the linkages of domestic firms to these intermediaries are commonly unob-
served.10
    We define firm j’s total foreign input share as the sum of firm j’s direct foreign input
share, sF j , and the direct foreign input share of firm j’s suppliers, suppliers’ suppliers, and
so forth, each weighted by the firm-pair-specific input shares (sij , ski , ...):
                                                                                           
                                            X                     X
                        sTF otal
                            j    = sF j +           sij sF i +           ski (sF k + · · · ),           (1)
                                            i∈ZjD                 k∈ZiD
                                                       |                  {z                }
                                                                      sT
                                                                       Fi
                                                                         otal



where ZjD denotes the set of domestic suppliers of firm j, and the denominator of the input
shares is the sum of labor costs, purchases from other firms, and imports. Note that the
definition of the total foreign input share is recursive: A firm’s total foreign input share is the
sum of its direct foreign input share and the share of its inputs from other firms multiplied by
those firms’ total foreign input shares. While many firm-level datasets contain information
about the direct foreign input share sF j , our data also offer information about firm-pair-
specific input shares, sij . As a result, we are able to calculate the total foreign input share
for every firm. We note that there is one inherent assumption in our definition of the total
foreign input share: When a firm sells its output to multiple firms or final consumers, the
foreign input share in the costs of producing these goods is assumed to be the same for all

  10
     A notable exception is Fujii, Ono, and Saito (2017) who use data on firm-to-firm linkages as recorded
by a Japanese credit reporting company. The data suggest that 19% of manufacturing firms have a shipment
to an exporting wholesaler. Another exception is Dhyne and Duprez (2017). Using the Belgian data on
domestic firm-to-firm sales, they show that nearly all firms in Belgium are at most three links away from an
importing firm, and about 65% of the firms are at most three links away from an exporting firm.


                                                           7
buyers (i.e., independent of the identity of the buyer).

               Figure 1: Histograms of direct and indirect linkages to foreign trade
                                       (a) Direct and total foreign input share


                           84500


                           2000


                           1500
                   Count




                           1000


                            500


                              0
                                   0         .2          .4             .6            .8           1
                                                        Foreign input share

                                                           Direct             Total


                                          (b) Direct and total export share

                           90000
                           44000
                           8000
                           7000
                           6000
                   Count




                           5000
                           4000
                           3000
                           2000
                           1000
                              0
                                   0         .2           .4            .6            .8           1
                                                            Export share

                                                           Direct             Total


Notes: Total foreign input share of firm i, sTF otal is calculated by solving sTF otal = sF i + j∈Zi sji sTF otal
                                                                                               P
                                                i                                 i                          j    where
                                                                                                                   T otal
sF i is i’s direct foreign input share andPsji is j’s share among i’s inputs. Total export share firm i, riF
                             T otal                     T otal
is calculated by solving riF        = riF + j∈Wi rij rjF       where riF is i’s share of exports in its revenue and
rij is share of i’s revenue that arises from sales to firm j. The figures are based on the analysis of 98,745
private sector firms in Belgium in 2012. The horizontal lines represent scale breaks on the vertical axis.


                                                           8
            Figure 2: Size premium of direct and indirect linkages to foreign trade
                                             (a) Foreign inputs




                      3
                      2
                  Log sales
                     10
                      -1




                              0      .2           .4             .6                .8      1
                                                 Foreign input share

                                                    Direct                 Total


                                                (b) Exports
                      2
                  Log sales
                      1
                      0




                              0      .2           .4                  .6           .8      1
                                                       Export share

                                                    Direct                 Total

Notes: The two figures display the smoothed values with 95% confidence intervals of kernel-weighted local
polynomial regression estimates of the relationship between firms’ sales and their levels of participation in
foreign trade. We use the Epanechnikov kernel function with kernel bandwidth of 0.01, pilot bandwidth of
0.02, degree of polynomial smooth at 0, and smooth obtained at 50 points. Log sales are demeaned with
4-digit industry fixed effects. The figures are based on the analysis of 98,745 private sector firms in Belgium
in 2012.




                                                         9
    In Figure 1a, we display a histogram of the total and direct foreign input shares of the
Belgian firms. While only 19% of firms import directly, nearly all firms obtain some foreign
inputs either directly or indirectly through domestic suppliers which use foreign inputs in
their production process.11 Indeed, most firms are heavily dependent on foreign inputs, but
only a small number of firms show that dependence through the direct foreign input shares
observed in firm-level transaction data on trade. In the median firm, for example, the total
foreign input share is 39%. While nearly all firms obtain some foreign inputs either directly
or indirectly, the exposure to foreign trade varies substantially across firms. For example, the
total foreign input shares are 20% and 58% at at the 20th and 80th percentile, respectively.12
    In Appendix D.1, we break down the direct and total foreign input shares by sector.
Interestingly, foreign inputs are important in all sectors once one accounts for the indirect
import. Even in the service sector, in which firms have little if any direct import, the
median firm’s total foreign input share is as large as 24%. Breaking down the data by sector
also reveals that indirect import is not entirely driven by firms obtaining foreign inputs
through the wholesale and retail sector. As shown in Online Appendix D.2, even when
excluding direct imports by the wholesale and retail sector (29% of aggregate imports) from
the calculation of sTF otal
                       i , most firms continue to indirectly import a significant amount of
foreign inputs through purchases from their domestic suppliers.13 For example, the median
firm’s total foreign input share is still as large as 18%.
    Figure 1b performs a similar exercise but now looks at total export shares and direct
                                                                 T otal
export shares. We calculate the total export share of firm j, rjF       , as the sum of the share of
revenue of firm j coming from directly exported goods, rjF , and the share of revenue coming
from goods sold to other domestic firms, multiplied by those firms’ total export shares:
                                                       "                                 #
                                              X                  X
                           T otal
                          rjF       = rjF +          rji riF +          rik (rkF + · · · ) ,                  (2)
                                              i∈Wj               k∈Wi
                                                       |                 {z              }
                                                                         T otal
                                                                        riF

where Wj denotes the set of domestic buyers of firm j and the denominator of the export
shares is the total revenue of the firm. Direct export is even more concentrated than direct

   11
      Note that virtually all firms are likely to use certain types of materials that are not produced in Belgium,
such as gasoline. While we may not observe all these purchases due to the 250 Euro reporting threshold for
domestic firm-to-firm transactions, the use of such inputs could help explain why nearly all firms (over 99%)
in our sample are obtaining some foreign input directly or indirectly.
   12
      In these calculations, we exclude the user cost of capital in the calculation of the input shares. The
reason is that the firm-to-firm may include purchases of capital goods and, therefore, adding the user cost
of capital from as another input cost could lead to double counting of capital goods. As a robustness check,
we nevertheless included the user cost of capital in the calculation of the input shares, finding that in the
median firm the total foreign input share is 35% (see Online Appendix D.1 for details).
   13
      Specifically, sTF otal
                        i    are computed by setting sF j = 0 for all firm j in the wholesale and retail sector.


                                                           10
import, both on the intensive and extensive margin. While only 12% of firms export directly,
88% of firms export either directly or indirectly by selling to domestic buyers which subse-
quently trade internationally. In terms of trade volume, however, export remains relatively
concentrated even after taking the indirect export into account. The total export share is
only 2% in the median firm, whereas it is 14% at the 80th percentile. In Online Appendix
D.2, we compute the total export shares when excluding any exports by wholesalers and
retailers (which account for 18% of aggregate exports). Among firms in sectors other than
wholesale or retail, the total export share is then 13% at the 80th percentile and 1% at the
median.
    Why does a majority of firms have significant indirect import but little indirect export?
It is not reflecting a trade deficit in Belgium, as aggregate imports and exports are roughly
equal. Instead, it reflects that most firms have a large number of domestic suppliers (i.e.,
indegrees) as compared to domestic buyers (i.e., outdegrees). While the first, second, and
third quartiles of the indegree distribution are 19, 33, and 55, the quartiles of the outdegree
distribution equal 2, 9, and 34. Hence the distribution of the number of buyers is much
more skewed than the distribution of the number of suppliers, leading the majority of firms
to have high indirect imports but low indirect exports. In Appendix D.2, we investigate the
direct and total foreign export shares by sector. One sector that stands out is the service
sector. While many firms in this sector rely on foreign inputs, relatively few export directly
or sell to domestic firms that are exporting directly or indirectly.
    Across a wide range of countries and industries, firms that directly export or import tend
to be larger than other firms. A natural question is whether the positive association between
firm size and international trade also carries over to indirect export or import. Figure 2
investigates this, calculating the average size of firms by direct and total foreign input shares
as well as by direct and total export shares. We demean the log of firm sales using the firm’s
four-digit industry average, so that a firm with log sales of zero is the size of an average firm
in its industry. Figure 2 illustrates that average firm size is increasing in both direct and
total foreign input shares. However, firms that import directly tend to be much larger than
firms that buy foreign inputs through domestic firms. Indeed, firms with less than 60% in
total foreign input shares are, on average, of similar size as the average firm in their industry.
A similar pattern is evident for size and export. Firms with very high total export shares
tend to be large. However, over most of the total export share distribution, there is only a
weak relationship between firm size and total export share. Firms with a total export share
of 60% are only about 50% larger than the average firm in their industry. Taken together,
the results in Figure 2 suggest that firms do not have to be large to rely heavily on foreign
inputs or to have most of their sales going ultimately to a foreign country.



                                               11
3       Model with fixed production networks
We now develop a model of trade with fixed production networks and use it to quantify how
international trade affects firms’ production costs and consumer prices. By fixed networks,
we mean that the buyer-supplier links are exogenous. Given these links, firms decide how
much to buy from and sell to the existing suppliers and buyers. While the assumption of
exogenous buyer-supplier links is admittedly strong, it allows us to derive several analytical
results and it makes it convenient to take the model to the data.


3.1     Model
To match our data from Belgium, we consider a small open economy. Before describing the
model, we briefly discuss the notation. Since there exist many bilateral directed flows in our
model, we will often have two subscripts. In such cases, the first subscript denotes the origin
of the good, and the second subscript denotes the destination of the good.

3.1.1    Preferences and Demand

Each consumer supplies one unit of labor inelastically. Consumers are assumed to have
identical, homothetic CES preferences over consumption goods:
                                                                    σ
                                                                 ! σ−1
                                        X                  σ−1
                                U=            (βkH qkH )    σ            ,                 (3)
                                        k∈Ω

where Ω denotes the set of available products in the small open economy, k denotes a product,
and H denotes domestic final demand from households. Since all consumers have the same
homothethic CES preferences for consumption, we can write the aggregate final consumer
demand (in quantities) for product k, given price pkH , as:

                                             p−σ
                                            σ−1kH
                                     qkH = βkH     E,                             (4)
                                             P 1−σ
where E denotes the aggregate expenditure in Belgium, and P denotes the domestic con-
sumer price index:
                                                               1
                                                            ! 1−σ
                                         X
                                                σ−1 1−σ
                                  P =          βjH pjH               .                     (5)
                                         j∈Ω

We assume that final goods are substitutes, and therefore σ > 1.
  Demand from abroad for product k takes a similar functional form:



                                                 12
                                                 σ−1     p−σ
                                                           kF
                                          qkF = βkF            EF ,                                     (6)
                                                         PF1−σ
where βkF is a product-k -specific foreign demand shifter, pkF is the price of product k abroad,
and PF and EF denote the foreign price index and expenditure, respectively .

3.1.2    Market structure and production

Firms produce single products. We will use i, j, k to index firms or products. The products
are differentiated across firms. Firms sell the same product to final consumers and to other
firms as an intermediate input, though not all firms sell to other firms, and not each pair
of firms has a buyer-supplier relationship. Note that we allow Belgian firms to sell directly
to foreign consumers, while all foreign products reach Belgian consumers indirectly through
the importing of inputs by Belgian firms.14
    When selling to households, we treat every firm as infinitesimal and assume monopolistic
                                                                                         σ
competition. Firms then charge a constant mark-up over marginal costs, µ = σ−1             . When
selling to other firms, the assumption of infinitesimal size is no longer reasonable, since most
firms just have a few selected suppliers. We assume that in the Nash bargaining between
buyer and supplier, the buyer has the full bargaining power. Given the assumptions on
technology described below, this will imply that the supplier sells at marginal cost to the
buyer firm. Note, however, that our theoretical results for the model with a fixed network
structure do not change if firms charge positive and possibly heterogeneous mark-ups to
buyer firms as long as these are fixed.15 The assumption of the bargaining power in firm-to-
firm transactions being on the buyer’s side is convenient for modeling the network formation
in a tractable manner in Section 4.16
    In this section we assume a fixed network structure, meaning that we take as given the
set of firms, Zj , from which each firm j is eligible to purchase inputs. For importing firms,
Zj contains also foreign, F , as an eligible supplier. Sometimes we will refer to the set of
domestic suppliers of firm j, which we denote by ZjD . In order to sell abroad, firms incur
iceberg transport costs, τ . In this section, we take export participation, IjF , as given (IjF = 1
for all exporting firms and IjF = 0 otherwise) and endogenize it in Section 4.
  14
       The assumption that foreign goods reach Belgian consumers only through Belgian firms is reasonable
because in the data nearly all imports are carried out by firms. We make the assumption that Belgian firms
can reach foreign consumers directly to avoid modeling foreign firms in detail.
    15
       Positive and fixed mark-ups by firms would only affect the system of equations in the Online Appendix
to calculate the change in the domestic wage. See Kikkawa et al. (2018) for a model of trade with fixed
production networks and variable firm-to-firm mark-ups.
    16
       Also in the industrial organization literature, corner solutions in the bargaining game are sometimes
assumed to obtain tractable solutions for network formation problems. For example, when studying the
determinants of the hospital networks offered by health plans, Ho (2009) assumes that hospitals make take-
it-or-leave-it offers to all health plans in the market.


                                                    13
    Firms use a CES input bundle of workers and domestic and foreign inputs with elasticity
of substitution ρ > 1 in the production function. We assume that σ > ρ, implying that
consumers are more price-elastic than firms in their purchase of goods. Given the CES
production function, we can write the unit cost function of firm j as:
                                                                        1/(1−ρ)
                                    1      X
                                            ρ−1 1−ρ   ρ−1 1−ρ 
                       cj (Zj ) =          αkj pkj + αLj w                          .          (7)
                                    φj k∈Z
                                              j


The first term in the cost function, φj , denotes the exogenous total factor productivity of firm
j. Inside the parentheses, the term αkj reflects how salient the good produced by supplier k
is as an input for firm j, and pkj denotes the price that supplier k charges for its input to
firm j. Furthermore, the term αLj captures the importance of labor input for firm j, and
the price of labor is denoted by w.

3.1.3   Firm behavior and dependence on foreign inputs

The share of variable costs by firm j that is spent on intermediate inputs produced by firm
k ∈ Zj is:
                                                         ρ−1 1−ρ
                                              pkj qkj   αkj  pkj
                                     skj    =         =           ,                            (8)
                                               cj q j    Θj (Zj )
                 P        ρ−1 1−ρ     ρ−1 1−ρ
where Θj (Zj ) = k∈Zj αkj     pkj + αLj   w     denotes the sourcing capability of firm j, and
Zj denotes the sourcing strategy of firm j, following the terminology of Antras et al. (2017).
    Firm j spends a larger fraction of variable costs on inputs produced by firm k if the
saliency term αkj is large or the price pkj is low, relative to its sourcing capability. Analo-
gously, the share of variable costs by firm j that is spent on labor is:
                                                        ρ−1 1−ρ
                                              wLj      αLj  w
                                      sLj   =        =           ,                             (9)
                                              cj q j    Θj (Zj )
while the direct foreign input share of firm j (assuming F ∈ Zj ) is:

                                              p F j qF j   αFρ−1 1−ρ
                                                              j pF j
                                     sF j   =            =           .                        (10)
                                                cj q j      Θj (Zj )
      Based on the firm-pair-specific input share, skj , the direct foreign input share, sF j , and
the set of domestic suppliers, ZjD , we are able to calculate the total foreign input share,
sTF otal
    j , defined in equation (1). The total foreign input share summarizes the exposure of
firms to foreign inputs and is intuitive in a model with single product firms in which each
firm uses the same fraction of foreign inputs in the good sold to every buyer. Proposition 1


                                                     14
shows that the total foreign input share is useful for calculating the firm-level cost change
in response to a change in the foreign input price. Let z 0 denote the value for any variable
                                      0
z after an exogenous shock and ẑ = zz denote the change in variable z.

Proposition 1 (Cost changes in response to foreign price changes)
Given fixed linkages between firms, the change in firm j’s unit cost, ĉj |p̂F · , given an uniform
change in foreign price, p̂F · , is

                                                                       1−ρ 1/(1−ρ)
                          ĉj |p̂F · =   1 − sTF otal
                                                       1−ρ
                                                            + sTF otal
                                                                          
                                                 j     ŵ         j p̂F ·          .                    (11)
                                                                      dpF ·
For a small percentage point change in the foreign price,              pF ·
                                                                            ,   the first-order approximation
to firm j’s unit cost is

                                   dcj                 dw            dpF ·
                                       = 1 − sTF otal
                                                 j         + sTF otal
                                                                 j          .                           (12)
                                    cj                  w              pF ·

    For both large and small changes to the foreign price, the changes in the firm-level cost
are a weighted aggregate of the change in the foreign price and the change in the domestic
wage. The change in the domestic wage is determined by the equilibrium, as described below.
The weights are firm-specific and summarized by the the firm’s total foreign input share.17
As can be seen from equation (1), a firm’s cost will not only change according to its own
direct foreign input share, but also according to its suppliers’ foreign input shares, suppliers’
suppliers’ foreign input share, and so forth. Note that we leveraged the assumption that there
is perfect pass-through of any cost changes along the production chain.18 For large changes
to the foreign price, the elasticity of substitution in the production function, ρ, indicates
how easy it is to switch to alternative inputs, including labor. Given the observed total
foreign input share, a lower value of ρ leads to a larger cost increase from an increase in the
foreign price. In the extreme case when the foreign price change is infinite and the economy
                                                                                   1/(1−ρ) aut
goes to autarky, the change in firm-level cost becomes ĉj |pF · →∞ = 1 − sTF otal
                                                                                 j         ŵ ,
         aut
where ŵ     denotes the change in the domestic wage when going to autarky. For small
changes to the foreign price, the first-order approximation to the firm’s cost change does not
depend on the elasticity of substitution. Furthermore, we show in the proof that the result
in equation (12) holds more generally for any constant returns to scale production function.
While Proposition 1 considers a uniform change in the foreign price, we derive expressions


    17
     Equivalently, we could express the cost change using the firm’s total labor input share: sTLjotal = 1 −
sTF otal
       = sLj + i∈Z D sij sTLiotal .
                P
    j               j
     18
     Note that we would derive the same equation under positive, but constant, firm-to-firm mark-ups.
However, the equilibrium change in ŵ would be different in such a model. See Kikkawa et al. (2018) for
results on cost changes under pair-wise variable mark-ups.


                                                      15
for firms’ cost changes when the import price changes are heterogeneous across firms, {p̂F j }
in Online Appendix A.1.19

3.1.4     Firm-level sales and profits

Firms’ total sales consist of the sum of domestic sales to final consumers, foreign sales to
final consumers, and domestic sales to other firms. Let firm j’s total sales be denoted by:


          σ−1 1−σ σ−1                 E          σ−1 1−σ σ−1                       EF
   xj = βjH  µ φj Θj (Zj )(σ−1)/(ρ−1) 1−σ + IjF βjF µ φj Θj (Zj )(σ−1)/(ρ−1) τ 1−σ 1−σ
        |             {z             P }                                          PF
                                            |                {z                       }
                     Domestic sales to final consumers                           Exports
             X                                        xk /µk
         +           I(j ∈ Zk )φρ−1
                                j
                                     ρ−1
                                    αjk  Θ(j)                  ,                                              (13)
                 k
                                                      Θk (Zk )
             |                        {z                     }
                            Domestic sales to firms


where µk denotes the average mark-up of firm k. Recall that the firm charges a constant
mark-up to final consumers and a zero mark-up to other firms. Hence, µk depends on the
distribution of firm k’s sales.
    Given that firms make their profits only on sales to final consumers, we can write the
variable profits of firm j given a sourcing strategy, Zj , and export participation, IjF , as


                                         1 σ−1 1−σ σ−1                  E
                      πjvar (Zj , IjF ) = βjH µ φj Θj (Zj )(σ−1)/(ρ−1) 1−σ
                                         σ                            P
                                              1 σ−1 1−σ σ−1                       EF
                                         + IjF βjF µ φj Θj (Zj )(σ−1)/(ρ−1) τ 1−σ 1−σ .                       (14)
                                              σ                                  PF

3.1.5     Aggregation and equilibrium

We now describe the aggregation of our model, discuss how firm profits are redistributed
to consumers, define the equilibrium, and discuss the determination of the domestic wage
change in response to any foreign price change. In the model with a fixed production network,
we abstract from fixed costs of linkage formation, and hence πj = πjvar .20
   We assume that the set of Belgian firms is fixed and that firm profits are distributed
to workers in Belgium. We consider Belgium as a small-open economy — i.e., foreign ex-
   19
      Consider arbitrary changes in the import price at the firm-level, {p̂F j }. Firm-level cost changes given
                                    1−ρ
                                                             +tF j , where tF j is computed from tF j = sF j p̂1−ρ
                                                T otal
                                                        1−ρ
P shocks can be expressed as ĉj = 1 − sF j
these                                                   ŵ                                                     Fj +
  i∈ZjD s  t
         ij F i , and ŵ is computed from the system    of equations  presented   in Online Appendix  A.1.  In  this
                                                                                                  n     o
system of equations, we also allow for arbitrary changes in export demand at the firm-level, β̂jF .
   20
      Note that the counterfactual results are identical even in the presence of fixed costs, as long as the
network structure is fixed.


                                                               16
penditure, EF , foreign price index, PF , and a set of prices by foreign suppliers, {pF j }j , are
exogenous. We further assume that there are no foreign asset holdings and that trade is
balanced. Hence aggregate household expenditure in Belgium is given by
                                                    X
                                       E = wL +         πk .                                 (15)
                                                    k

Balanced trade implies that aggregate exports are equal to aggregate imports:
               X
                          σ−1 1−σ σ−1                           EF     X 1
                     IjF βjF µ φj Θj (Zj )(σ−1)/(ρ−1) τ 1−σ          =      s F j xj .       (16)
                 j
                                                               PF1−σ   j
                                                                         µj

Labor market clearing implies that labor income is equal to firms’ labor costs:
                                              X 1
                                       wL =        sLj xj .                                  (17)
                                              j
                                                µj

   The equilibrium for the small open economy is defined as follows.

Definition 1 (Equilibrium given a fixed network structure)
Given foreign expenditure, EF , foreign price index, PF , and a set of prices by foreign sup-
pliers, {pF j }j , an equilibrium for the model with a fixed network structure and fixed export
participation is a wage level, w, price index for the consumer, P , and aggregate expenditure,
E, such that equations (5), (7), (8), (9), (13), (14), (15), (16), and (17) hold.

    Using the system of equations in the above definition and the result in Proposition 1, we
describe the system of equations to determine the change in the nominal wage for a foreign
price change in Online Appendix A.3, while Online Appendix A.4 contains the analogous
system of equations under first-order approximation.
    In order to describe the change in the real wage, it will be useful to define the share of
household consumption that is produced by firm i, siH :

                                        piH qiH   β σ−1 p1−σ
                                   siH =        = iH 1−σiH .                            (18)
                                          E          P
Given this definition, the change in the real wage for a uniform foreign price change can be
summarized as follows:

Proposition 2 (Real wage change in response to foreign price changes)
  Given fixed linkages between firms, the change in the real wage, P̂ŵ , due to an uniform




                                               17
change in foreign price, p̂F · , is:
                                                                      1
                                                                   ! σ−1
                    ŵ                 X                    1−σ
                         |p̂F · = ŵ       siH ĉi |p̂F ·
                    P̂                 i
                                                                               1
                                                                              σ−1
                                                                         1−σ
                                                                  1−ρ  1−ρ
                                X                                p̂F ·
                                   siH 1 − sTF otal   + sTF otal
                                                    
                              =               i            i       1−ρ
                                                                                  .                         (19)
                                 i
                                                                 ŵ

                                                                           dpF ·
For a small percentage point change in the foreign price,                   pF ·
                                                                                 ,   the first-order approximation
to the change in the real wage is:

                                dw dP    dw X          dcj
                                   −   =     −     sjH
                                 w   P    w     j
                                                        cj
                                                      X
                                           dw dpF ·
                                       =      −              sjH sTF otal
                                                                     j .                                     (20)
                                            w     pF ·     j


The change in the real wage is given by the change in the domestic nominal wage and a
weighted aggregate of firms’ cost increases, with the weights equal to the firms’ share in
domestic household demand, siH . In the extreme case where the foreign price change is
infinite and the economy goes to autarky, the change in the real wage becomes P̂ŵ |p̂F · →∞ =
P                     1−σ  1
                T otal 1−ρ σ−1
     i siH 1 − sF j             . When going to autarky, the change in the nominal wage doesn’t
have to be calculated since it cancels out. Moreover, we provide equations for calculating
the change in real income in Online Appendix A.5.21 The first-order-approximation to the
change in the real wage in equation (20) holds for a wider class of production and utility
functions, provided that they are homogeneous of degree one.
    The above proposition highlights the importance of the change in the nominal wage, the
firms’ shares in domestic household demand, and the firms’ total foreign input shares in
calculating the real wage changes in response to a foreign price shock. In general, computing
these statistics require knowledge (or strong assumptions) about the network structure. This
contrasts with the result from Hulten (1978) for a closed economy, which states that for
an efficient economy, and under some technical conditions, the knowledge of the network
structure becomes redundant in making aggregate counterfactual predictions up to a first-
order approximation.22
    Applying Hulten’s insights to a small open economy, one may consider exports as inputs

  21
      Furthermore, we show in Online Appendix A.2 that analogous results to Propositions 1 and 2 can be
obtained under the assumption of a continuum of firms.
   22
      Hulten’s theorem states that the change in aggregate real consumption, C, can be expressed as dC
                                                                                                     C =
P Outputs dAs          dAs
  s    VA   As , where As denotes the change in TFP of sector s.


                                                            18
and imports as outputs of a “foreign sector.” To calculate the percentage change in the real
wage of a small open economy, one would compute the product of the foreign sector’s Domar
(1961) weight, aggregate imports over aggregate value added, and the percentage change
in the foreign sector’s productivity. The change in the foreign sector’s productivity can be
captured by the change in the terms-of-trade (i.e., the change in the price of exports minus
the change in the price of imports). Therefore, under perfect competition, the change in the
real wage expressed in equation (20) becomes equivalent to the expression:
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                       
                                             X                                                       
        dw dP                    Imports                  T otal
                                                                   dw    T otal dp F  ·         dpF · 
           −                  =                sjF   1 − sF j         + sF j              −            
        |w {z P }                  VA                               w             pF ·            pF · 
                                             
                                 | {z }  j                                                      | {z } 
     Real wage change           Domar weight
                                             |                                                         
                                                                                                Change in
                                                               {z                        }
  under perfect competition                                           Change in                import price
                                                                     export price
                                                          X
                                Imports       dw dpF ·
                                                                     sjF 1 − sTF otal
                                                                                      
                              =                  −                               j      ,                     (21)
                                  VA           w   pF ·          j
                                                             |              {z       }
                                                            Domestic content in exports


where sjF is firm j’s export share in total exports. See Appendix A.3 for the derivation.
    Equation (21) states that the ratio of imports over value added and the change in the
foreign price are not sufficient in computing the change in the real wage in an open economy,
even under perfect competition. There are two adjustment terms needed: the response of the
domestic wage, dw
                                                                               
                    , and the domestic content in exports, j sjF 1 − sTF otal
                                                             P
                  w                                                         j    . These terms
are needed because not all foreign shocks are absorbed domestically in a small open economy.
And to compute these terms, knowledge about the network structure is required.
    Our results imply that one can find different aggregate effects from foreign price changes
across two economies with the same elasticities of substitutions in production and in the
utility functions and the same levels of aggregate imports and exports, GDP, and gross
production. In fact, even all firm-level outcomes on domestic sales, imports, exports, value
added, and intermediate good purchases can be identical, and the aggregate effects can still
be different. We illustrate this in a simple numerical example in Appendix B and discuss
this further in the quantitative application with the Belgian data in Section 3.3.23




  23
     This example is related to the discussion in Melitz and Redding (2014) that the gains from trade can
be arbitrarily large in a model with sequential production as the number of stages of production increases.
However, note that the ratio of gross production to GDP also rises in their example as the number of stages
gets larger. Here we hold the level of gross production and GDP fixed and illustrate that the gains from
trade can still differ.


                                                       19
3.2     Alternative approaches and data requirements
As we have shown above, the structure of the domestic production network is relevant for
measuring changes of firm-level cost, real wages, and real income in response to a foreign price
shock. Below, we describe several alternative approaches that have lower data requirements.

3.2.1    Back of the envelope calculation for an efficient economy

One may want to use the analogue of Hulten’s theorem for a small open economy in equation
(21) to calculate a first-order approximation to the change in real wages, assuming that the
economy is efficient. As discussed above, the network structure is still needed to compute
several of the terms in this equation. Here we discuss additional simplifying assumptions to
                                              
approximate the term j sjF 1 − sTF otal
                         P
                                         j      . If one assumes no import content in the produc-
                       P             T otal
                                            
tion of exports, then j sjF 1 − sF j           is equal to 1. Alternatively, if one assumes perfect
competition and the import content being the same in both exports and domestic final de-
                                                     VA
                                
mand, then j sjF 1 − sTF otal                             .24 This approach nevertheless only will
             P
                             j    becomes VA+Exports
yield to a back-of-the-envelope calculation as it ignores the change in the domestic wage, dw   w
                                                                                                  ,
which adjusts differently depending on the network structure.

3.2.2    Roundabout production economies

    In the absence of firm-level data on the structure of the domestic production network,
researchers can approximate linkages between firms, for example, by assuming a simple
roundabout production economy or by using sectoral input-output tables. Importantly,
these assumptions will lead to different predictions for siH and sTF otal
                                                                     i , which are not observed
                       25
in standard data sets. While we lay out the key difference in the assumptions here, we
describe the changes in firm-level cost, real wage, and real income analogous to Propositions
1 and 2, in addition to the full set of equilibrium equations, for these alternative models in
Online Appendices A.3, A.4, and A.5.

    Simple roundabout production economy

The seminal work by Eaton and Kortum (2002) assumes that that goods are produced with
labor input and a composite good that is used as an intermediate (and also equal to the
final good consumption bundle). While their model assumes that the production function is
  24
      See Appendix A.4 for the derivation. Consistent with De Gortari (2017), we find in Online Appendix
D.3 that the import content in exports tend to be different from that in domestic final demand for all sectors.
In particular, we find that in the manufacturing sector the import content in exports is much larger than
that in domestic final demand.
   25
      Researchers with access to firm-level data usually observe domestic sales and exports, but not the split
of the domestic sales between sales to households and sales to other firms. The sales to households are
important for calculating siH and the sales between firms are important for calculating sTF otal
                                                                                            i    .


                                                      20
Cobb-Douglas in labor and intermediates, we stay close to the functional form in equation
(7) and capture the roundabout approach by assuming a production function that leads to
the following cost function for firm j:
                                                                                1
                                   ρ−1 1−ρ
                         cj = φ−1          + αFρ−1 1−ρ    ρ−1 1−ρ
                                                                              1−ρ
                               j  αDj P         j pF j + αLj w                       ,                  (22)

where αDj captures the saliency of intermediate goods for firm j and P is the standard CES
price index defined above. We note that this production function differs in two dimensions
from the baseline model. First, all firms are using every other firms’ inputs through the
composite good. Second, the composite good is aggregated with the elasticity of substitution
in final demand, σ, even when these goods are used in production.

    Sectoral roundabout production economy

The important works by Caliendo and Parro (2015) and Blaum et al. (2016) extend the
roundabout approach to incorporate sectoral linkages. We follow their approach by assum-
ing that the composite intermediate good is sector-specific and a Cobb-Douglas aggregate
of sectoral composite input bundles. To be specific, we consider the following production
function for firm j in sector u:
                                                                                           1
                                                                                          1−ρ
                                                      !1−ρ
                                             γ
                            ρ−1
                                      Y
                 cj = φ−1
                       j
                          αDj             Pv vu(j)          + αFρ−1 1−ρ    ρ−1 1−ρ 
                                                                  j pF j + αLj w                 ,      (23)
                                       v

               P               1
                      σ−1 1−σ 1−σ
where Pv =          β
                 i∈v iD  p iD     denotes the sector-v-specific CES price index for the com-
posite sector v good, and γvu is the Cobb-Douglas share of sector v inputs in the production
of sector u goods. For the sectoral model, we assume a sectoral Cobb-Douglas layer in the
utility function which implies a price index for consumption P = v PvγvH .
                                                                  Q


3.3     Quantitative results
In this section, we provide a quantitative analysis of how international trade affects firms’
production costs and the consumer price index. We consider a counterfactual change in the
import price of foreign goods. The analysis utilizes data from year 2012 on firm-to-firm
transactions, firm-level output, international trade flows, and labor input, in combination
with estimates or assumptions for the elasticity of substitution in the production function,
ρ, and the utility function, σ. Throughout the paper, the baseline specification assumes σ
is equal to 4 and ρ is equal to 2.26 For small changes and first-order approximations, these

  26
      Using data for the US, Antras et al. (2017) estimate σ = 3.85 and Oberfield and Raval (2014) estimate a
level of σ between 3 and 5 among various manufacturing industries. In Appendix D.8, we perform sensitivity


                                                        21
elasticities will matter only in so far as they affect the calculation of the domestic wage
change to ensure trade balance.
    As we solve in the counterfactual exercise for the change in endogenous wages, we require
the model equations and the data to be consistent with each other. Under the assumptions
made so far, the model is too stylized to rationalize all observed ratios of sales to input costs
(mark-ups). Therefore, throughout this section we assume that the firm charges a fixed
mark-up, µi on all its sales that is calculated from the data as the ratio of sales over input
costs.27 This assumption does not affect the results in Propositions 1 and 2, except for the
calculation of the endogenous wage change.
    The results in this section are focused on the change in firm-level costs and the change in
the real wage due to a 10% foreign price increase. We also analyze the change in real wage
and real income when going to autarky. We emphasize that when we compare the predictions
from the baseline model with those from the alternative models outlined in Section 3.2, we
keep unchanged the firm-level variables on domestic sales (aggregated over households and
to other firms), imports and exports, domestic inputs, and labor costs. Therefore, we also
hold the aggregates of these variables constant when comparing across models.28
    We start by analyzing the effects of a 10% increase in the foreign input prices on firm-
level costs. As foreign inputs are heavily used in Belgium exports and, by assumption, the
export demand is relatively elastic compared to import demand, the domestic nominal wage
falls by 2% to ensure trade balance. Figure 3a displays the effects on firms’ production
costs, as measured by equation (11) of Proposition 1. The horizontal axis represents the
change in firm-level costs, which are bounded between .98 (the change in the nominal wage)
and 1.1 (the change in the foreign price). The histograms of cost changes show that most
firms would be significantly affected by the change in the foreign input prices. This is as
expected since most firms are heavily dependent on foreign inputs (see Figure 1a). Even
though the price of domestic labor falls by approximately 2%, the majority of firms would
have 2.7% or larger nominal cost increases. Figures 3b and 3c displays the histograms of the
change in firm-level costs as measured by the roundabout models. Both in the simple and
the sectoral roundabout economy (with 52 different sectors), the change in the firm-level cost
is considerably more compressed than when using the baseline model. This is because these
models fail to capture the large amount of heterogeneity in firms’ exposure to foreign inputs
that is observed in the data. At the 90th percentile, for example, the change in the firm-level

analysis under different sets of values for both ρ and σ.
   27
      Note that for some firms this ratio is less than one.
   28
      We aggregate the firm-to-firm transactions to 52 sectors to calculate the sectoral input-output coeffi-
cients. We do this aggregation based on the firm-to-firm transaction data to keep the aggregates unchanged
across the various models that we are comparing. This would not be possible when using published sectoral
input-output tables, which are not consistent with aggregated firm-to-firm transaction data; in particular,
these published tables lead to much smaller coefficients for the wholesale and retail sector.


                                                     22
cost is 25 percent larger in the baseline model as compared to the roundabout models.

                                           Figure 3: Histograms of firm-level cost changes
        2500                                                        2500                                                        2500



        2000                                                        2000                                                        2000



        1500                                                        1500                                                        1500
Count




                                                            Count




                                                                                                                        Count
        1000                                                        1000                                                        1000



         500                                                         500                                                         500



           0                                                           0                                                           0
               0.98   1   1.02   1.04   1.06   1.08   1.1                  0.98   1   1.02   1.04   1.06   1.08   1.1                  0.98   1   1.02   1.04   1.06   1.08   1.1



                  (a) Baseline model                                       (b) Simple Roundabout                                   (c) Sectoral Roundabout
Notes: Note that all three histograms are bounded from above with 1.1, which is the change in the foreign
price. The changes in the nominal wages are different across the three models, which generates different
lower bounds. See Online Appendix D.4 for analogous figures plotting firm-level cost changes relative to the
change in nominal wage, ĉŵi , in which all three histograms are bounded from below with 1 but have different
upper bounds.


    To investigate the effect of the increase in the foreign input prices on the real wage, we
use equation (19) in Proposition 2. Applied to our data, this equation suggests that a 10%
foreign price increase leads to a 6% decline in the real wage. This sizable fall in real wages
reflects the combination of a large import content in domestic final demand ( j sjH sTF otal
                                                                                   P
                                                                                             j
equals 0.584) and a 2% decline in the nominal wage. The fall in real income is even larger
as firms and their owners lose profits from exports (see Online Appendix D.7). While our
results are based on the assumption of fixed mark-ups implying a perfect pass-through of
cost shocks to other firms, Kikkawa et al. (2018) analyze the effects of an import price shock
under variable mark-ups in firm-to-firm trade. They find that the aggregate welfare change
is similar when allowing for variable mark-ups compared to fixed mark-ups.
    In Table 2, we decompose the change in the real wage into the effect from the direct cost
increase and the indirect increase through intermediate goods. We consider both the case of
a 10% foreign price increase and the extreme case of autarky. In the price index calculation,
all firms are weighted by their sales to households. We find that about half of the increase
in the price index is due to the direct effect, where the other half is coming from the indirect
effect. In Online Appendix D.6, we furthermore calculate how final good prices (weighted
by household expenditure on these goods) change across broad sectors in the economy. We
find that the increase in the price index is coming primarily from firms that have their main
activity in manufacturing, wholesale or retail.
    How do these results compare to the back-of-the-envelope calculations motivated by Hul-
ten (1978)? Using equation (21) and assuming perfect competition, no import content in
the production of exports, and no change in the nominal wage, one can approximate the

                                                                                         23
                           Table 2: Changes in real wage, decomposition

                                                     Total    Direct    Indirect
                           10% increase in pF ·      0.940    0.968      0.973
                                Autarky              0.558    0.818      0.795
 Notes: The number for Direct is computed by replacing sTF otal
                                                             j    in equation (19) with the direct foreign in-
 put share, sF j . The number for Indirect is computed by replacing sTF otal
                                                                        j    in equation (19) with the indirect
 foreign input share, sTF otal
                          j    − sFj . The nominal wage change ŵ  is the same   across the three columns and
 computed according to Online Appendix A.3. Due to non-linearities, the direct effects and the indirect ef-
 fects do not necessarily add up. In Appendix D.3 we report an analogous decomposition under a first-order
 approximation where the decomposition is additive, leading to quantitatively similar results.


change in the real wage, dw w
                                − dP
                                   P
                                     , with − dp F · Imports
                                               pF ·    VA
                                                             = − dp F·
                                                                  pF ·
                                                                       × 0.817. Alternatively, under
the assumption of perfect competition, import content being the same in both exports and
domestic final demand, and no change in the nominal wage, one can approximate the change
in the real wage with − dp  F·   Imports
                          pF · VA+Exports
                                          = − dp F·
                                               pF ·
                                                      × 0.449. These back-of-the-envelope calcula-
tions, which are summarized in Appendix D.4, are simple to perform but unfortunately lead
to unreliable estimates of the decline in the real wage as compared to those we obtain from
the baseline model.
    In contrast to the back-of-the-envelope approaches, the simple and the sectoral round-
about models capture much better the change in the real wage, as we show in Table 3a. To
understand why, we decompose the change in the real wage for each of the models into two
terms. The first is the log-change in the domestic nominal wage relative to the foreign price
and the second captures the import content in domestic final demand. We find that both the
simple and sectoral roundabout economies have a similar import content in domestic final
demand (0.61) as the baseline economy (0.58). The changes in the nominal wage are similar
as well. These results are shown in Table 16 of Appendix D.3.
    Further, Table 3b shows that the differences between the aggregate predictions of the two
alternative models and that of the baseline model are noticeably larger when one considers
a large foreign price change (p̂F · → ∞) so that the economy is going to autarky. The real
wage falls by 44% in the baseline model and by 40% in the simple roundabout model. The
differences between models for large changes in foreign prices is driven by two opposing
forces: On the one hand, firms are much more homogeneously affected by trade under the
roundabout economy assumption, so it is more difficult for the consumer to substitute away
from the firms with the largest price increases. All else equal, this effect leads to a larger
fall in the real wage in the roundabout economy. On the other hand, in the roundabout
economy the intermediate good is aggregated using the same elasticity as in final demand,
σ, hence allowing firms to substitute more than in the baseline model, which in turn leads to a




                                                     24
smaller fall in real wages.29 The real wage would fall the most under the sectoral roundabout
economy assumption as the utility function was changed to Cobb-Douglas across sectors. In
Online Appendix D.7 we discuss the analogous results for the changes in real income. The
ordering in the real income changes is the same as the ordering in the real wage changes
when going to autarky across the three models.

                                         Table 3: Changes in real wage
                          (a) Changes in real wage upon 10% increase in foreign price
                                   Baseline   Simple Roundabout    Sectoral Roundabout
              ŵ    p̂F · =1.1
              P̂
                    |               0.940            0.941                 0.931

                                     (b) Changes in real wage upon autarky
                                   Baseline   Simple Roundabout    Sectoral Roundabout
               ŵ       p̂F · →∞
               P̂
                    |               0.558            0.596                 0.441

    Our analysis so far has taken the network structure of firms as fixed. In the following
section, we analyze how the network forms endogenously.


4        Model with endogenous production networks
This section develops a model of trade with endogenous network formation, allowing buyer-
supplier relationships to change in response to trade shocks. The model builds on the
theoretical framework presented in Section 3.1. We assume the same preferences, demand
functions, production technology, and market structure as in the model with fixed production
networks. What is new is that firms now optimally choose their set of suppliers (i.e. the firm’s
sourcing strategy) and decide whether to import and export. We first describe the model
with endogenous network formation and discuss how it can be solved. Then we estimate
the model and use it to quantify how international trade affects firms’ production costs and
consumer prices with and without endogenous network formation.


4.1      Model
4.1.1     Sourcing strategies and extensive margins of trade

We assume that only buyers initiate linkages with other domestic firms. Forming linkages
to suppliers is costly, and firm j incurs a random, firm-pair-specific fixed cost fkj w to add

    29
     This force disappears when one assumes σ = ρ. Table 7c in Appendix D.8 shows that the real wage
decline is larger in the simple roundabout economy than in the baseline model when we assume σ = ρ = 2.


                                                      25
supplier k. The realization of fixed costs is known to the firm at the time it selects suppliers.
Firms in our model make profits due to positive mark-ups in sales to domestic and foreign
final consumers. Since the buyer is assumed to have all the bargaining power, firms do not
make profits from sales to other firms. Hence, variable profits are proportional to firm-level
sales to final consumers.
    Given a sourcing strategy, Zj , and export participation choice, IjF , the profits of firm j
                                                                                    P
are equal to variable profits less the fixed costs of domestic and foreign sourcing, k∈Zj fkj w,
and the fixed costs of exporting, IjF fjF w:
                                                                X
                         πj (Zj , IjF ) = πjvar (Zj , IjF ) −          fkj w − IjF fjF w.              (24)
                                                                k∈Zj


We assume that firm j exogenously meets a set of eligible suppliers, Zj . Firm j then en-
dogenously decides on the set of suppliers and whether or not to export:

                            max πj (Zj , IjF ) s.t. Zj ⊆ Zj , IjF ∈ {0, 1}.                            (25)
                           Zj ,IjF

When deciding on whether to add a supplier to its sourcing strategy, the firm is trading off
a reduction in its variable cost (leading to higher variable profits) for an increase in its fixed
cost. Solving this problem is difficult for two reasons. First, each firm faces a large discrete
choice problem of selecting Zj and IjF . Second, the profit function, πjvar (Zj , IjF ), depends
on the cost of other firms in the economy, which in turn are equilibrium objects. We now
describe how we tackle these two challenges.
    We overcome the first challenge by combining theoretical insights on complementarities
in the firms’ decision making with an iterative algorithm developed by Jia (2008).30 Given
our assumption that final demand is more elastic than the substitution between inputs in the
production function, σ > ρ, the marginal benefit of adding a supplier is increasing in the set
of existing suppliers, and it is higher if the firm exports. These complementarities become
useful when applying the iterative algorithm to solve the problem described in (25) for a
given firm given its knowledge about the costs of the eligible suppliers in Zj . The algorithm
works as follows. Holding the export participation choice fixed, one obtains a lower bound for
the optimal sourcing strategy by evaluating the profitability of adding each supplier given a
starting guess of no suppliers. The suppliers for which the marginal benefit of inclusion in the
sourcing strategy is positive are then included in the updated guess of the sourcing strategy.
Then again one evaluates the marginal benefit of each supplier and adds those with positive
marginal benefit to the updated guess. Due to complementarities, the marginal benefit of a
  30
     Antras et al. (2017) adopted this approach to solve a multi-country model of global sourcing. In recent
work, Arkolakis and Eckert (2017) have extended this approach to the case where suppliers are substitutes
in the firm’s profit function.


                                                      26
supplier is more likely to be positive as the set of suppliers in the current guess increases.
Once this iterative procedure stalls, one has obtained a lower bound for the optimal sourcing
choice given the exporting choice. Similarly, one obtains an upper bound by including all
eligible suppliers in the initial guess and dropping those suppliers with negative marginal
benefit from the updated guess of suppliers. The optimal sourcing set, for a given export
participation choice, then must be in between the two bounds. Eventually, one also repeats
the procedure for the alternative export participation choice, and finally selects the sourcing
strategy and exporting choice that yields the maximum profits. In Online Appendix F, we
describe the algorithm more formally and in detail.31
    To overcome the second challenge, it is necessary to deal with the fixed point problem that
arises because firms’ sourcing strategies are interdependent. Not only would it be extremely
challenging computationally to find a fixed point in the set of costs for all firms so that
these costs are consistent with everyone’s optimal sourcing decision, the uniqueness of such
a fixed point is also unlikely. On the one hand, if firms guess that suppliers have very high
unit costs, this could result in the formation of very few linkages and lead to high unit costs
overall. On the other hand, if firms guess that suppliers have very low unit costs, this could
result in the formation of many linkages and lead to low unit costs overall. To get around
these problems, we consider the formation of an acyclic network, postulating an ordering of
firms and restricting the eligible set of suppliers to firms that appear prior to the buyer.
    To be concrete, all firms can choose to import foreign inputs and to export their output
abroad. However, the set of eligible domestic suppliers varies across firms. Specifically, we
order firms in a sequence S = {1, 2, 3, ..., N } that restricts the set of eligible suppliers, Zj ,
as illustrated in Figure 4. Because we assumed buyers have the full bargaining power in
any firm-to-firm transactions, firms only need to know the choices of the firms prior in the
sequence. Taken together, these assumptions make the network formation tractable, as we
describe below.
    Firm 1 is first in the sequence and can only hire labor inputs. To make its decision of
how much labor to hire, firm 1 only needs to know the wage level, w, and domestic market
            E
demand, P 1−σ  . Firm 2 is second in the sequence and can hire both labor inputs as well as
purchase the input produced by firm 1. To make these decisions, firm 2 needs to know the
wage and market demand level as well as the cost of its eligible supplier (firm 1). Firm 3 can
hire labor and purchase the inputs from firm 1, firm 2, or both. And so on. Given a guess
                                                              E
for equilibrium wages, w, and domestic market demand, P 1−σ      , one can solve the problems of

  31
     The procedure is very similar to the one described in Antras et al. (2017). Here, we also develop a
greedy algorithm in case that the differences in the lower and upper bounds for the optimal solution are too
wide to evaluate the profits of all feasible combinations in between. As in Antras et al. (2017), we find that
in about 99% of the cases the lower and upper bounds are perfectly overlapping (see Table 9 in the Online
Appendix F).


                                                     27
the firms sequentially.

              Figure 4: Endogenous network formation — eligible connections


    Foreign
    Inputs




                                                                                     Domestic
    Labor         Firm 1       Firm 2       Firm 3       Firm 4
                                                                    Other Firms    Final Demand




                                                                                      Foreign
                                                                                   Final Demand



    Although the above ordering of firms simplifies the problem, we are still limited in the
number of possible sourcing strategies we can feasibly evaluate. We therefore restrict the
set of eligible suppliers for firm j, Zj , to be a random subset from the set of firms prior to
firm j in the sequence. The suppliers for firm j are then optimally chosen as the solution
to the problem in (25). In practice, we choose the maximum cardinality of Zj to be 300.
We have experimented with the threshold and found that our model fit and counterfactual
predictions are very similar when, alternatively, imposing a maximum of 200 or 250 eligible
suppliers. The firm’s order in the sequence of supplier choices and its set of eligible suppliers
are becoming attributes of the firm and therefore primitives of the model.
    Imposing a tie-breaking rule that in the case of indifference a supplier is included ensures
a unique solution to the problem in (25). As a consequence, the network formation will also
be unique given a set of wages and a guess for the price index. We can then alter wages, price
index, and expenditure to achieve labor market clearing, trade balance, and a fixed point for
the price index and expenditure. Importantly, we are searching here only for a fixed point
in wages and price index (only 2 scalars,) as opposed to searching for a large fixed point
vector in every firm’s costs and searching strategies. In other words, the ordering approach
implies that even with a rich micro structure and firm-level heterogeneity, knowing only two
equilibrium variables is sufficient to solve sequentially the firms’ problems. We discuss the
aggregation and the equilibrium with endogenous network structure more formally below.




                                               28
4.1.2    Aggregation and equilibrium

The model aggregation and equilibrium are broadly similar to the case with fixed networks.
However, there are a few notable differences. The first is that firms incur fixed costs — paid
in units of labor — to add a domestic buyer, import, or export. Therefore, the labor market
clearing condition becomes:
                                                                            
                             X µj − 1            X X
                      wL =            sLj xj + w        fkj + IjF fjF  .                        (26)
                             j
                                 µ j             j   k∈Z      j


   Additionally, a firm’s profit function now subtracts the incurred fixed costs, and a firm’s
sourcing strategy and export participation are now endogenous choices. However, the trade
balance condition remains unchanged. The following definition formally describes equilib-
rium with an endogenous network structure.

Definition 2 (Equilibrium with endogenous network structure)
Given foreign expenditure, EF , foreign price index, PF , and a set of prices by foreign sup-
pliers, {pF j }j , as well as set of eligible suppliers, Zj , that satisfies acyclicity of the network,
an equilibrium for the model with endogenous network structure and endogenous export par-
ticipation is a wage level, w, price index for the consumer, P , and aggregate expenditure, E,
as well as a set of sourcing strategies and export participation choices, such that the firm’s
optimization problem in (25), and equations (5), (7), (8), (9), (13), (14), (15), (16), and
(26) hold.

    We note that the equilibrium of the economy may not be necessarily efficient. A source
for a potential inefficiency is that the firm, when deciding on its sourcing strategy, is not
internalizing the full benefits its lowered variable cost have for its buyers. We will return to
discussing the efficiency of the economy later in the counterfactual analysis.


4.2     Assessing the assumptions about the shape of the network
Given the assumptions we invoked to solve the endogenous network formation, the resulting
network will be acyclic. As shown in Figure 5, in an acyclic firm network, there exists at
least one way to sort firms so that all directed edges face one direction. In contrast, in a
cyclic network at least one edge will face the opposite direction. This feature of our network
formation mechanism is admittedly restrictive. We now perform two checks to assess how
well the Belgian data can be approximated by an acyclic network.




                                                  29
                         Figure 5: Examples of acyclic and cyclic networks


        A            B                  D                E        A           B                 D          E


                               C                                                       C
                    Directed acyclic network                                Directed cyclic network




       A        C             B             D            E        A       C             B             D    E


                Directed acyclic network, sorted                         Directed cyclic network, sorted



4.2.1       How cyclic is the production network?

Let ν (i) be an ordering of firms that maps firms {i, j, k, · · · } ∈ Θ into numbers from
{1, · · · N }. To describe how cyclic the Belgian production network is, we want to find the
optimal ν (k) that minimizes the following objective function:
                                            X
                                    min            1 {i ∈ Zj } 1 {ν (i) > ν (j)} ,
                                   {ν(k)}
                                            i,j


where Zj is the supplier set of firm j. Solving this problem corresponds to minimizing the
number of directed edges that are facing the direction opposite to that of the sorting order.
In other words, we try to find an ordering that minimizes the number of arrows facing to
the left in the cyclic network in Figure 5.
    To solve this problem, which is also known as the feedback arc set problem, we adopt
an algorithm proposed by Eades, Lin, and Smyth (1993). The details of the computational
algorithm and implementation are presented in Online Appendix E. Intuitively, the algorithm
places firms with a high net outdegree (number of outgoing links minus number of incoming
links) at the beginning of the ordering and those firms with a low net outdegree towards
the end of the ordering. The algorithm offers a local minimum, showing that at most 18%
of edges in the whole firm-to-firm network in 2012 violate acyclicity.32 We also search for
an ordering that minimizes the value of firm-to-firm sales in violation of acyclicity.33 We

  32
      While there is no perfect reference point for this figure, we can compare it to the structure of the
directed social network Twitter. Simpson, Srinivasan, and Thomo (2016) calculate that 23% of edges are in
violation of acyclicity in the Twitter network in the year 2010.
   33
                                                             P
      Specifically, we solve the following problem: min{ν(k)} i,j xij 1 {ν (i) > ν (j)}, where xij is the value


                                                             30
find that no more than 23% of firm-to-firm sales are in violation of acyclicity. We will refer
to the former as the unweighted ordering algorithm and the latter as the weighted ordering
algorithm. Note that under both approaches, this heuristic algorithm does not guarantee a
global minimum solution. Likely there exists another ordering where the approximation of
an acyclic network is even better than the one we find.34
    A natural question that arises is how different the structure of an economy with an
acyclic network is in comparison to the economy observed in the data. One way to make this
comparison is to calculate input-output tables with and without the firms in buyer-supplier
relationships that violate acyclicity. We find that when calculating input-output tables with
72 sectors, the correlations between the input-output table coefficients from the full data and
the data without links in violation of the ordering are high.35 When we use the unweighted
ordering algorithm output, the correlation is 0.90, and it is even higher, 0.97, when using
the weighted ordering algorithm output.36

4.2.2    Gains from trade under fixed networks: cyclic versus acyclic production
         networks

Another way to assess the assumption of an acyclic network is to examine how the results
based on the exogenous network model change if we exclude transactions that violate acyclic-
ity. It is reassuring to find that estimated effect of international trade on consumer prices
and firms’ costs of production are very similar if we only use firm-to-firm sales that are
consistent with the acyclic network obtained by the ordering algorithm described in Section

of the sales from firm i to firm j.
   34
      Coleman and Wirth (2009) and Simpson et al. (2016) find that compared to other algorithms proposed
in the computer science literature, the algorithm of Eades et al. (1993) does well in terms of speed and
finding a low objective.
   35
      To construct the input-output table coefficients, we aggregate firm-to-firm transactions within the sup-
plying and buying sector. We note that this procedure differs from the national account definition of an
input-output table. First, the rows and columns of our aggregated tables are referring to the main sectors of
the buyers and suppliers, but these firms can also have a significant share of their production in other sectors.
Second, in national account tables, the contribution of the wholesale and retail sectors to the production of
the other goods only refer to the trade margin of retailers and wholesalers. In our data, the wholesale and
retail sectors are accounted based on their total sales and total input consumption and not on their trade
margin.
   36
      These correlations remain high when we drop the diagonal coefficients. With the unweighted ordering
algorithm output, the correlation is 0.89, and with the weighted ordering algorithm output, the correlation
stays at 0.97. We also find that these high correlations are robust when doing the same exercise at the 4-digit
level with 524 industries. The correlation is 0.89 when using the unweighted ordering algorithm output and
0.93 when using the weighted ordering algorithm output. Finally, this heuristic algorithm produces orderings
that are highly correlated with upstreamness measures in the existing literature, such as that from Antràs,
Chor, Fally, and Hillberry (2012). The rank correlation between the upstreamness measure from Antràs
et al. (2012) and the ordering from the unweighted algorithm’s is -0.53, and the rank correlation between
the ordering from the weighted algorithm is -0.76. However, this upstream measure produces much larger
objectives, with 36% of links and 31% of firm-to-firm sales in violation of acyclicity.


                                                       31
4.2.1. Specifically, we keep the direct import share of each firm the same as in the data, set
all transactions in violation of the ordering to zero, and adjust all other domestic firm-to-firm
input shares such that share of each firm j’s input purchases, i∈Zj sij , is unchanged.37 The
                                                                 P

results presented in Table 8 in Online Appendix D.8 show that the gains from trade under
an exogenous network are virtually identical if we only use the subset of transactions for
which the domestic production network is acyclic.


4.3     Determining the model parameters
When allowing for endogenous network formation, we are not able to analytically solve
the model. Instead, we use the data to determine the model parameters and then provide
numerical results for several counterfactual analyses. The goal of these numerical analyses
is to draw inference about how endogenous network formation may affect gains-from-trade
calculation in an economy that matches our data in important ways.
    In the estimation of our model, we simulate 100,000 Belgian firms, approximately the
same size as our sample in 2012. A firm is characterized by a set of eligible suppliers that
satisfies the ordering, a core productivity level, a vector of firm-pair-specific cost shifters,
a foreign input cost shifter, a foreign demand shifter, a vector of fixed cost draws for all
eligible suppliers, and fixed costs of importing and exporting. We normalize firms’ labor
productivity shifters, αLj = 1, and firms’ domestic final demand shifters, βjH = 1.38 Firms
are positioned in an order from 1 to 100,000. The sets of up to 300 eligible suppliers are
drawn randomly such that the eligible suppliers are positioned earlier than the buyer in the
order of firms.
    As a first step of the estimation, we recover the productivity distribution of firms (scaled
by some general equilibrium objects) from the identity

                                           1/(σ−1)
                                         xiH                P E 1/(σ−1)
                                           1/(1−ρ)
                                                     = φi               .                                  (27)
                                         sLi                   µw
                                                                                                         1/(σ−1)
Observing all the terms on the left hand side enables us to estimate the distribution φi P E µw .
After visually inspecting the distribution, we assume it is log-normal and estimate the scale
parameter to be −1.52 and the dispersion parameter to be 0.85.
   We next turn to the parameterization for the distributions of cost and demand shifters.
We choose a parameterization for the firm-pair-specific shifter in the production function,

   37
      The only exception is when there is no other domestic supplier of a firm, in which case in the data with
only acyclic transactions the domestic firm-to-firm input share is set to zero.
   38
      Note that αLj as well as αkj (∀k ∈ Zj ) enter multiplicatively with the inverse of firm productivity, 1/φj
in the cost function in equation (7). We therefore normalize αLj = 1. As we have only data on revenues and
costs (not separated by price and quantity), we normalize the domestic final demand shifter, βjH = 1.


                                                       32
αkj , such that it can generate a more skewed distribution of firms’ outdegrees than of firms’
indegrees. Specifically, we assume that the αkj draw is a product of a supplier-k-specific
random variables and an i.i.d. firm-pair-specific random variable. Outside the steps of the
estimation described below, we choose the supplier-k-specific random variable to be drawn
from a Beta distribution with shape parameters 0.1 and 0.9. We assume that firm-pair-
specific random variables contained in αkj , as well as αF j , and βjF are independent draws
from three log-normal distributions which share a common dispersion parameter, Φα,β     disp , and
                                      αdom  αF      βF
have different scale parameters, Φscale , Φscale , Φscale , respectively.
     Similarly, the fixed cost draws for domestic purchases from other firms, imports, and
exports, are drawn independently from three log-normal distributions with scale parameters
           fimp         fexp
Φfscale
   dom
        , Φscale , and Φscale and a common dispersion parameter, Φfdisp . Overall, there are 8
parameters to be estimated.
     We use a method of simulated moments to estimate our parameters. We target three sets
of moments to match. The first set of moments describes the domestic sourcing patterns
of firms. For example, we target the model to match the quartile distribution of number of
suppliers. Following the procedure used by Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011), we include
in the first vector of moments generated by the model, m̂1 (Φ), the fraction of firms falling
into the bins of the first, second, third, and fourth quartile of the number of suppliers. We
also target the distribution of customers, share of labor costs in firms’ costs, and the firm-to-
firm input shares (conditional on observing trade between firms). Using the same procedure
as above, we include the fraction of firms in the four quartile bins of the distribution (using
as thresholds the quartiles observed in the data). This generates 16 elements in the vector
m̂1 (Φ).
     The second set of moments characterizes firm-level patterns of imports and exports. We
include in m̂2 (Φ) the share of firms that import and export, respectively. We also include
the fraction of firms falling into the bins of the first, second, third, and fourth quartile of
firms’ direct share of foreign inputs (conditional on importing). Furthermore, we target the
quartiles of the total share of foreign inputs shown in Figure 1a. Similarly, on the export
side, we target the quartiles of the direct share of exports (conditional on exporting) as well
the total share of exports (as shown in Figure 1b). There are 18 elements in the vector
m̂2 (Φ).
     As a third set of moments, we include important aggregate targets such as the ratio
of aggregate exports to aggregate final demand and the import content of domestic final
demand. There are 2 elements in the vector m̂3 (Φ).
     We describe the difference between the moments in the data and in the simulated model
by ŷ(Φ):



                                               33
                                                                  
                                                      m1 − m̂1 (Φ)
                                ŷ(Φ) = m − m̂(Φ) =  m2 − m̂2 (Φ)  ,
                                                                  

                                                      m3 − m̂3 (Φ)
and the following moment condition is assumed to hold at the true parameter value Φ0 :

                                               E [ŷ(Φ0 )] = 0.                                      (28)

   The method of simulated moments selects the model parameters that minimize the fol-
lowing objective function:
                           Φ̂ = arg min [ŷ(Φ)]> W [ŷ(Φ)] ,                     (29)
                                                Φ

where W is a weighting matrix.39

4.3.1      Estimation results

Table 4 shows the values of the estimated parameters.

                                     Table 4: Estimated parameters

                      Preference and production                           Fixed costs
                                                                           fimp    fexp
                     Φ̂αscale
                         dom
                              Φ̂αscale
                                  F
                                       Φ̂βscale
                                           F
                                                Φ̂α,β
                                                  disp        Φ̂fscale
                                                                  dom
                                                                         Φ̂scale Φ̂scale   Φ̂fdisp
                     -4.42 -2.22 -2.01 2.34                   -3.21       2.64    6.75     6.98

We note that the scale of the estimated parameters is affected by the choice of normalizations
for the foreign market size and the price of the foreign input. We therefore focus on the model
fit given these parameter estimates. Table 5 shows the targeted moments generated by the
estimated parameters, compared with the moments from the data. Note that instead of
showing the moments directly (i.e., the fraction of firms falling into each quartile bin), we
show the values of the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles in both the data and model. The
estimated model fits well the targeted statistics of firm-to-firm transactions. In particular,
the model succeeds in generating a more skewed distribution of the number of domestic
buyers than of the domestic suppliers. This enables the model to match also the differences
in the distribution of total foreign input shares and total export shares. Analogous to Figure
1, we plot the distributions of direct and total foreign input shares and export shares from the
estimated model and show them in Online Appendix H.1. While we succeed in generating
different distributions of firms’ exposure to imports and exports, both directly and indirectly,
the model also matches well the magnitude of aggregate imports relative to domestic final
demand. Finally, we also match quite well the import content in domestic final demand,
  39
       We weight the moments equally, hence the weighting matrix is the identity matrix.


                                                         34
   siH sTF otal
P
  i        i , which is a key statistic that determines the magnitude of the change in real
wage in response to a change in the foreign price (see equation (20)).

                                Table 5: Model fit: targeted moments

                                                                                             Data      Model
                   Number of dom. suppliers 25th percentile                                   19        17
                   Number of dom. suppliers 50th percentile                                   33        30
                   Number of dom. suppliers 75th percentile                                   55        49
                    Number of dom. buyers 25th percentile                                      2         2
                    Number of dom. buyers 50th percentile                                      9        13
                    Number of dom. buyers 75th percentile                                     34        46
                      Share of labor costs 25th percentile                                   0.17       0.12
                      Share of labor costs 50th percentile                                   0.34       0.25
                      Share of labor costs 75th percentile                                   0.54       0.49
                    Firm-to-firm input share 25th percentile                                0.0002     0.0000
                    Firm-to-firm input share 50th percentile                                0.0012     0.0003
                    Firm-to-firm input share 75th percentile                                0.0053     0.0034
                         Share of firms that import                                          0.19       0.19
       Direct foreign input share (among importers) 25th percentile                          0.01       0.01
       Direct foreign input share (among importers) 50th percentile                          0.28       0.05
       Direct foreign input share (among importers) 75th percentile                          0.67       0.25
                  Total foreign input share 25th percentile                                  0.24       0.18
                  Total foreign input share 50th percentile                                  0.39       0.31
                  Total foreign input share 75th percentile                                  0.55       0.44
                         Share of firms that export                                          0.12       0.10
           Direct export share (among exporters) 25th percentile                             0.01       0.02
           Direct export share (among exporters) 50th percentile                             0.10       0.14
           Direct export share (among exporters) 75th percentile                             0.62       0.50
                     Total export share 25th percentile                                     0.0008     0.0000
                     Total export share 50th percentile                                     0.0156     0.0328
                     Total export share 75th percentile                                     0.1005     0.2982
 Ratio of aggregate exports to aggregate sales to domestic final demand                      0.82       0.90
                Import content of domestic final demand                                      0.58       0.65
 Notes: Percentiles are calculated based on all firms in the sample. Share of labor costs refers to the
 fraction of labor costs in costs (labor costs + domestic purchases + imports) and the percentiles are cal-
 culated based on all firms the sample. Firm-to-firm share refers to the fraction of costs a firm spends
 on one particular supplier and the percentiles are calculated for all firm-to-firm transactions. The per-
 centiles for share of exports in total firm sales are calculated for all firms with positive export sales. The
 percentiles for share of imports in firm inputs are calculated for all firms with positive import purchases.


   We also examine how well the model fits moments that were not directly targeted in
the estimation. Specifically, we have not targeted directly the association of size between


                                                      35
buyers and suppliers that trade with each other. Consistent with the data, the model
predicts a weak negative correlation between the number of suppliers of the buying firms
(indegree buyer) and the number of buyer firms of suppliers (outdegree supplier). Similarly,
the correlation between sales of the buying and selling firm is close to zero both in the
data and in the model. Analogous to Figure 2, the model generates the pattern that the
size premium increases sharply for low values of direct import and export shares and only
gradually increase for higher direct shares. In comparison, the sales premium for total share
measures increases more gradually (Figure 6 in Online Appendix H.2).

                         Table 6: Model fit: non-targeted moments

                                                                                Data    Model
                 Corr (Indegree buyer, Outdegree supplier)                      -0.05   -0.13
                     Corr (Sales buyer, Sales supplier)                         -0.02   0.01



4.4    Effects of changes in the price of foreign goods with endoge-
       nous network formation
Equipped with the parameter estimates of our model, we next turn to the same counterfactual
experiment as we studied under fixed linkages, i.e., a 10% increase in the price of the imported
goods. As before, we solve for the change in the domestic wage such that trade is balanced
and the labor market clears. Here, however, we allow firms to also change their set of
suppliers (i.e. the firm’s sourcing strategy) or alter the decision to import and export in
response to the trade shock.
    Figure 6 presents the density of the change in firms costs in the model with endogenous
network formation. Similar to what we found in the model with a fixed network structure,
the unit cost of a large majority of firms increase. Some firms, however, benefit from the rise
in the domestic price index, which increases their overall scale and enables them to add more
suppliers and obtain lower unit cost. Overall, we find that under endogenous networks the
number of domestic linkages would increase by 1% in response to a 10% increase in the price
of foreign goods. Underlying this net increase, however, is churn in the domestic linkages
between firms in the economy.
    To better understand which kind of firms have the highest unit cost increases and which
kind of firms can actually reduce their unit cost, we examine ex-ante firm outcomes and
the counterfactual response in unit cost, number of suppliers, etc. Figure 7 depicts the
univariate correlations between firms’ cost changes and observable firm-level variables prior
to the change. Recall that under fixed networks, the total share of foreign inputs are the key
firm-level predictor for firms’ cost increases in response to a change in the import price. Even

                                              36
under endogenous networks, the total share of foreign inputs is still a strong indicator of how
much firms’ costs will change in response to a change in the price of the imported good. The
cost change is also negatively correlated with firms’ share of labor costs in variable costs,
and positively correlated with firms’ size variables such as log total sales and log sales to
domestic final demand. We also find that firms that have a high total foreign input share,
high export share, or a low labor share are more likely to reduce their number of suppliers in
response to a 10% increase in the price of imported goods (see Table 10 in Online Appendix
H.3 for supporting regression results). Due to complementarity in the exporting, importing,
and domestic sourcing decisions, it is intuitive that the firms that lose the most from the
price increase in the foreign goods may also be the ones that reduce the most the number of
domestic suppliers. Those firms that have a low total foreign input share or a high labor share
are more likely to see a reduction in their unit cost when the foreign input price increases
(see Table 10 in Online Appendix H.3 and Figure 7).

                       Figure 6: Cost changes under endogenous networks
                         0.025




                          0.02




                         0.015




                          0.01




                         0.005




                             0
                              0.9     0.95       1        1.05       1.1      1.15



Notes: The figure shows the density of cost changes from a 10% increase in the price of foreign goods under
endogenous networks.


   To analyze the quantitative importance of endogenous networks, we also compute the
analogous cost changes under fixed networks. To compute the cost changes under fixed
networks, we start from the economy generated by our endogenous network model and
consider the same change in the foreign price while holding fixed the choice of suppliers as
well as the decisions to import and export. Hence as in Section 3, when conducting model

                                                     37
                              Figure 7: Correlations with firm-level variables

                                                       +
                                                               +

                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                                          +

                          +
                              +




                                                           +
                                                                   +

                                                   +
                                                               +

                                                                        +
                                                                                            +

                                               +
                                                                   +

                                                           +
                                                                                  +


             0      0.1           0.2    0.3           0.4                  0.5       0.6       0.7       0.8   0.9   1
Notes: The black bars depict the univariate correlations between firms’ cost changes under endogenous
networks and observable firm-level variables prior to the counterfactual change. The white bars depict the
univariate correlations between firms’ cost changes under exogenous networks and observable firm-level
variables.


comparisons we compare between models that have identical fit of firm-level and aggregate
outcomes of sales, intermediates, imports, and exports prior to the counterfactual change.
    We next turn to the changes in the real wage that are summarized in Table 7. For a 10%
increase in the foreign price, we find that the real wage declines in the endogenous network
model by 6.18 percent while the real wage declines by 6.79 in the fixed network economy.
Hence, the re-formation of buyer-seller linkages dampens the aggregate impact of a negative
shock. For large changes in the price of the foreign goods, it becomes more even more costly
for the economy to be tied to the fixed network structure and the dampening effect gets
stronger. The real wage would fall by 7 percentage points less under endogenous than under
fixed network structure when going to autarky. In relative terms, the real wage decline is
about 10 percent weaker due to the endogeneity of the production network.
    We also consider a 10% or 50% decline in the foreign price. It is easy to show that for an
efficient economy, the flexibility of the network structure must dampen the aggregate effect
of a negative shock (i.e., increase of the foreign price) and amplify the benefits of a positive
shock (i.e., a decrease in the foreign price). However, as discussed above, the endogenous
network economy is not necessarily efficient. In particular, firms do not fully internalize the
benefits their cost reductions bring to their buyers, their buyers’ buyers, etc.


                                                                       38
    Therefore, whether endogenous networks amplify/ dampen the effects of economic shocks
is ultimately an empirical question. For a 10% decrease in the price of foreign goods, we
find that allowing for endogenous network formation generates a smaller increase in the real
wage. By comparison, when considering a 50% decrease in the price of foreign goods, we
find that the endogeneity of the network amplifies the benefits of this positive shock, and
yields a 25 percentage points real wage gain over and above the fixed network benchmark.
We have tried various alternative parameterizations of our endogenous networks model and
robustly obtained the result that the endogenous network structure dampens the effect of a
large negative shock (i.e., autarky) and amplifies the benefits of a large positive shock (i.e.,
50% reduction in the foreign price).

                Table 7: Changes in real wage upon change in foreign price

                                        Endogenous Network         Fixed Network
             10% increase (p̂F · = 1.1)       0.9388                   0.9321
               Autarky (p̂F · → ∞)            0.4844                   0.4157
             10% decrease (p̂F · = 0.9)       1.0681                   1.0881
             50% decrease (p̂F · = 0.5)       2.2779                   2.0170




5     Conclusion
In this paper we have used novel data on the domestic transactions between firms together
with information about firm-level exports and imports to illustrate that many firms are
strongly indirectly linked to international trade even though they may not be direct importers
or exporters themselves. We have shown that the total share of foreign inputs can be used
as a sufficient statistic together with the elasticity of substitution in the production function
to calculate firm-level unit cost increases from banning international trade. We have also
developed a novel framework for analyzing the endogenous formation of the production
network. Our conceptual insight is that it is much more tractable to model the formation
of an acyclic than a cyclic production network. Reassuringly, our analysis suggests that an
acyclic production network is a reasonable approximation to the full network, in the sense
that the amount of transactions to be dropped to yield an acyclic network is not too large,
the input-output table coefficients are similar to the full data, and the gains from trade under
fixed networks are nearly the same as when using the full data. We hope that our model
of network formation can prove useful in other contexts in macroeconomics or industrial
organization beyond the analysis of international trade.




                                               39
References
Acemoglu, D., V. M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012):
 “The Network Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 80, 1977–2016.

Ahn, J., A. K. Khandelwal, and S.-J. Wei (2011): “The role of intermediaries in
 facilitating trade,” Journal of International Economics, 84, 73 – 85.

Amiti, M., M. Dai, R. C. Feenstra, and J. Romalis (2017): “How Did Chinas WTO
 Entry Benefit U.S. Consumers?” Working Paper 23487, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Amiti, M., O. Itskhoki, and J. Konings (2014): “Importers, Exporters, and Exchange
 Rate Disconnect,” American Economic Review, 104, 1942–1978.

Amiti, M. and J. Konings (2007): “Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Pro-
 ductivity: Evidence from Indonesia,” American Economic Review, 97, 1611–1638.

Antràs, P., D. Chor, T. Fally, and R. Hillberry (2012): “Measuring the Up-
 streamness of Production and Trade Flows Three Measures of Upstreamness,” American
 Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 102, 412–416.

Antràs, P. and A. de Gortari (2017): “On the Geography of Global Value Chains,” .

Antras, P., T. C. Fort, and F. Tintelnot (2017): “The Margins of Global Sourcing:
 Theory and Evidence from U.S. Firms,” American Economic Review, 107, 2514–64.

Antràs, P. and E. Helpman (2004): “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy,
 112, 552–580.

——— (2008): “Contractual Frictions and Global Sourcing,” in The Organization of Firms
 in a Global Economy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012): “New Trade Models
 , Same Old Gains?” American Economic Review, 102, 94–130.

Arkolakis, C. and F. Eckert (2017): “Combinatorial Discrete Choice,” 1–34.

Atalay, E., A. Hortacsu, J. Roberts, and C. Syverson (2011): “Network structure
 of production,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108, 5199–5202.

Baqaee, D. R. (2014): “Cascading Failures in Production Networks,” mimeo.



                                         40
Baqaee, D. R. and E. Farhi (2017): “The Macroeconomic Impact of Microeconomic
 Shocks: Beyond Hulten’s Theorem,” mimeo.

——— (2018): “Productivity and Misallocation in General Equilibrium,” .

Barrot, J. N. and J. Sauvagnat (2016): “Input Specificity and the Propagation of
 Idiosyncratic Shocks in Production,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 1543–1592.

Bernard, A. B., E. J. Blanchard, I. Van Beveren, and H. Vandenbussche
 (2016a): “Carry-Along Trade,” mimeo.

Bernard, A. B., E. Dhyne, G. Magerman, K. Manova, and A. Moxnes (2018):
 “The Origins of Firm Heterogeneity: A Production Network Approach,” .

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2007): “Firms in
 International Trade,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 105–130.

——— (2010): “Wholesalers and Retailers in US Trade,” American Economic Review, 100,
 408–13.

Bernard, A. B., A. Moxnes, and Y. U. Saito (2016b): “Production Networks, Geog-
 raphy and Firm Performance,” mimeo.

Bigio, S. and J. La’o (2016): “Financial Frictions in Production Networks,” mimeo.

Black, P. E. (1999): “Algorithms and Theory of Computation Handbook,” .

——— (2005): “Greedy Algorithm,” Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures, 2.

Blaum, J., C. Lelarge, and M. Peters (2016): “The Gains from Input Trade with
 Heterogeneous Importers,” mimeo.

Boehm, C., A. Flaaen, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2015): “Input Linkages and the
 Transmission of Shocks : Firm-Level Evidence from the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake,” .

Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2015): “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
 NAFTA,” Review of Economic Studies, 82, 1–44.

Carvalho, V. M. and B. Grassi (2017): “Large Firm Dynamics and the Business Cycle,”
 mimeo.

Carvalho, V. M., M. Nirei, Y. Saito, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2016): “Supply Chain
 Disruptions: Evidence from the Great East Japan Earthquake,” mimeo.



                                         41
Carvalho, V. M. and N. Voigtländer (2015): “Input Diffusion and the Evolution of
 Production Networks,” mimeo.

Chaney, T. (2014): “The Network Structure of International Trade,” American Economic
 Review, 104, 3600–3634.

——— (2016): “Networks in International Trade,” The Oxford Handbook of the Economics
 of Networks.

Coleman, T. and A. Wirth (2009): “Ranking Tournaments, Local Search and a New
 Algorithm,” Journal of Experimental Algorithmics, 14, 6–22.

Costinot, A. and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (2014): “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quanti-
 fying the Consequences of Globalization,” in Handbook of International Economics, vol. 4,
 197–261.

De Gortari, A. (2017): “Disentangling Global Value Chains,” mimeo.

De Loecker, J., C. Fuss, and J. Van Biesebroeck (2014): “International Competition
 and Firm Performance : Evidence from Belgium,” NBB Working Paper Series, 269.

De Loecker, J., P. K. Goldberg, A. K. Khandelwal, and N. Pavcnik (2016):
 “Prices, Markups, and Trade Reform,” Econometrica, 84, 445–510.

Dhyne, E. and C. Duprez (2017): “Its a Small, Small World... A Guided Tour of the
 Belgian Production Network,” International Productivity Monitor, 32, 84–96.

Dhyne, E., G. Magerman, and S. Rubinova (2015): “The Belgian Production Network
 2002-2012,” National Bank of Belgium Working Paper Series, 288.

Dhyne, E., A. Petrin, V. Smeets, and F. Warzynski (2017): “Multi-Product Firms,
 Import Competition, and the Evolution of Firm-product Technical Efficiencies,” mimeo.

Domar, E. D. (1961): “On the Measurement of Technological Change,” The Economic
 Journal, 71, 709–729.

Eades, P., X. Lin, and W. F. Smyth (1993): “A Fast and Effective Heuristic for the
 Feedback Arc Set Problem,” Information Processing Letters, 47, 319–323.

Eaton, J., D. Kinkins, J. Tybout, and D. Xu (2016): “Two-sided Search in Interna-
 tional Markets,” mimeo.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002): “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica,
 70, 1741–1779.

                                           42
Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz (2011): “An Anatomy of International Trade:
 Evidence From French Firms,” Econometrica, 79, 1453–1498.

——— (2018): “Firm-to-Firm Trade: Imports, Exports, and the Labor Market,” .

Fujii, D., Y. Ono, and Y. U. Saito (2017): “Indirect exports and wholesalers: Evidence
 from interfirm transaction network data,” Japan and the World Economy, 44, 35 – 47.

Furusawa, T., T. Inui, K. Ito, and H. Tang (2017): “Global Sourcing and Domestic
 Production Networks,” mimeo.

Gabaix, X. (2011): “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 79,
 733–772.

Ganapati, S. (2018): “The Modern Wholesaler: Global Sourcing, Domestic Distribution,
 and Scale Economies,” mimeo.

Garetto, S. (2013): “Input Sourcing and Multinational Production,” American Economic
 Journal: Macroeconomics, 5, 118–151.

Goldberg, P. K., A. K. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova (2010): “Im-
 ported Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India,” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 1727–1767.

Gopinath, G. and B. Neiman (2014): “Trade Adjustment and Productivity in Large
 Crises,” American Economic Review, 104, 793–831.

Halpern, L., M. Koren, and A. Szeidl (2015): “Imported Inputs and Productivity,”
 American Economic Review, 105, 3660–3703.

Ho, K. (2009): “Insurer-Provider Networks in the Medical Care Market,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 99, 393–430.

Hulten, C. R. (1978): “Growth Accounting with Intermediate Inputs,” The Review of
 Economic Studies, 45, 511–518.

Jia, P. (2008): “What Happens When Wal-Mart Comes to Town: An Empirical Analysis
  of the Discount Retailing Industry,” Econometrica, 76, 1263–1316.

Johnson, R. C. (2018): “Measuring global value chains,” Annual Review of Economics,
  207–236.

Johnson, R. C. and G. Noguera (2012): “Accounting for intermediates: Production
  sharing and trade in value added,” Journal of International Economics, 86, 224–236.

                                         43
Kikkawa, A. K., G. Magerman, and E. Dhyne (2018): “Imperfect Competition in
 Firm-to-Firm Trade,” mimeo.

Lim, K. (2018): “Endogenous Production Networks and the Business Cycle,” Working
  paper.

Liu, E. (2016): “Industrial Policies and Economic Development,” mimeo.

Magerman, G., K. De Bruyne, E. Dhyne, and Van Hove (2016): “Heterogeneous
 Firms and the Micro Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” National Bank of Belgium Work-
 ing Paper Series, 312.

Melitz, M. J. and S. J. Redding (2014): “Missing Gains from Trade?” American
 Economic Review, 104, 317–21.

Morales, E., G. Sheu, and A. Zahler (2015): “Extended Gravity,” mimeo.

Oberfield, E. (2018): “A Theory of InputOutput Architecture,” Econometrica, 86, 559–
 589.

Oberfield, E. and D. Raval (2014): “Micro Data and Macro Technology,” mimeo.

Ossa, R. (2015): “Why trade matters after all,” Journal of International Economics, 97,
 266–277.

Rodrı́guez-Clare, A. (2010): “Offshoring in a Ricardian World,” American Economic
 Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, 227–258.

Simpson, M., V. Srinivasan, and A. Thomo (2016): “Efficient Computation of Feed-
  back Arc Set at Web-Scale,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 10, 133–144.

Spiegler, R. (2016): “Bayesian Networks and Boundedly Rational Expectations,” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 131, 1243–1290.

Taschereau-Dumouchel, M. (2018): “Cascades and Fluctuations in an Economy with
 an Endogenous Production Network,” .




                                          44
A      Theoretical Results
A.1     Proof of Proposition 1
Proof.
  We have
                                                                X
                                 sTF otal
                                     j    = sF j +                   sij sTF otal
                                                                             i
                                                                i
                                                                         "                                    #
                                                                X                   X
                                           = sF j +                  sij sF i +         ski (sF k + · · · )
                                                                i                   k


and
                                      X
                        c1−ρ
                         j   =              ρ−1 ρ−1 1−ρ
                                           αkj          ρ−1 ρ−1 1−ρ
                                               φj ck + αLj φj w     + αFρ−1 ρ−1 1−ρ
                                                                         j φj  pF j ,
                                       k


where pF j is common across j.
    Consider a uniform foreign price change, where firm j’s import price changes to p̃F · . Then
firm j’s new cost function is
                                      X
                        c̃1−ρ
                          j   =             ρ−1 ρ−1 1−ρ
                                           αkj           ρ−1 ρ−1 1−ρ
                                               φj c̃k + αLj φj w̃    + αFρ−1 ρ−1 1−ρ
                                                                          j φj  p̃F · .
                                       k


Computing the change in the costs yields:
                                      ρ−1 ρ−1 1−ρ  ρ−1 ρ−1 1−ρ
                                                               + αFρ−1 ρ−1 1−ρ
                            P
                                 k   αkj φj c̃k + αLj φj w̃         j φj  p̃F ·
         ĉ1−ρ
           j   |p̂F ·   =P            ρ−1 ρ−1 1−ρ ρ−1 ρ−1 1−ρ
                                 k   αkj φj ck + αLj φj w     + αFρ−1 ρ−1 1−ρ
                                                                   j φj  pF j
                            X
                        =            skj ĉ1−ρ
                                           k   + sLj ŵ1−ρ + sF j p̂F1−ρ
                                                                      ·
                             k
                                                                                               !
                            X              X
                        =            skj                 slk ĉ1−ρ
                                                               l   + sLk ŵ1−ρ + sF k p̂1−ρ
                                                                                        F·         + sLj ŵ1−ρ + sF j p̂F1−ρ
                                                                                                                          ·
                             k                   l
                                                 X                                                  X
                        =   sF j p̂1−ρ
                                   F·      +              skj sF k p̂F1−ρ
                                                                       · + · · · + sLj ŵ
                                                                                          1−ρ
                                                                                              +          skj sLk ŵ1−ρ + · · ·
                                                     k                                               k
                                                                             1−ρ
                                      sTF otal            1−ρ
                                                                    sTF otal
                                                 
                        = 1−              j          ŵ         +       j p̂F ·


    For small changes, log-linearize equation (11) around p̂F · = ĉj = ŵ = 1 and obtain

                                            dcj                 dw            dpF ·
                                                = 1 − sTF otal
                                                          j         + sTF otal
                                                                          j          .
                                             cj                  w              pF ·



                                                                             45
    This result can be obtained in a more general setting. Consider a constant returns to
scale production function. Denote firm j’s cost function to produce y units of output with
c({pkj }k∈Zj , w, y). Taking the total derivatives of the cost function yields:

                          X ∂c({pkj }k∈Zj , w, y)        ∂c({pkj }k∈Zj , w, y)     ∂c({pkj }k∈Zj , w, y)
dc({pkj }k∈Zj , w, y) =                           dpkj +                       dw+                       dy
                          k∈Z
                                   ∂p kj                         ∂w                         ∂y
                             j



Dividing both sides with c({pkj }k∈Zj , w, y), we get:

                           ∂c({p
                            kj k∈Zj}     ,w,y)                    j
                                                                   ∂c({pkj }k∈Z ,w,y)
                                                                                 ∂c({pkj }k∈Zj ,w,y)
dc({pkj }k∈Zj , w, y) y        ∂y        dy   X pkj         ∂pkj       dpkj w                        dw
                                                                                         ∂w
                     −                      =                               +                           .
c({pkj }k∈Zj , w, y) c({pkj }k∈Zj , w, y) y   k∈Z
                                                  c({p kj }k∈Zj , w, y) pkj   c({p kj }k∈Zj , w, y) w
                                                               j


                                              ∂c({pkj }k∈Z ,w,y)
                                                   j
                                                                                        ∂c({pkj }k∈Z ,w,y)
                                                                                             j
By Shephard’s lemma, we also have             ∂pkj
                                                        = xkj ({pkj }k∈Zj , w, y) and    ∂w
                                                                                                    =
`j ({pkj }k∈Zj , w, y). In addition, from the constant returns to scale assumption, c({pkj }k∈Zj , w, y) =
yc({pkj }k∈Zj , w, 1). Rearrange and obtain:

                           dc({pkj }k∈Zj , w, 1)   X       dpkj       dw
                                                 =     skj      + sLj    , ∀y.
                           c({pkj }k∈Zj , w, 1)    k∈Z
                                                           p kj        w
                                                               j



That is, if the production function is CRS, the percentage change in the unit cost equals a
weighted average of percentage change in factor prices, with a factor’s weight equal to the
expenditure share on the factor. We can then iterate forward to arrive at equation (12).



A.2     Proof of Proposition 2
Proof.
  From equation (5), we have the expression for the price index after the shock,
                                                                            1
                                                                         ! 1−σ
                                                 X
                                       P̃ =           βiσ−1 µ1−σ c̃1−σ
                                                                   i             .
                                                  i




                                                          46
Combining this expression with the pre-shock price index P , we have

                                                    P̃
                                      P̂ |p̂F · =
                                                    P
                                                                                          1
                                                                 βiσ−1 µ1−σ c̃i1−σ
                                                    P                                  1−σ
                                                             i
                                              =
                                                                    P 1−σ
                                                                                            1
                                                                                         ! 1−σ
                                                      X                           1−σ
                                              =                  siH ĉi |p̂F ·
                                                         i


where siH denotes firm i’s share in final consumption. Combine with equation (11) and
obtain
                                                                             1
                                                                          ! σ−1
                   ŵ                   X                          1−σ
                        |p̂F · = ŵ           siH ĉi |p̂F ·
                   P̂                     i
                                                                               1
                                                                              σ−1
                                                                         1−σ
                                                                 1−ρ   1−ρ
                               X                                p̂F ·
                                  siH 1 − sTF otal   + sTF otal
                                                   
                             =               j            j       1−ρ
                                                                                  .
                                i
                                                                ŵ

   For small changes, first obtain the log-linearized change in the aggregate price index,

                                                    dP   X     dcj
                                                       =   sjH      .
                                                    P    j
                                                                c j


Combine with equation (12) and obtain
                                                                           X
                               dw dP                     dw dpF ·
                                  −   =                     −                          sjH sTF otal
                                                                                               j .
                                w   P                     w   pF ·                 j


    Again, as in Proposition 1, the result for small changes holds more generally. Now con-
sider a constant returns to scale utility function and describe it as e({pjH }, U ) = U e({pjH }, 1).
That is, the minimized expenditure to achieve utility level U equals U times the minimized
expenditure to obtain an unit utility. Furthermore, with homothetic preferences, the ideal
price index P is the minimized cost of buying one unit of utility, i.e., P = e({pjH }, 1).
    Take the total derivative of e({pjH }, U ) and obtain:

                                                         ∂e({pjH },U )                      ∂e({p     },U )
                  de({pjH }, U ) X pjH ∂pjH        dpjH U       jH
                                                               ∂U      dU
                                 =                     +                  .
                   e({pjH }, U )   j
                                     e({pjH }, U ) pjH   e({pjH }, U ) U
                                                         |    {z     }
                                                                                                 =1




                                                                   47
Then total differentiate U e({pjH }, 1):

                                                de({pjH }, U )   dP   dU
                                                               =    +    .
                                                 e({pjH }, U )   P     U

                           jH      ∂e({p      },U )
By Shephard’s Lemma,      ∂pjH
                                  = xjH ({pjH }, U ). Equating the previous two equations
             dU
and dropping U , the percentage change in the ideal price index for any level U is:

                                                      dP   X     dpjH
                                                         =   sjH      .
                                                       P   j
                                                                 p jH


The percentage change in the real wage is thus:

                                           dw dP    dw X      dpjH
                                              −   =   −   sjH       .
                                            w   P   w   j
                                                               p jH


     dpjH       dcj
As    pjH
            =    cj
                    ,   the rest of Proposition 2 follows.



A.3         Derivation of equation (21)
    Here we show that under perfect competition, the change in the real wage in equation
(20) can be expressed as the product of Imports
                                          VA
                                                and the change in terms of trade.
    The change in the terms of trade can be written as the change in the average export
                                                    dc
price minus the change in the import price, j sjF cjj − dp
                                            P               F·
                                                          pF ·
                                                               , where sjF is firm j’s share in
aggregate exports. Combining with equation (12), we have

                                          !                                                                          !
Imports         X           dcj   dpF ·         Imports X                            dw            dp F  ·     dp F  ·
                                                                      1 − sTF otal      + sTF otal
                                                                                   
                        sjF     −             =                sjF            j               j              −
  VA             j
                            cj     pF ·            VA       j
                                                                                      w             pF ·        pF ·
                                                             
                                                  dw dpF · Imports X
                                                                              sjF 1 − sTF otal
                                                                                                
                                              =      −                                     j      .
                                                   w   pF ·        VA     j


     Now consider the following identity under perfect competition:
                                                         X
                                           Imports =          (xjH + xjF ) sTF otal
                                                                               j ,                                (30)
                                                          j


where it says the total imports equal the sum of firms’ total input used for final output, that
is, sales to domestic consumers and foreign, multiplied by the total foreign input share of



                                                              48
the firm. Rearranging this equation yields the following:

                       Imports X                 Exports X
                              =   sjH sTF otal
                                          j    +           sjF sTF otal
                                                                   j .
                         VA     j
                                                   VA    j


Using the trade balance condition where Imports = Exports, we obtain

                         Imports X                   X
                                   sjF 1 − sTF otal
                                               j     =   sjH sTF otal
                                                                 j .
                           VA    j                     j


Therefore, under perfect competition we have
                                                X
                   dw dP              dw dpF ·
                     −   =              −                 sjH sTF otal
                                                                  j
                   w   P              w   pF ·        j
                                                
                                      dw dpF ·       Imports X
                                                               sjF 1 − sTF otal
                                                                                
                              =         −                                  j      .
                                      w   pF ·         VA    j


A.4     Conditions under which the knowledge of the network struc-
        ture becomes irrelevant
    Here we outline conditions under which the knowledge of the network structure is unnec-
                                                 
essary to compute the term j sjF 1 − sTF otal
                               P
                                             j    , in equation (21).
    If we assume that there is no import content in the production of exports, then the total
                                                                                                 
foreign input share of firm j that export, sTF otal                                       T otal
                                                                            P
                                               j , should be 0. Therefore      j sjF 1 − sF j
would simply be 1.
    Alternatively, if we assume perfect competition and that there is import content being the
                                                                            
same in both exports and domestic final demand, then j sjF 1 − sTF otal
                                                           P
                                                                         j    can be expressed
       VA
as VA+Exports . To see this, combine equation (30) with the trade balance condition and obtain

           Exports      X xjH + xjF
                      =                sTF otal
                                           j
         VA + Exports   j
                          VA + Exports
                        X     VA                      X   Exports
                      =                sjH sTF otal
                                                j   +                sjF sTF otal
                                                                             j .
                        j
                          VA + Exports                j
                                                        VA + Exports

From the assumption of import content being the same in both exports and domestic final
demand, sjH = sjF , we then have

                                    Exports      X
                                               =   sjF sTF otal
                                                           j ,
                                  VA + Exports   j




                                                 49
which then yields

                        VA         X
                                     sjF 1 − sTF otal
                                                      
                                 =               j      .
                    VA + Exports   j




                                     50
B      Numerical example
    Here we demonstrate that economies with identical sets of aggregate exports, aggre-
gate imports, aggregate gross production and GDP, but with different firm-to-firm network
structures, can potentially generate different import content in domestic final demand. We
consider two economies with both consisting of three firms. Table 8 lays out the details
of the two economies. In the two economies, firm-level imports, exports, gross production,
domestic sales, labor costs, and value added are the same. The only difference between the
two economies are how firms allocate their domestic sales to sales to households or to sales
to other firms. In Table 8, the first seven rows are identical across the two economies, but
the entries for Firm-to-firm sales and sales to households differ.

                                  Table 8: Two economies

                                Economy 1                             Economy 2
                         Firm 1   Firm 2 Firm 3              Firm 1    Firm 2   Firm 3
       Imports             100         0            0          100         0          0
       Exports              0          0          100           0         0          100
   Gross production        200        200         200          200       200         200
    Domestic Sales         200        200         100          200       200         100
      Labor cost           50         100          50          50        100         50
  Domestic purchases        0          50         100           0         50         100
        Profits            50          50          50          50         50         50
                         x12 = 50 x23 = 50                            x23 = 100 x32 = 50
    Firm-to-firm sales
                         x13 = 50
  Sales to households      100      150           100          200       100          50


    Now let us compute the direct and total shares of foreign inputs, as well as the firms’
shares in household consumption. Table 9 summarizes the firms’ shares. Firms’ direct
shares of foreign inputs are the same across the two economies, as firm-level imports and
total inputs are the same. But because the firm-to-firm sales structure is not the same in the
two economies, the total shares of foreign inputs and firms’ shares in household consumption
are different.




                                             51
 Table 9: Direct and total shares of foreign inputs, and shares in household consumption

                                 Economy 1                                     Economy 2
                           Firm 1 Firm 2 Firm 3                          Firm 1 Firm 2 Firm 3
                 sF i       2/3           0          0                    2/3      0       0
                sTF otal
                    i       2/3          2/9       2/27                   2/3      0       0
                 siH        2/7          2/7        3/7                   4/7     1/7     2/7


    Next, we compute the import content in domestic final demand in the two economies,
         T otal
P
  i siH sF i . In economy 1, the import content in domestic final demand is 6/21, while in
economy 2 it is 8/21. Because there is no leakage of imports in economy 2 to Foreign, the
import content in domestic final demand is about 10 percentage points higher in economy 2.
    We can also easily calculate what that implies for the real wage change of going to
autarky. Under ρ = 2 and σ = 4,
                                                                    1
                                                                 ! σ−1     
           ŵ                  X                          1−σ             0.79 if economy 1
                 |p̂F · →∞ =          siH 1 − sTF otal
                                                  j
                                                           1−ρ
                                                                         =                      .
           P̂                     i
                                                                           0.77 if economy 2

Hence, as expected, the real wage changes are larger in economy 2.




                                                           52
C       Data Appendix
C.1      Grouping VAT-identifiers into firms
     As mentioned in the main text, all our datasets are recorded at the VAT-identifier level.
We utilize ownership filings in the annual accounts and information from the Balance of
Payments survey in order to aggregate multiple VAT-identifiers into firms. In the ownership
filings, each enterprise reports a list of all other enterprises of which it has an ownership
share of at least 10% and the value of the share. In the Balance of Payments survey,
Belgian enterprises with international financial linkages have to report their stock and flows
of financial links. They have to report both the international participation they own and the
foreign owners of financial participation in their capital if the participation represents at least
10% of the capital. The survey is designed to cover the population of Belgian enterprises
involved in international financial transactions.
     We group all VAT-identifiers into firms if they are linked with more than or equal to 50%
of ownership. In addition, we group all VAT-identifiers into firms if they share the same
foreign parent firm that holds more than or equal to 50% of their shares. We use a “fuzzy
string matching” method to determine whether they share the same foreign parent firm, by
obtaining similarity measures of all possible pairs of foreign firms’ names. Lastly, in order
to correct for misreportings, we also add links to the VAT-identifier pairs if the two were
linked one year before and one year after. We define a firm as the group of VAT-identifiers
that are directly and indirectly linked.
     Given these groupings of VAT-identifiers, we then choose the “most representative” VAT-
identifier for each firm. We use this “head VAT-identifier” as the identifier of the firm.40
Then, in order to make the identifiers consistent over time, we make the following adjustment:
We take firms whose head VAT-identifier was not an identifier of any firm in the previous
year. For such firms, if there exists a VAT-identifier within the firm which was a head
VAT-identifier in the previous year, then we switch the firm identifier to that former head
VAT-identifier.41
     Having determined the head VAT-identifier for each firm with multiple VAT-identifiers,
we aggregate all the variables up to the firm level. For variables such as total sales and
inputs, we adjust the aggregated variables with the amount of B2B trade that occurred
   40
       The criteria for determining the head VAT-identifier is as follows: (i) If there is only one VAT-identifier
in the firm that filed all the full annual accounts, the VAT declarations, and the B2B filings, then this
VAT-identifier is chosen as the head. (ii) If there are no such VAT-identifiers or multiple of them, then we
choose the VAT-identifier that has the largest total assets reported. (iii) If there are no VAT-identifier that
filed the annual accounts, then we choose the VAT-identifier that has the largest amount of total inputs,
which is the sum of labor costs, B2B inputs, and imports.
    41
       If there are multiple such VAT-identifier, then we choose the “most representative” VAT-identifier, using
the same criteria as above.


                                                       53
within the firm, correcting for double counting. For other non-numeric variables such as
firms’ primary sector, we take the value of its head VAT-identifier.
    The number of VAT-identifiers for firms with multiple VAT-identifiers are shown in Table
10.

         Table 10: Number of VAT-identifier in firms with multiple VAT-identifiers

                                        Mean      10%     25%    50%     75%     90%     max
             Num. VAT-identifier           3        2      2       2       3       5     372


C.2     Firm selection
   Table 11 displays the same numbers for Table 1, with statistics for all Belgian firms
added.

                    Table 11: Coverage of all Belgian firms and selected sample

                      All Belgian Firms                                    Selected sample
 Year
         Count      V.A. Sales Imports           Exports       Count    V.A. Sales Imports           Exports
 2002    714,469     134      812       204         217        88,301    119     604        175         185
 2007    782,006     176     1080       294         282        95,941    152     782        277         265
 2012    860,373     195     1244       320         317        98,745    164     874        292         292
 Notes: All numbers except for Count are denominated in billion Euro in current prices. Firms’ value added
 in the selected sample is computed as their sales minus imports and their purchases from other Belgian firms
 that are in the selected sample. Firms’ value added is from the reported values from the annual accounts. This
 reported value added is not necessarily the same as the value added measure used later in the quantitative
 analysis, which is the sales value minus imports and purchases from other Belgian firms.



C.3     Sectoral composition
   Table 12 shows the sectoral composition of our selected sample. Values for value added
and output are in billion Euro.




                                                    54
                            Table 12: Sectoral composition in 2012


              Sector                 Count        V.A.      Output       Imports       Exports
    Agriculture and Mining           2,805        4.37       49.4          16.9         10.9
          Manufacturing              16,577       54.9       272           146           193
    Utility and Construction         20,421       25.4       77.0          27.8         17.5
     Wholesale and Retail            31,117       30.7       241           84.1         53.4
             Service                 27,825       48.4       127           17.6         16.9
              Total                  98,745       164        874           292           292
 Notes: Agriculture and Mining corresponds to NACE 2-digit codes 01 to 09, Manufacturing corresponds to
 NACE 2-digit codes 10 to 33, Utility and Construction corresponds to NACE 2-digit codes 35 to 43, Whole-
 sale and Retail corresponds to NACE 2-digit codes 45 to 47, and Service corresponds to NACE 2-digit codes
 49 to 63, 68 to 82, and 94 to 96.



D      Descriptive statistics
D.1     Direct and Total foreign input shares
    In Figure 8 we present the histograms of both the direct and total foreign input shares,
for each major sector. We also summarize statistics on these distributions in Table 13.




                                                  55
            Figure 8: Histograms of direct and total foreign input share by firms’ sector


            Agriculture and Mining                           Manufacturing                     Utility and Construction
                                           11900                                       19400
     2500
       70                                                                                600
       60                                          300                                   500
    Count




                                           Count




                                                                                       Count
       50                                                                                400
       40                                          200
                                                                                         300
       30
       20                                          100                                   200
       10                                                                                100
        0                                            0                                     0
             0   .2    .4   .6    .8   1                 0   .2    .4   .6    .8   1            0   .2    .4   .6    .8   1
                 Foreign input share                         Foreign input share                    Foreign input share

                    Direct         Total                         Direct        Total                    Direct        Total



             Wholesale and Retail                                Service
    24000                                  26900
      800                                    700
      700                                    600
      600                                    500
    Count




                                           Count




      500                                    400
      400
                                             300
      300
      200                                    200
      100                                    100
        0                                      0
             0   .2    .4   .6    .8   1                 0   .2    .4   .6    .8   1
                 Foreign input share                         Foreign input share

                     Direct        Total                         Direct        Total



Notes: The black dot indicates the ending of the bar for the total foreign input share. Total foreign input
share of firm i, sTF otal is calculated by solving sTF otal = sF i + j∈Zi sji sTF otal
                                                                    P
                     i                                 i                          j    where sF i is i’s direct foreign
input share, and sji is j’s share among i’s inputs. The horizontal lines represent scale breaks on the vertical
axis.




                                                               56
       Table 13: Distribution of direct and total foreign input share by firms’ sector


                                               Direct                                    Total
            Sector
                                 Mean     Weighted Mean        Median      Mean     Weighted Mean        Median
 Agriculture and Mining           0.05           0.70              0        0.46           0.85            0.45
       Manufacturing              0.12           0.59              0        0.44           0.75            0.42
 Utility and Construction         0.02           0.31              0        0.39           0.59            0.39
  Wholesale and Retail            0.12           0.43              0        0.52           0.75            0.55
          Service                 0.01           0.19              0        0.25           0.41            0.24
           Total                  0.07           0.45              0        0.40           0.68            0.39

Notes: The numbers for the weighted mean are calculated using total input purchases of firms as the weights.



D.2      Direct and Total export share
    In Figure 9 we present the histograms of both the direct and total foreign input shares,
for each major sector. We also summarize statistics on these distributions in Table 14.




                                                    57
                       Figure 9: Histograms of direct and total export share by firms’ sector


                  Agriculture and Mining                               Manufacturing                         Utility and Construction
        2500                                          12900                                         20000
                                                       4500
            500                                        1000                                               9200
            400                                             800                                           2000
    Count




                                                    Count




                                                                                                  Count
            300                                             600                                           1500
            200                                             400                                           1000
            100                                             200                                           500
              0                                               0                                              0
                   0     .2     .4    .6   .8   1                  0   .2     .4    .6   .8   1                  0   .2     .4    .6   .8   1
                              Export share                                  Export share                                  Export share

                              Direct        Total                            Direct       Total                            Direct       Total



                   Wholesale and Retail                                      Service
      27500
                                                      27000
      16000
                                                      13500
            2000
    Count




                                                    Count




            1500                                            1500

            1000                                            1000
             500                                            500
               0                                              0
                   0     .2     .4    .6   .8   1                  0   .2     .4    .6   .8   1
                              Export share                                  Export share

                               Direct       Total                            Direct       Total



Notes: The black dot indicates the ending of the bar for the total export share. Total export share firm i,
  T otal                           T otal                    T otal
                                                 P
riF      is calculated by solving riF     = riF + j∈Wi rij rjF      where riF is i’s share of exports in its revenue,
and rij is share of i’s revenue that arises from sales to firm j. Wi is the set of customers of i. The horizontal
lines represent scale breaks on the vertical axis.




                                                                        58
           Table 14: Distribution of direct and total export share by firms’ sector


                                                    Direct                                     Total
            Sector
                                 Mean          Weighted Mean           Median      Mean   Weighted Mean   Median
 Agriculture and Mining           0.05              0.22                 0         0.24       0.30          0.11
       Manufacturing              0.11              0.56                 0         0.23       0.62          0.07
 Utility and Construction         0.01              0.19                 0         0.06       0.25          0.01
  Wholesale and Retail            0.04              0.21                 0         0.09       0.26          0.01
          Service                 0.01              0.13                 0         0.07       0.23          0.01
           Total                  0.04              0.33                 0         0.11       0.40          0.02

Notes: The numbers for the weighted mean are calculated using total sales of firms as the weights.



D.3      Decomposition of real wage change
    Table 15 shows the numbers analogous to those of Table 2, but in first-order approxi-
mations. Under a first-order approximation (see equation (20)), we can also decompose the
log-change in the real wage upon a 10% increase in the foreign price into two multiplicative
terms: the log-change in the domestic nominal wage and the foreign price as well as the level
of import content in domestic final demand, j sjH sTF otal
                                              P
                                                        j . Table 16 shows that the import
content in domestic final demand is about 2 percentage points higher in the two alternative
models. In the data, firms with higher export intensities tend to have higher input shares
on foreign inputs. Our baseline case is able to capture this heterogeneity, while the two
alternative models cannot. This difference results in the alternative models predicting larger
import content in domestic final demand.

Table 15: Log-changes in real wage upon 10% increase in foreign price, direct and indirect
effects

                                                 Total        Direct    Indirect
                                 dw       dP
                                  w
                                      −   P
                                                 -0.069       -0.038    -0.031
 Notes: The number for Direct is computed by replacing sTF otal
                                                              j   in equation (20) with the direct foreign input
                                                                  T otal
 share, sF j . The number for Indirect is computed by replacing sF j in equation (20) with the indirect foreign
 input share, sTF otal
                  j    − sF j . The nominal wage change dw
                                                         w is the same across the three columns and computed
 according to Online Appendix A.4.




                                                         59
Table 16: Log-changes in real wage upon 10% increase in foreign price, decomposition using
equation (20)

                                                          Baseline   Simple Roundabout         Sectoral Roundabout
                     dw   dpF ·
                      w
                          −
                          pF ·
                                                           -0.118          -0.112                    -0.130
                       s sT otal
                   P
                                                           0.584           0.609                      0.607
                    j jH F j P
 dw
 w
      −   dP
          P
               =    dw
                     w
                       − dp F·
                         pF ·    j        sjH sTF otal
                                                  j        -0.069          -0.068                    -0.079


D.4        Back-of-the-envelope calculations of the changes in real wage
    In Table 17 we present the first-order approximated changes in real wage that are com-
puted from the back-of-the-envelope calculations motivated by Hulten (1978). Notice that
all calculations lead to noisy estimates compared to the baseline result in Table 16.

Table 17: Back-of-the-envelope calculations of the changes in real wage, upon 10% increase
in foreign price

                                                                       Same import content
                                          No import content
                                                                         in exports and
                                              in exports
                                                                      domestic final demand
                               (1)            − dp F·
                                                 pF ·
                                                      = −0.1              − dp F·
                                                                             pF ·
                                                                                  = −0.1
                                              Imports                     Imports
                               (2)              VA
                                                         = 0.817        VA+Exports
                                                                                     = 0.449
                          dw         dP
                          w
                               −     P
                                                   -0.082                     -0.045
 Notes: The third row is computed as (1) × (2). The first column computes the real wage change under as-
 sumptions of perfect competition and no import content being in the production of exports. The second col-
 umn computes the real wage change under assumptions of perfect competition and same import contents in
 both exports and domestic final demand. Both calculations in the two columns also assume no change in the
 nominal wage, dw
                w = 0.




                                                              60
