                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND A FIRM’S WORKFORCE

                                      David A. Matsa

                                     Working Paper 25125
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25125


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2018




I thank Jiaheng Yu and Yang Zhang for excellent research assistance and Matthew Serfling for
sharing his data and code, which I used to develop the analysis shown in Table 2. For helpful
comments, I am grateful to Ashwini Agrawal, Andrew Ellul, Ravi Jagannathan, James Naughton,
and an anonymous reviewer. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by David A. Matsa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Capital Structure and a Firm’s Workforce
David A. Matsa
NBER Working Paper No. 25125
October 2018
JEL No. G32,J31,J32,J33,J38,J51,J52,J63,J65,J68,M51,M52

                                         ABSTRACT

While businesses require funding to start and grow, they also rely on human capital, which affects
how they raise funds. Labor market frictions make financing labor different than financing
capital. Unlike capital, labor cannot be owned and can act strategically. Workers face
unemployment costs, can negotiate for higher wages, are protected by employment regulations,
and face retirement risk. I propose using these frictions as a framework for understanding the
unique impact of a firm’s workforce on its capital structure. For instance, high leverage often
makes managing labor more difficult by undermining employees’ job security and increasing the
need for costly workforce reductions. But firms can also use leverage to their advantage, such as
in labor negotiations and defined benefit pensions. This research can help firms account for the
needs and management of their workforce when making financing decisions.


David A. Matsa
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
dmatsa@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

The neoclassical firm produces output from two inputs: capital and labor. Acquiring these inputs

requires funds and often external financing, raising the question of the optimal mix of debt and

equity financing. Capital structure research has mostly focused on financing the capital input to

production. This is a natural starting point in that acquiring capital often requires large upfront

payments, can be pledged as collateral, and represents the tangible value of a business. But the

organization of a firm’s workforce also factors prominently into its financial structure.

       Most early capital structure research did not model labor explicitly or in great detail.

Nevertheless, Modigliani & Miller’s (1958) assumption that investment is held constant applies

equally to investments in human capital and physical assets. Most finance theories implicitly

assume that labor is supplied in a frictionless spot market, where wages equal the marginal

product of labor in each period. In practice, however, labor markets are rife with frictions and

employment relationships typically span multiple periods. As a result, a firm’s sources of

financing affect its ability to recruit, train, and retain an effective workforce. Incorporating labor

market frictions into finance theories enriches our understanding of capital structure

determination and reveals how firms’ financial structures are shaped by workforce

considerations.

       The key to understanding the unique impact of a firm’s workforce on its capital structure

decisions is to understand how labor is different than capital. Labor can do things that capital

cannot (Autor et al. 2003; Levy & Murnane 2005; Autor & Dorn 2013). For example, employees

can solve unstructured problems for which rules do not exist and process new information,

deciding what is relevant in a flood of undefined data. Their creativity produces valuable

tangible and intangible assets in the form of new ideas, processes, and know-how. They can also



                                                  1
execute complex, non-routine tasks that require physical dexterity and flexible interpersonal

skills.

          Hiring employees, however, exposes a firm to labor market frictions. Unlike capital,

people cannot be owned and can act strategically. They can choose where to work and whether

to quit, forcing employers to be sensitive to their needs. As a result, various underlying labor

market frictions and human factors affect firms’ financing choices, such as whether to take on

additional debt or fund their employees’ pensions. In Section 2, I describe the implications of

employees’ option to quit their job, which is most often motivated by dissatisfaction with job

security or pay. Unlike machines, people face large costs in unemployment and can organize into

labor unions that negotiate for higher wages and improved working conditions. In Section 3, I

discuss labor market regulations and norms, which impose labor-specific adjustment costs that

impede workforce downsizing and nominal wage cuts. Finally, unlike machines, people face

retirement risk and worry about providing for themselves if they are unable to continue working.

Historically, this concern led many employers to offer deferred compensation in the form of

defined benefit pensions, which promise regular payments during retirement regardless of the

value of the assets invested in the fund backing the promise. Defined benefit pensions are

essentially another form of corporate debt, wherein the firm borrows from its employees. In

Section 4, I describe how such arrangements affect other sources of the firm’s financing and

most often increase its financial leverage.


2. ABILITY TO QUIT

          The most obvious difference between labor and capital is ownership. Firms can own

machines, but in an economy without human slavery, they cannot own people or force them to

work against their will.


                                               2
       Understanding the implications of employees’ freedom to leave their job begins by

examining why employees quit. Clark (2001) used data on labor market stints from the British

Household Panel Survey to examine the determinants of worker resignations. He associated them

with workers’ job satisfaction along seven dimensions. Two job characteristics emerged as most

important to retaining workers: job security and pay. Employees value job security because job

loss is costly, and they can bargain collectively to try to boost their pay. A firm that takes on

risky debt increases its workers’ expected unemployment costs and may advantage the firm in

collective bargaining. These labor market frictions thus affect firms’ capital structure choices.


2.1. Unemployment Costs

       Employees value job security because getting laid off from a job can be costly. Laid-off

workers often endure significant reductions in consumption (Gruber 1997), long delays before

reemployment (Katz & Meyer 1990), and significant wage cuts after returning to work (Gibbons

& Katz 1991; Farber 2005). Drawing on longitudinal U.S. Social Security records from 1974 to

2008, Davis & von Wachter (2011) estimate the earnings loss associated with being displaced in

a mass layoff event. Discounting at a 5% annual rate over 20 years after job loss, they find that

laid-off men lose an average of 1.4 years of predisplacement earnings when the national

unemployment rate is below 6%. These losses are even more severe for workers laid off during

recessions. The losses amount to a staggering 2.8 years of predisplacement earnings for

individuals laid off when the unemployment rate exceeds 8%.

       Various labor market frictions complicate laid off workers’ search for a suitable job: the

search is costly (Diamond 1982; Mortensen 1986; Mortensen & Pissarides 1994); there is a

limited supply of match-specific job opportunities (Lazear 2009); the worker’s productivity is

difficult to discern in advance (Harris & Holmstrom 1982); collective bargaining may limit


                                                 3
firms’ hiring (Dunlop et al. 1944; Freeman & Medoff 1984), and so on. These frictions do not

only cause the unemployed to lose earnings. They can also lead to lower achievement by their

children in school (Stevens & Schaller 2011); the loss of their home (Hsu et al. 2018); divorce

(Charles & Stevens 2004); stress-related health problems (Burgard et al. 2007); or even death

(Sullivan & von Wachter 2009).

        An employee’s job security typically relies on the firm’s financial condition. Distressed

firms often discharge workers to reduce costs (e.g., John et al. 1992; Kang & Shivdasani 1997),

especially firms with large predistress debt obligations (Ofek 1993; Asquith et al. 1994; Sharpe

1994; Calomiris et al. 1997; Hanka 1998). To confirm that financial leverage causes distressed

firms to restructure and lay off employees, one must differentiate the effects of their financial

distress from those of their economic distress. That is, when economic conditions tighten, firms’

demand for labor decreases irrespective of their leverage position. Before one can conclude that

people seeking job security should prefer employment at less indebted firms, one must confirm

that the financial constraints associated with leverage do indeed make jobs less secure.

        Researchers have approached this challenge of empirically separating financial from

economic distress by examining discrete financial events, such as when firms face large amounts

of debt maturing or default. Benmelech et al. (2011) find that, in any given year, firms with

maturing long-term debt reduce their labor force more than firms without maturing long-term

debt.1 Applying a similar empirical approach using hand-collected data from the Great

1
  In two other natural experiments, Benmelech et al. (2011) show that positive (negative) shocks to bank
loan supply, caused by state-level deregulation and bank losses in unrelated markets, decrease (increase)
local unemployment. Chodorow-Reich (2014) finds that reduced credit supply accounts for between one-
third and one-half of the employment declines at small and medium firms in the wake of the 2008–2009
financial crisis. Duygan-Bump et al. (2015) provide complementary evidence for the financial crisis and
find similar results for the 1990–1991 recession.



                                                   4
Depression, Benmelech et al. (2018) conclude that financial constraints accounted for 10% to

33% of the aggregate decline in employment of large firms between 1928 and 1933.

       Other researchers investigate the effects of discrete credit events, typically by comparing

firms experiencing credit events to firms that are not. If the latter experience similar economic

conditions, then the difference in outcomes can be attributed to the distressed firm’s borrowing

and the credit event. A potential limitation of this approach is that the source of cross-sectional

variation in firms’ debt levels and contract terms is often not known definitively and could be

correlated with an omitted variable. Nevertheless, showing that comparison firms are unaffected

or that the distressed firms’ outcomes manifest immediately around the credit event make it

unlikely that an omitted variable impacts the results.

       Credit events are often associated with dramatic reductions in employment. Hotchkiss

(1995) finds that employment decreases by about 50% around a bankruptcy filing; Agrawal &

Matsa (2013) find that bond defaults lead firms to decrease employment by at least 27% in the

two years surrounding a default; and Falato & Liang (2016) find that covenant violations cause

firms to cut their workforces by about 10%. Based on U.S. employer-employee linked data,

Graham et al. (2016) report that 76% of workers separate (including both layoffs and quits) from

bankrupt firms within three years of a bankruptcy filing, a 27% increase above the 60%

separation rate among matched control firms. Furthermore, wages decrease for both retained and

separated workers: the present value of earnings losses over the seven years after bankruptcy is

63% of prebankruptcy annual earnings. Being productive does not necessarily spare an employee

from these cuts. Examining Swedish data, Caggese et al. (2018) show that financial constraints

can distort firms’ firing decisions, suboptimally favoring the termination of employees with steep

productivity profiles or lower firing costs.



                                                 5
        To avoid the insecurity of employment at distressed firms, people prefer to work

elsewhere. Analyzing data from a leading online job search platform, Brown & Matsa (2016)

examine the impact of corporate distress on firms’ ability to attract job applicants. Distressed

firms attract fewer and lower-quality applicants to open positions, particularly for jobs with

higher educational requirements.2 These reductions appear to be aggravated by the firms’

financing, as applications decrease more among firms with greater preexisting leverage,

maturing debt, and more debt covenants. Furthermore, the reductions are tied directly to job

security, as applications decrease more in states where unemployment insurance offers workers

less protection from job loss. Concerned about job security, job seekers are also less willing to

relocate out of the state to work at a distressed firm. Financial distress thus reduces firms’ access

to the national labor market and reduces the quality of the applicant pool.

        Brown & Matsa’s (2016) estimates suggest that the ripple effect of distress on labor

supply is sizable. For comparison, consider the effect of distress on consumers of durable goods.

Consumers’ demand for durable goods decreases when a producer is in distress because

consumers worry that parts and servicing will become harder to obtain. Hortaçsu et al. (2013)

find that the prices of used automobiles decrease when the manufacturer is in distress. They

estimate that a 1,000-basis-point increase in a manufacturer’s credit default swap spread

decreases the price of a used car by $68 (or 0.5%). The labor market impacts appear to be 40

times larger, as Brown and Matsa find that the same size of shock decreases the volume of

2
  Job seekers are unlikely to explicitly track firms’ leverage decisions, financial statements, or credit
default swap spreads; more likely, their perceptions are based on indirect sources, such as media reports,
online searches, and word of mouth. Although the specific sources that job seekers use to learn about
firms’ risk have not been studied, evidence suggests they are informative. Using survey responses, Brown
& Matsa (2016) show that job seekers’ perceptions of firms’ financial condition track firms’ credit default
swap spreads and accounting data.



                                                    6
applications by about 20% and increases wages by a similar margin.

        Financially distressed firms also struggle to retain their existing employees. Using

matched employer-employee data from Sweden, Baghai et al. (2017) show that employees with

short tenures, a lot of industry experience, and high general human capital are the most likely to

depart firms before they enter bankruptcy. They estimate that employees with the highest ability

are 30% more likely to leave a firm approaching financial distress than are average employees.

        With labor supply reduced, employees often require higher wages, additional benefits, or

improved working conditions to compensate them for the unemployment risk associated with

working for a distressed firm. This additional compensation is referred to as a compensating

wage differential. The idea that a wage differential must compensate employees for bearing

unemployment risk dates back to eighteenth-century Scottish economist Adam Smith (1976, p.

120):

        The wages of labor in different occupations vary with the constancy or

        inconstancy of employment. . . .What he earns, therefore, while he is employed,

        must not only maintain him while he is idle, but make him some compensation for

        those anxious and desponding moments which the thought of so precarious a

        situation must sometimes occasion. . . .The high wages of those workmen,

        therefore, are not so much the recompense of their skill, as the compensation for

        the inconstancy of their employment.

        Rosen (1986) summarizes the theoretical literature formalizing this idea, and empirical

evidence supports its importance. Abowd & Ashenfelter (1981) find that compensating

differentials for unemployment risk vary across industries and amount to up to 14% of total

wages in the presence of significant unemployment risk. Topel (1984) estimates that a 1-



                                                7
percentage-point increase in anticipated unemployment raises an individual’s wage by about 1%

in the presence of mean unemployment insurance wage replacement. Li (1986) and Hamermesh

& Wolfe (1990) find that 14%-41% of total interindustry wage differentials are due to the

differences in unemployment risk.

       Because financial leverage can reduce job security, an increase in leverage raises the

costs required to compensate workers for their greater risk of unemployment. Even an employee

without any bargaining power will receive this compensating differential, because the differential

does not provide them with any of the surplus created by the employment relationship. Rather,

the differential is required to make them as well off as they would be working at an unlevered

firm with greater job security.

       Estimating the magnitude of compensating wage differentials for financial leverage is not

straightforward. Even if one could isolate exogenous variation in corporate leverage and use it to

estimate its true causal effect on wages, this quantity likely provides a biased estimate of the

compensating wage differential, because leverage also affects wages through other channels,

including reducing agency problems (Jensen 1989) and countering employees’ bargaining power

(see Section 2.2.1). As a consequence, the results of research correlating leverage and wages are

mixed (e.g., Lichtenberg & Siegel 1990; Hanka 1998; Cronqvist et al. 2009; Chemmanur et al.

2013; Michaels et al. 2018). To overcome these challenges, researchers have instead estimated

leverage-related compensating wage differentials indirectly.

       Graham et al. (2016) estimate how much of a wage premium firms would need to offer

risk-averse workers to fully compensate them for their exposure to potential earnings losses in

the event that the firm went bankrupt. Using a 5% real discount rate, they estimate the present

value of employees’ aggregated earnings losses within six years after bankruptcy to be 21.5% of



                                                8
firm value. This figure excludes income from unemployment insurance. If employees require the

same level of expected utility to accept employment at firms with different financial distress risk

(i.e., require the same risk-adjusted present value of expected wages), then levered firms with

higher probabilities of bankruptcy will have to raise wages to compensate employees for the

greater expected earnings losses due to bankruptcy. The present value of wage premia should

equal the expected present value of the earnings losses due to bankruptcy.

       Graham et al. (2016) account for employees’ risk aversion by overweighting the

probability of bankruptcy in their calculation. Specifically, they use risk-neutral probabilities of

default from Almeida & Philippon (2007), which are calibrated from risk premia in the bond

market. Because most employees are less diversified than bond investors, this approach is

conservative in that it likely undervalues the present value of the earnings losses to undiversified

employees. Assuming a risk-free rate of 2.5% and that the firm will employ workers indefinitely,

Graham et al. estimate an implied wage premium of 7.46% of firm value for a BBB-rated firm.

       In practice, however, firms are unlikely to pay such a high premium, which overtakes the

tax benefits of debt even without considering other costs of financial distress (see Table 5 of

Graham et al. 2016). The premium estimated by Graham et al. (2016) is substantially greater

than those implied by direct estimates of the compensating differential for unemployment risk.

Topel (1984) finds that, for every additional percentage point in unemployment risk, average

equilibrium wages increase by 0.93%. This effect is moderated by the unemployment insurance

system, and Topel estimates that compensating wage differentials would increase to 2.5% in the

absence of unemployment insurance benefits. Agrawal & Matsa (2013) combine these figures

with estimates for the probability of unemployment conditional on default and the probabilities

of default associated with different credit ratings. Agrawal & Matsa’s calculation uses natural



                                                 9
probabilities because Topel’s estimate of the wage premium already accounts for employees’

risk aversion. Agrawal & Matsa assume that the firm will employ workers until it defaults and

use a risk-free rate of 6.9%, the average 10-year Treasury rate from 1962 to 2009. Discounting at

a higher interest rate yields a lower estimate, so the magnitude of the wage differential will vary

with interest rates over time. To facilitate a comparison with Graham et al., I recalculate Agrawal

& Matsa’s estimates assuming a risk-free rate of 2.5% and report the results in Table 1.

       Even without unemployment insurance (as in the calculation in Graham et al. 2016), I

estimate that a BBB-rated firm pays a wage premium of 2.94% of firm value, which is about

60% smaller than the premium implied by the realized wage losses. There are at least five

potential reasons for the difference between these estimates. First, the estimates in Table 1

account only for unemployment risk, whereas Graham et al. (2016) also include the wage losses

of employees who continue to work at a bankrupt firm. Second, Graham et al. might

overestimate employees’ risk-adjusted wage loss if they tend to move to less risky jobs after the

bankruptcy. Third, Topel might underestimate the compensating differential for unemployment

risk if employees in risky industries are negatively selected in ways he cannot observe. Fourth,

some of the compensating differential might be paid as nonwage benefits, such as better health

insurance or an insured pension, which are not included in Topel’s calculation. Finally, although

workers tend to correctly rank firms’ distress risk (see footnote 2), they might underestimate the

probability, leading them to require a smaller risk premium than would be expected on the basis

of their true risk exposure.

       Regardless of the exact size of the premium, the labor supply considerations that it

reflects affect firms’ financing policies. Titman (1984) was the first to propose this idea in his

seminal paper on the indirect costs of financial distress; Berk et al. (2010) model the labor supply



                                                10
considerations explicitly. Although they model a friction related to the observability of

employees’ productivity (Harris & Holmstrom 1982), other labor market frictions imply a

similar result. The key insight is that labor market frictions that make unemployment costly for

employees affect a firm’s optimal capital structure. This consideration can be understood as an

additional term in the trade-off weighed by firms when taking on additional leverage:

        NPV [Debt Issue] = NPV [Tax Shield ] + NPV [Costs of Financial Distress ] + D Labor Expense .(1)

        In the traditional trade-off theory of capital structure, a firm that issues debt balances the

value obtained from debt tax shields with the potential value lost should the debt cause the firm

to encounter financial distress (e.g., Graham 2000). The net present value (NPV) of the costs of

financial distress is the product of the probability of financial distress and the magnitude of

appropriately discounted, ex post direct and indirect costs of distress. Leverage’s effect on labor

supply can be represented as an additional term in this equation. Because debt financing

increases both the probability of the firm undergoing financial distress and the probability of

layoffs, it raises the compensation that employees require to bear unemployment risk. Unlike the

costs of financial distress, which typically refer to ex post costs that are realized if the firm

eventually becomes financially distressed, the final term in Equation (1) represents costs paid ex

ante before distress sets in.

        Although the term labor expense is convenient shorthand, not all of the costs of

leverage’s effect on labor supply are pecuniary, or even operate through employees’

compensating differential, broadly defined to include pay, benefits, and working conditions.

Another important cost is incurred when leverage reduces employees’ investments in firm-

specific human capital. Unlike general human capital, which is valued by all potential employers,

firm-specific human capital involves skills and knowledge that have productive value for only


                                                  11
one particular employer (Becker 1962). Becker (1962), Parsons (1972), and Lazear (2009) show

that employees are reluctant to specialize their human capital to an employer, particularly when

they face an inflated probability of job loss. Jaggia and Thakor (1994) incorporate this cost into

an optimal capital structure model. Because leverage can reduce job security, it discourages

investments in firm-specific human capital and is particularly costly for firms relying on such

capital in production.3 As explained by Stewart Myers (Myers et al. 1998, pp. 18–19):

       To succeed a corporation requires a co-investment of financial capital from the

       outside and human capital that is built up inside the business. . . . When you ask

       people to make an investment of human capital in your firm, you do not then do

       things—like raising the leverage ratio too high—that would needlessly put that

       investment at risk.

       When firms design their financing structure, they decide how much capital to borrow and

how much to raise from equity investors. Firms can reduce their wage and other labor-related

costs by choosing more conservative financial policies (i.e., ones that rely less on borrowing).

These benefits of reducing leverage increase with employees’ unemployment risk, which is

affected by both the probability of being laid off and the costs borne by employees upon a layoff.

In Figure 1, I show the relation between leverage and layoffs at the industry level. Figure 1

depicts a correlation, but not necessarily a causal relation. Leverage, measured as the ratio of

total debt to the market value of total assets in 2016, is computed from Compustat data. The

layoff rate, which includes all involuntary separations initiated by the employer, is the annual

average over 2001–2015 from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) of the
3
 At the same time, debt could motivate employees to work harder. Although a disciplining role of debt is
most often applied to managers (e.g., Grossman & Hart 1982), it could also apply to the workforce more
broadly (Kale et al. 2015).



                                                  12
Bureau of Labor Statistics. In the relation presented in Figure 1, I control for other differences in

labor turnover from JOLTS: rates of hires, quits (voluntary separations), and other separations

(retirements, transfers, deaths, and disability). As shown by the regression line, a 1-percentage-

point increase in the layoff rate is associated with a 5.8-percentage-point decrease in leverage

(SE = 1.3; p < 0.001).

       The correlation between layoffs and capital structure shown in Figure 1 might not reflect

a causal relation. High industry volatility, for example, could lead to both high layoff

propensities and conservative financial policies. To more precisely measure and identify the

impact of worker unemployment costs on financial policy, Agrawal & Matsa (2013) examine

changes in unemployment insurance benefits as shocks to the final term in Equation (1). Because

unemployment is less costly when employees are eligible for more generous unemployment

insurance benefits, they require a lower compensating differential per unit of layoff risk.

Unemployment insurance benefits are determined at the state level and revised regularly.

Agrawal & Matsa find that increases in state-mandated unemployment benefits lead to increases

in corporate leverage. A 100-log-point increase in the maximum total unemployment insurance

benefit is associated with firms maintaining greater average ratios of debt to assets by 4.5

percentage points, or about 15%.

       The magnitude of a worker’s unemployment risk is also affected by employment

protection legislation and household structure (e.g., the availability of a spouse to work).

Employment protection shields employees from unemployment risk. Baghai et al. (2017) show

that Swedish firms used lower leverage after legislation reduced employment protection and

gave them more flexibility to lay off employees. This reduction is consistent with what we would

expect if unemployment insurance were weak enough that employment protection legislation had



                                                 13
a large effect on employees’ unemployment risk (see Section 3.1). Insurance within a household

can also reduce the costs of unemployment. He et al. (2017) find that firms with higher leverage

are more likely to employ people who live in households with alternative sources of labor

income, which make them less vulnerable to distress if they are laid off. In essence, risky firms

tend to match with risk-tolerant workers.

       Conservative capital structures have also been linked to human capital specificity. Titman

& Wessels (1988) show a positive association between workforce voluntary quit rates and firm

leverage ratios at the industry level. They reason that employees with high levels of firm-specific

human capital would find it costly to leave their jobs. More recently, Kim (2015) examines

responses to new manufacturing plant openings and concludes that firms increase financial

leverage when their employees’ human capital is more general due to greater local job

opportunities. Furthermore, Bae et al. (2011) show that firms with highly rated employee

relations use less leverage, and speculate that this is due in part to these firms’ need for

employees to make firm-specific investments. Because of the composite nature of their measure

of employee relations, their result could also be related to various other labor market

considerations discussed in this article, including unionization (Section 2.2), employee equity

ownership (Section 2.4), and retirement benefits (Section 4).


2.2. Labor Negotiations

       Employees’ ability to withhold their labor as a means of negotiating higher pay is another

major difference between labor and capital. Once capital is purchased, it is available to the firm;

employees, on the other hand, may choose not to work at any time. Although the firm can

commit to a compensation level over a contract period, workers cannot be forced to work against

their will. By threatening to strike or quit, workers can potentially negotiate for a higher wage.


                                                 14
       Both employees and capital providers need to be paid at least their opportunity costs: the

amount the employee would be paid elsewhere for similar work and the return the capital

provider would earn investing in another project with similar risk. But some projects generate

more value than is required to satisfy these opportunity costs. In such cases, the project’s rents

must be divided between the firm’s stakeholders through an explicit or implicit bargaining

process, which provides one or more stakeholders with a payoff greater than his opportunity cost

(a supernormal profit). The less replaceable party has an advantage in this negotiation. If it is

more difficult for the employee to find another job, then more of the surplus will go to the

investor; but if it is more difficult for the firm to find another worker, then more will go to the

employee.

       Most employees are replaceable and thus powerless when they bargain individually.

(Exceptions, which include employees with key talents or who embody the firm’s organizational

capital or intellectual property, are discussed in Section 2.3.) But when employees unionize and

bargain collectively, they can threaten to strike and shut down the business. Unlike individual

workers, employees’ collective actions can also threaten the firm’s organizational capital—the

productive capacity embedded in a firm’s organization and its “people relationships” (Prescott &

Visscher 1980; Tomer 1987). From the capital provider’s perspective, these threats are viewed as

a holdup problem. Holdup problems are not unique to providers of labor. Suppliers of specialized

materials, for example, can hold out for higher prices. But a firm’s typical levers for dealing with

the potential holdup of physical capital—vertical integration (Monteverde & Teece 1982) and

long-term contracting (Joskow 1987)—are not available when contracting with employees.

Unionized firms often use financial leverage instead.




                                                15
2.2.1. Strategic debt

       Notions of using debt as a means to partially control wage demands date back to Baldwin

(1983), if not before, and formal models have been developed by Bronars & Deere (1991),

Dasgupta & Sengupta (1993), Perotti & Spier (1993), Sarig (1998), Matsa (2006), and Hennessy

& Livdan (2009). In labor negotiations, unions often demand some of a firm’s realized excess

liquidity—its operating cash flow net of any required debt payments. To improve their future

bargaining position, firms with strong unions can reduce expected future liquidity by including

more debt in their capital structure. Just as leverage can be used to remove excess liquidity that

might otherwise be spent unprofitably (on poor projects, unwarranted diversification, or wasteful

perks; Jensen 1986), leverage can be used to influence labor negotiations. In both cases, debt

reduces managerial flexibility and discretion.

       These capital structure models predict that leverage should increase with supplier

bargaining power (e.g., unionization rates). This prediction holds among US firms. Figure 2

shows the conditional correlation between market leverage and union coverage from 1990 to

2016, controlling for industry and year fixed effects. The leverage data are from Compustat, and

union coverage is measured at the industry-year level using the Current Population Survey of the

Bureau of Labor Statistics. The industry fixed effects ensure that the relation is identified from

changes in the union coverage rate over time as opposed to any fixed differences across

industries. A 10-percentage-point increase in union coverage is associated with a 2.0-percentage-

point increase in leverage (SE = 0.6; p < 0.001, adjusted for clustering at the industry level).

       The relation shown in Figure 2 is consistent with other cross-sectional analyses. Bronars

& Deere (1991), Hirsch (1991), and Matsa (2010) show that unionization rates are correlated

with financial leverage at the industry and firm levels, while Cavanaugh & Garen (1997) show



                                                 16
that the correlation increases with rough proxies for the specificity of a firm’s assets. However,

these results may be affected by omitted variable bias: unions are more likely to organize in

established, profitable firms and industries, which may also have a greater capacity for debt.

       To overcome this bias, Matsa (2010) uses states’ adoption of right-to-work laws in the

1950s and states’ repeal of unemployment insurance work stoppage provisions in the 1960s and

early 1970s as sources of exogenous variation in union power. Right-to-work laws prohibit

employment contract provisions that require employees to join or financially support a union.

The laws expose unions to a free rider problem by allowing nonunion employees to benefit from

collective bargaining without paying union dues. Work stoppage provisions allow strikers to

collect unemployment benefits during a labor dispute if their employer continues to operate at or

near normal levels, effectively insuring unionized workers against failed strikes. After states

adopt legislation that reduces union bargaining power, unionized firms reduce debt relative to

otherwise similar firms in other states. Matsa finds that the ratio of debt to firm value decreases

by up to one-half after a right-to-work law is passed, and up to one-fifth after a work stoppage

provision is repealed. Consistent with a causal interpretation, financial policy is unaffected in

industries with a low union presence.

       Although the aggregate impact of collective bargaining on the capital structures of U.S.

firms surely decreased as private-sector unionization declined after the 1950s (Dickens &

Leonard 1985), collective bargaining remains prominent in much of the industrialized world: the

share of private-sector workers covered by collective bargaining agreements is 24% in Japan,

32% in Canada, 35% in the United Kingdom, 50% in Australia, and 63%-99% in Continental

Europe and Scandinavia (Visser 2006). Studies find that firms around the world use leverage

strategically to influence their bargaining with workers. Using legal variation across 28



                                                17
countries, Ellul & Pagano (2017) show that firms use higher leverage when employees have

greater bargaining power, stronger seniority in liquidation, and weaker rights in restructuring. In

addition, Gorton & Schmid (2004) show that German firms subject to codeterminiation laws

(requiring partial employee corporate control) have greater leverage than other firms.

       High leverage appears to be effective in diminishing labor’s bargaining position, as it

appears to deter strikes (Myers & Saretto 2016), enable workforce reductions (Atanassov & Kim

2009), and facilitate substantial wage concessions (Benmelech et al. 2012) at unionized firms.

Hanka (1998) finds that debt is also negatively correlated with employment, wages, and pension

funding, and positively correlated with the use of part-time and seasonal employees. Sarig

(1998), in contrast, finds that the share of profits received by employees is positively related to a

firm’s leverage. To the extent that leverage is endogenous to a firm’s financial condition and the

bargaining environment, however, some of these correlations may not have a causal

interpretation. Furthermore, a firm’s weakened financial condition can limit its ability to use

leverage strategically (Ellul & Pagano 2017).


2.2.2. Operating leverage

       Unionization makes it harder for a company to adjust its labor inputs and thus increases

the proportion of the company’s costs that are fixed as opposed to variable. Fixed costs must be

paid irrespective of the company’s sales volume, product market demand, or overall economic

conditions. A firm’s reliance on fixed as opposed to variable costs is referred to as its operating

leverage. Increasing operating leverage could moderate unions’ effect on financial leverage (for

more discussion on operating leverage unrelated to unionization, see Section 3). Union contracts

often make it more difficult for firms to cut wages or lay off employees. For example, Atanassov

& Kim (2009) show that, in countries with strong union laws, poorly performing firms sell assets


                                                 18
more often than they lay off large numbers of workers. Economies with greater worker

bargaining power are also more likely to enact employment protection legislation (Saint-Paul

2002). Cross-industry correlations suggest that the elevated operating leverage associated with

unionization increases business risk (Chen et al. 2011). Economies in which labor bargaining

takes place at the industry rather than firm level might offer a window into unions’ effect on

leverage through the operating leverage channel. When labor bargaining is at the industry level,

as in Sweden, debt’s strategic role is lessened and the operating leverage channel might

dominate. Kvistrum & Kågerman (2012) indeed find that Swedish firms with higher unionization

rates have lower leverage ratios.


2.2.3. Supply of debt

       Unionization could also affect the supply of debt. On the one hand, unions could increase

the supply of debt if their negotiating positions have the byproduct of protecting creditors’

wealth. For example, unions might discourage the firm from taking investments that increase the

firm’s risk of distress and put both the unionized workers’ wage premium and lenders’ debt

payments at risk. Unions might also oppose takeovers, which threaten not only workers (Shleifer

& Summers 1988; Pagano & Volpin 2005) but also bondholders (Warga & Welch 1993).

Consistent with this view, Chen et al. (2012) find that bond yields are lower in unionized

industries.

       On the other hand, unionization could hurt bondholders in default states, because

unionized workers are entitled to special treatment in bankruptcy court. Senior, unsecured

creditors stand to lose the most. Consistent with this view, Campello et al. (2018) find that

closely won union elections significantly reduce bond values even though they do not increase

default risk. They show that unionization is associated with longer and more costly proceedings


                                              19
in bankruptcy court. Bankruptcies of unionized firms are less likely to result in liquidations and

are more likely to be followed by a subsequent refiling. In pricing debt claims, rational lenders

would anticipate such costs and decrease their supply of credit to unionized firms.


2.3. Key Talent, Organizational Capital, and Intellectual Property

       A firm’s inability to prevent employee mobility can also create distress risk that is

unrelated to unemployment costs or labor bargaining. A firm is particularly vulnerable to the

departure of employees who possess hard-to-replace talents or who embody the firm’s

organizational capital or intellectual property. Eisfeldt & Papanikolaou (2013) and Donangelo

(2014) embed labor mobility in production-based models of asset pricing. Employees’ option to

leave a firm when better opportunities arise makes bad times worse for shareholders who are left

with capital that is less productive. To compensate investors for bearing this risk, firms with

more mobile workers or greater organizational capital earn about 5% higher average returns.

       The growing prevalence of organizational capital and intellectual property in the

economy is increasing the importance of labor mobility risk. Falato, Kadyrzhanova, & Sim

(2013) find that firms’ reliance on intangible capital rose from about 25% of net book assets

(assets minus cash holdings) in 1970 to more than 85% in 2010. Organizational capital

comprises a substantial component of intangible capital, estimated to account for 29% (“firm-

specific human and structural resources”; Corrado, Hulten, & Sichel 2009, p.670) to 52%

(Falato, Kadyrzhanova, & Sim 2013) of intangible capital in 2003. Organizational capital is more

important in the health, high-tech, and finance industries than in manufacturing and consumer

industries (Eisfeldt & Papanikolaou 2014). The majority of the remaining intangible capital is

intellectual property.




                                                20
       Labor mobility risk may encourage firms to reduce their financial borrowing to mitigate

the potential costs of financial distress triggered by mobility events. For example, when

employees hold the firm’s intellectual property, their ability to quit and transfer this property

elsewhere, perhaps to a competitor, poses a risk. This risk is greatest for property that is

protected by secrecy but not by patents, such as propriety information about the firm’s

customers, suppliers, prices, costs, future business plans, formulas, practices, processes, or

designs. Financial slack enables a firm to respond more aggressively to labor mobility and

intellectual property losses, and Klasa et al. (2018) show that worker mobility risk leads firms to

choose more conservative capital structures. They find that firms increase leverage by about

15%, relative to sample means, after legal rulings recognize the inevitable disclosure doctrine,

which prevents workers with such secrets from working for a rival firm.


2.4. Equity Ownership

       Firms can also use broad-based employee stock or option ownership to help retain

employees. Although stock and stock options are thought of as incentive tools for senior

executives (for a survey, see Frydman & Jenter 2010), they typically provide only minimal

incentives for rank-and-file employees at large firms, because each employee’s effort has a

trivial effect on the value of his or her stock holdings. However, because stock and stock option

grants typically have a vesting period, they make it more costly for employees to leave the firm.

Furthermore, Oyer (2004) argues that deferring equity-based compensation increases retention

even more than does deferring cash payments. If employees’ reservation wages are correlated

with their firm’s performance, and compensation contracts are costly to adjust, then equity

ownership will retain employees by giving them a raise when labor demand increases while

cutting pay when labor demand decreases.


                                                21
       Broad-based employee equity-based compensation may also benefit the firm in other

ways. First, it can help attract employees who are optimistic about the firm’s prospects and more

willing to invest in firm-specific human capital (Salop & Salop 1976; Oyer & Schaefer 2005;

Bergman & Jenter 2007). Second, if employees are more informed than investors about the

firm’s prospects, then their acceptance of stock-based pay sends a positive signal about the

firm’s value to the equity market (Lazear 2004). Third, financially constrained firms can

conserve cash by substituting equity-based compensation for cash wages (Core & Guay 2001).

Fourth, entrenched management can use employee stock ownership plans to thwart hostile

takeover bids (Chaplinsky & Neihaus 1994; Kim & Ouimet 2014). Finally, in certain

circumstances, equity-based pay can be used as employee incentives (Lazear & Oyer 2012; Kim

& Ouimet 2014).

       In sum, employee mobility has wide-ranging implications for a firm’s financial strategy.

For the most part, labor mobility encourages firms to reduce leverage. Reducing leverage

increases employees’ job security, giving them more reason to stay employed at the firm.

Similarly, firms can offer employees equity ownership with vesting requirements to promote

employee retention. Reducing leverage also offers the firm more financial flexibility to reinvest

when departing employees take organizational capital or intellectual property with them, and to

manage the business cycle when collective bargaining agreements limit its flexibility to

downsize the workforce. But too much financial flexibility can backfire if it encourages rent-

seeking, especially by a labor union during collective bargaining. A unionized firm has an

incentive to increase its financial leverage to weaken its balance sheet and negotiate a lower

wage rate.




                                               22
3. LABOR MARKET REGULATIONS AND NORMS

       Both physical and human capital are costly to adjust, and these adjustment costs can

influence firms’ financing strategies. Some labor adjustment costs—like training requirements—

are similar to those affecting physical capital, but others arising from labor market regulations

and norms are unique to labor.

       Adjusting the capital stock (or its utilization) can be costly, as it disrupts production by

reassigning and restructuring tasks; new equipment takes time to install and shifts other inputs

away from current production (Hamermesh & Pfann 1996). Furthermore, many capital goods

lack a secondary market. Once installed, such capital has little or no value unless it is used in

production. This irreversibility can make firms hesitant to purchase new capital (McDonald &

Siegel 1986; Dixit & Pindyck 1994).

       In a similar way, the costs of hiring, training, and firing make labor costly to adjust (Oi

1962). It typically takes 27–50 hours to recruit, screen, and interview candidates for a single

vacancy (Mishra 2015). Firms also usually provide new employees with formal and informal

training. In the first 3 months of work, a new employee spends about 30% of his or her time in

training (Frazis et al. 2000). In addition to the direct cost of trainers and materials, the costs

include the opportunity costs of lost production not only from experienced employees providing

informal training but also from the new employees themselves. In survey responses, the average

firm reports that replacing a blue-collar worker costs about $2,600 and replacing a white-collar

worker costs about $9,500, in 2017 dollars (Dube et al. 2010).

       Such labor adjustment costs effectively increase a firm’s operating leverage by making its

workforce and wage bill less flexible. Higher operating leverage increases the expected costs of

financial distress, lowering the firm’s optimal debt ratio (e.g., Mandelker & Rhee 1984; Mauer &



                                               23
Triantis 1994). Many of these labor adjustment costs are directly analogous to capital adjustment

costs. For example, the cost of training employees is analogous to that of installing equipment.

       Other costs, however, are unique to labor. Various labor market regulations and norms

without capital market analogs, such as employment protection legislation, minimum wages, and

downward wage rigidity, further impede firms’ flexibility to reduce employment and wages.

Because these labor-specific adjustment costs effectively increase operating leverage and

exacerbate financial distress, they influence firms’ financing strategies.


3.1. Employment Protection Legislation

       Labor market regulations that protect employment by increasing firing costs make firms’

workforces less flexible during downturns (e.g., Messina & Vallanti 2007). Such regulations are

associated with lower leverage.

       In Figure 3, I use data from countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and

Development (OECD) to show the conditional correlation between market leverage and

employment protection from 2006 to 2014, controlling for country and year fixed effects. The

leverage data are from Amadeus, and employment protection is measured at the country-year

level using Version 1 of the OECD’s index measuring the strictness of employment protection

for individual dismissals of employees on regular contracts. The index includes the

administrative complexity of dismissal procedures; notice and severance requirements for no-

fault dismissals; and the definition of, process for assessing, and compensation for unfair

dismissals. The country fixed effects ensure that the relation is identified from changes in

employment protection over time as opposed to any fixed differences across countries. In this

sample period, the employment protection index has a standard deviation of 0.6, with higher

scores representing stricter regulations. A 1-point increase in employment protection is


                                                 24
associated with a 9.0-percentage-point decrease in leverage (SE = 4.8; p = 0.073, adjusted for

clustering at the country level).

       When examining components of the index individually, leverage is most correlated with

the length of the notice period required for no-fault individual dismissals. Using the same

specification as for Figure 3, a 1-standard-deviation increase in the notice period for a worker

with 4 years of tenure is associated with an 11.4-percentage-point decrease in leverage (SE = 1.7;

p < 0.001, adjusted for clustering at the country level). Leverage is also negatively correlated

with the strictness of regulations of collective dismissals and the use of fixed-term and temporary

employment contracts, but these relations are not statistically significant at conventional levels.

       Simintzi et al. (2015) were the first to show a relation between leverage and country-level

employment protection. The relation illustrated by their analysis is robust to alternative

specifications, estimation strategies, and measures of employment protection. They show that

countries display similar trends to other countries before adopting a labor market reform and

different leverage levels afterwards. Employment protection is most constraining for firms whose

production process entails frequent workforce adjustments. When Simintzi et al. divide the firms

within each country according to their industry’s labor turnover in the United States, they find

that employment protection lowers leverage more in industries with more employee turnover.

       Kuzmina (2013) reaches a similar conclusion when exploiting variation in employment

protection within Spain. In Spain, as in many European countries, there are two types of

employment contracts—fixed-term and permanent—that differ in the job security they provide.

Fixed-term contracts account for 24% of employment in Spain and 15% in Europe overall. When

an employee with a permanent contract is dismissed in Spain, the firm is often forced to defend

the fairness of the dismissal in court and must pay the worker 33–45 days of wages per year of



                                                 25
tenure. In contrast, a firm may without penalty simply choose not to renew a fixed-term contract

when it expires. Some fixed-term contracts are renewed weekly, providing the firm with an

option to adjust its labor force almost immediately; even if a fixed-term worker is dismissed

early, severance is only 0–12 days of wages. As a result, firms are much more likely to cut fixed-

term rather than permanent workers when they encounter adverse business conditions. Fixed-

term contracts provide firms with more employment flexibility, making labor costs more

variable.

       In the late 1990s, Spanish regional governments introduced subsidies, ranging from about

€1,600 to more than €15,000 per employee, for hiring workers on permanent contracts.

Exploiting variation in firms’ eligibility for subsidies based on their location, initial fixed-term

contract usage, and (imputed) gender composition, Kuzmina (2013) finds that firms eligible for

higher subsidies use fewer fixed-term workers and lower financial leverage. Her estimates imply

that completely prohibiting temporary employment contracts would lead the average firm to

reduce its indebtedness by 3.6 percentage points, or about 6.3%. Consistent with these findings,

Caggese & Cuñat (2008) find that financially constrained firms, which are more vulnerable to

liquidity shocks and thus place greater value on flexibility, hire more temporary workers than do

other firms.

       Although firing costs are typically lower in the United States than in Europe, Serfling

(2016) shows that more modest employment protection regulation also affects capital structure

decisions in the United States. Employment in the United States is mostly at will, which means

that employers are free to terminate any employee for any reason, or no reason, with or without

prior notice, and without risk of legal liability. Serfling (2016) focuses on the good-faith

exception to at-will employment. This common law exception, which was adopted by 14 US



                                                26
state courts between 1977 and 1998, prevents an employer from discharging an employee out of

bad faith, malice, or retaliation. If an employer is found to have done so, employees can recover

contractual losses and punitive damages.

       Serfling (2016) finds that adopting the good-faith exception increases firms’ operating

leverage and decreases their financial leverage. After the good-faith exception is adopted, firms

are less likely to discharge employees following an earnings decline, employment flows are less

volatile, and variation in employment is less sensitive to earnings variations. In addition,

earnings are less persistent, and changes in earnings become more sensitive to changes in sales.

Presumably as a result, market leverage ratios decrease by 1.0 percentage point, or about 3.6%,

after the good-faith exception’s adoption.

       Employment protection also has a countervailing effect on leverage. Because higher

firing costs make layoffs less likely, they decrease employees’ unemployment risk, which in turn

lowers the compensating wage differential that they require to accept employment at a levered

firm (see Section 2.1).

       Table 2 presents the results from an augmented version of Serfling’s (2016) analysis, in

which leverage is regressed on employment protection, unemployment insurance generosity, and

their interaction. The results reveal the dual effects of employment protection on firms’ leverage.

Over an unemployment spell, the average maximum benefit available from states’ regular

unemployment insurance systems during this sample period (1967–1995) is about $4,700.

       In states with greater unemployment insurance benefits, employees are better protected

against unemployment risk. In these states, employment protection increases firms’ operating

leverage and distress risk but has less impact on employees’ unemployment risk and

compensating wage differential. The estimates reported in Table 2 suggest that firms in states



                                                27
with unemployment insurance generosity 1 standard deviation above the mean ($7,000) reduce

leverage by 1.9 percentage points (SE = 0.8, p < 0.05), or 6.9%, after the good-faith exception is

adopted.

       In states with low unemployment insurance benefits, however, employment protection

both increases firms’ distress risk (decreasing optimal leverage) and decreases employees’

unemployment risk (increasing optimal leverage). On net, the leverage of a firm is less affected

in these states. Indeed, the estimates reported in Table 2 suggest that firms in states with

unemployment insurance generosity 1 standard deviation below the mean ($2,400) do not adjust

leverage after the good-faith exception is adopted (estimate = 0.01 percentage points, or 0.04%;

SE = 0.51; p = 0.98).


3.2. Minimum Wages

       High minimum wages could also reduce operating flexibility and increase the costs of

financial distress, which would reduce a firm’s optimal leverage ratio. Gustafson & Kotter

(2017) examine the effects of U.S. federal minimum wage policy between 1987 and 2012. They

find that Compustat firms respond to a binding federal minimum wage by increasing operating

and financial flexibility, shifting from capital expenditures to operating leases, and decreasing

leverage. Labor-intensive firms reduce leverage use by about 10% after a 10% increase in the

minimum wage. Consistent with financial distress costs being a consideration, the decrease is

concentrated at below investment grade-rated firms.


3.3. Downward Wage Rigidity

       Through a similar channel, downward wage rigidity could also reduce firms’ leverage. In

many developed economies, firms are reluctant to cut nominal wages, even during recessionary



                                               28
periods when unemployment is high (Dickens et al. 2007). For example, Kahn (1997) estimates

that from 1970 to 1988, downward wage rigidities protected approximately 9.4% of U.S. wage

earners from a nominal wage reduction. Surveys of U.S. hiring managers find that concerns for

both fairness and adverse selection in quits play roles in explaining why firms typically refrain

from cutting wages in recessionary periods (Blinder & Choi 1990; Bewley 1995; Campbell &

Kamlani 1997). Many firms keep wage differentials between workers smaller than productivity

differentials because they are concerned that large wage differentials for similar workers would

harm morale and lead some employees to reduce their efforts. Because wages are compressed,

firms that need to reduce payroll would rather lay off their overpaid, least productive employees

than lose their underpaid, productive workers through quits.

       Downward wage rigidity is akin to raising a firm’s operating leverage, because rigid

input prices reduce its cash flow during recessions. Schoefer (2015) shows that this constraint

can lead firms to reduce hiring and other profitable investments. Firms’ optimal leverage ratio is

lower to avoid exacerbating this constraint.

       In these various ways, labor market regulations and norms introduce frictions that make it

more costly for firms to reduce their wage bill. By making firms’ operating costs less flexible,

employment protection, minimum wages, downward wage rigidity, and other labor market

frictions increase firms’ operating leverage and thus reduce the firms’ optimal financial leverage.


4. RETIREMENT RISK

       A final difference between workers and machines is that workers must provide for

themselves during retirement. In most developed countries, retirees have three potential sources

of support: state-provided social security, occupational pension plans, and personal savings. In

the United States, according to the National Compensation Survey as of March 2016, 18% of


                                                29
private sector workers have access to a defined-benefit pension plan, which promises to pay

them a regular amount during retirement regardless of the value of the assets in the fund backing

this promise. The prevalence of such plans varies across industries, ranging from 76% in utilities

to 3% in accommodation and food services. Because these plans are a form of corporate debt,

they should be viewed as part of a firm’s financing strategy.4

          Defined-benefit plans are essentially deferred pay. In a Modigliani-Miller theorem for

pensions, Blinder (1982) shows that pensions and wages are perfect substitutes in a world with

perfect capital markets, no uncertainty, no taxes, no compulsory retirement, and worker

compensation equal to worker marginal product. Under these conditions, pensions are irrelevant

in that they do not affect savings, work, or retirement decisions. An employee who prefers a mix

of pension and wages different than the firm offers could shift compensation from wages to

pension by saving, or from pension to wages by borrowing.

          In reality, firms offer pension plans because the assumptions in Blinder’s (1982) theorem

do not hold. First and foremost, pensions enable employees to avoid and defer taxes. Assets in a

pension fund are not subject to the payroll tax and accumulate free of income tax until

retirement, when most people are in lower tax brackets than during their working years. Firms

can also use pension plans to attract, accumulate, and retain human capital. Pension benefits

attract employees with low rates of time preference, which is valued by certain employers

(Ippolito 1997). More importantly, defined benefit plans reduce labor turnover, especially among

experienced employees, which benefits firms, for example, by avoiding transaction costs in

hiring and by enabling firm investment in worker training.



4
    See Cocco (2014) for a survey of finance research related to defined benefit pension schemes.



                                                      30
       Despite strong tax and operational incentives for firms to fully fund defined-benefit

pension plans (Tepper 1981; Rauh 2006), many firms nonetheless choose to underfund these

plans. A firm that underfunds its pension fund is essentially borrowing from its employees,

which might be a desirable source of finance for a number of reasons. First, the forgone tax

benefit might be cheaper than other sources of financing for a financially constrained firm

(Cooper & Ross 2001). Second, it reduces the agency cost of external borrowing by giving

managers an incentive to reduce risk shifting and to protect the company from insolvency

(Jensen & Meckling 1976; Sundaram & Yermack 2007).5 Third, it improves the firm’s

bargaining position with labor unions by holding back some of their compensation, thereby

giving them a stronger stake in the firm’s long-run success (Ippolito 1985; Benmelech et al.

2012). Fourth, it allows small risk-averse firms to share risk with their risk-averse workers

(Arnott & Gersovitz 1980). Finally, because the government insures pension defaults in the

United States, a distressed company has an incentive to underfund its pension plans to maximize

the value of this insurance (Sharpe 1976).

       Because defined-benefit plans are a form of corporate debt, they play an important role in

the capital structures of firms that use them. Shivdasani & Stefanescu (2009) argue that, when

assessing a firm’s financing, pension liabilities should be consolidated with the firm’s debt

obligations. After all, firms are liable for their pension benefits, just like other corporate

liabilities (Black 1980). Pension liabilities can be senior to or at par with unsecured financial

liabilities, but are never junior to financial debt; like interest payments on debt, corporate pension

contributions are tax deductible and failing to pay them can trigger bankruptcy.
5
 Among large firms, pension entitlements represent about 10% of an average CEO’s compensation, often
exceed the government insurance limits, and are associated with reduced firm risk (Sundaram & Yermack
2007; Wei & Yermack 2011).



                                                 31
       Firms consider their pension assets and liabilities when making capital structure

decisions. In Figure 4, I show the conditional correlation between financial leverage and pension

liability in 1985–2016, controlling for the market-to-book ratio and firm and year fixed effects.

Financial leverage includes both short- and long-term debt, while pension liability is the

projected benefit obligation—the actuarial present value of the accrued benefits earned for past

services rendered plus the projected benefits from future salary increases. Both types of liabilities

are measured annually from Compustat data as fractions of the combined market value of the

firm’s operating and pension assets. The firm fixed effects ensure that the relation is identified

from changes in leverage over time as opposed to any fixed differences across firms. A 10-

percentage-point increase in pension leverage is associated with a 2.8-percentage-point decrease

in financial leverage (SE = 0.3; p < 0.001, adjusted for clustering at the firm level).

       Because this offset in leverage is only partial, firms’ leverage ratios are greater when

measured on a consolidated basis. The difference between balance-sheet leverage ratios and

consolidated leverage ratios is often substantial. Shivdasani & Stefanescu (2009) show that, for

Compustat firms with defined-benefit pension plans between 1991 and 2003, both book and

market leverage are about one-third larger when calculated on a consolidated basis: average book

leverage increases from 25% to 34%, while average market leverage increases from 20% to 27%.

Bartram (2015) finds similar results on a sample of firms from 50 countries. Using data from

WorldScope and DataStream between 2002 and 2009, he finds that consolidating pension and

financial debt increases effective leverage by about a third, as firms reduce their financial debt by

only 22 cents for every dollar of pension liability. On net, total leverage ratios of firms with

pension plans are 23% higher than those of firms without pension plans.




                                                 32
5. CONCLUSION

       In this article, I examine how a firm’s workforce affects its optimal sources of finance.

The needs of and risks posed by workers differ from those of physical capital; these disparities

create labor market frictions that a firm must take into account when considering how to

structure its financing. While physical capital constitutes the tangible value of a firm and can be

pledged as collateral, firms do not hold title to labor and the human capital its employees

possess. People can choose where to work and can quit their jobs at any time. Labor market

frictions arise, for example, from the costs associated with job loss. Employees can also band

together to improve their bargaining power and are often shielded by employment protection and

other labor market regulations. In addition, workers are a source of corporate borrowing,

sometimes at below-market rates, when they are willing to forgo some compensation until their

retirement.

       These unique features of labor among inputs to production have important implications

for businesses structuring their financing. The analysis in this review aims to clarify how these

implications can be organized according to the underlying labor market frictions that they reflect.

State-of-the-art research has developed well beyond simply showing that labor affects finance.

New empirical research in this area should interpret the interconnections between capital

structure and labor market phenomena through the lens of these frictions. The largest research

contributions will provide fresh insight on the corporate finance implications of these and other

underlying labor market frictions.

       There is irony in the timing of the recent renaissance in research on connections between

a firm’s capital structure and its workforce. Current trends in the labor market are reducing the

relevance of some of the institutions discussed in this paper. Private-sector unionization rates in



                                                33
the United States are in long-term decline (from 24.2% in 1973 to 6.4% in 2016; Hirsch &

Macpherson 2003), as is the percentage of private-sector workers whose only employer-based

retirement savings is a defined-benefit pension plan (from 28% in 1980 to 2% in 2014;

Employee Benefit Research Institute 2017). These changes in labor market institutions only

underscore the importance of researchers relating their findings to the underlying labor market

frictions. Even with the diminished roles of unions and pensions, the underlying frictions remain:

workers can act strategically to increase their pay and need to provide for their retirement. We

can more easily understand the financing implications of new labor market institutions when we

relate these institutions to the underlying frictions that they represent or are designed to address.

       Other recent economic developments increase the importance of additional labor market

frictions for firms. The growth of information technology and the knowledge economy presents

new corporate financing considerations. In 2014, Facebook acquired WhatsApp, a company with

only 55 employees and $60 million of funding, for $19 billion. WhatsApp’s business model

reflects a trend observable throughout the economy. Human capital (and the intangible assets that

it creates) is becoming an increasingly critical asset for contemporary firms. As Zingales (2000)

posits, employees in such firms are not automata operating valuable physical assets, but are

valuable assets themselves, operating commodity-like physical assets. In such firms, labor

mobility risk and the potential loss of firm-specific human capital are all the more important. The

growing prominence of human capital in the modern economy (e.g., Corrado, Hulten & Sichel

2009; Autor 2014) underscores the importance of further integrating workforce considerations

and labor market frictions into corporate finance research and practice.




                                                  34
LITERATURE CITED

Abowd JM, Ashenfelter OC. 1981. Anticipated unemployment, temporary layoffs, and
     compensating wage differentials. In Studies in Labor Markets, ed. Rosen S, pp. 141–70.
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Agrawal AK, Matsa DA. 2013. Labor unemployment risk and corporate financing decisions.
      Journal of Financial Economics. 108(2):449–70.
Almeida H, Philippon T. 2007. The risk‐adjusted cost of financial distress. Journal of Finance.
      62(6):2557–86.
Arnott RJ, Gersovitz M. 1980. Corporate financial structure and the funding of private pension
       plans. Journal of Public Economics. 13(2):231–47.
Asquith P, Gertner R, Scharfstein D. 1994. Anatomy of financial distress: An examination of
       junk-bond issuers. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 109(3):625–58.
Atanassov J, Kim E. 2009. Labor and corporate governance: International evidence from
       restructuring decisions. Journal of Finance. 64(1):341–74.
Autor DH. 2014. Skills, education, and the rise of earnings inequality among the “other 99
      percent.” Science. 344(6186), 843–51.
Autor DH, Dorn D. 2013. The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of the US
      labor market. American Economic Review. 103(5):1553–97.
Autor DH, Levy F, Murnane RJ. 2003. The skill content of recent technological change: An
      empirical exploration. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 118(4):1279–1333.
Bae KH, Kang JK, Wang J. 2011. Employee treatment and firm leverage: A test of the
     stakeholder theory of capital structure. Journal of Financial Economics. 100(1):130–153.
Baghai R, Silva R, Thell V, Vig V, 2017. Talent in distressed firms: Investigating the labor costs
       of financial distress. Working Paper, Stockholm School of Economics.
Baldwin CY. 1983. Productivity and labor unions: An application of the theory of self-enforcing
      contracts. Journal of Business. 56:155–85.
Bartram SM. 2015. Corporate post–retirement benefit plans and leverage. Review of Finance.
       20(2):575–29.
Becker GS. 1962. Investment in human capital: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Political
      Economy. 70(5, Part 2):9–49.
Benmelech E, Bergman NK, Enriquez RJ. 2012. Negotiating with labor under financial distress.
      Review of Corporate Finance Studies. 1(1):28–67.
Benmelech E, Bergman N, Seru A. 2011. Financing labor. NBER Working Paper 17144.
Benmelech E, Frydman C, Papanikolaou D. 2018. Financial frictions and employment during the
      great depression. Journal of Financial Economics. In press.
Bergman NK, Jenter D. 2007. Employee sentiment and stock option compensation. Journal of
      Financial Economics. 84(3):667–712.


                                               35
Berk JB, Stanton R, Zechner J. 2010. Human capital, bankruptcy, and capital structure. Journal
       of Finance. 65(3):891–26.
Bewley TF. 1995. A depressed labor market as explained by participants. American Economic
      Review. 85(2):250–54.
Black F. 1980. The tax consequences of long-run pension policy. Financial Analysts Journal.
       36(4):21-28.
Blinder AS. 1982. Private pensions and public pensions: Theory and fact. NBER Working Paper
       902.
Blinder AS, Choi DH. 1990. A shred of evidence on theories of wage stickiness. Quarterly
       Journal of Economics. 105(4):1003–15.
Bronars SG, Deere DR. 1991. The threat of unionization, the use of debt, and the preservation of
       shareholder wealth. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 106(1):231–54.
Brown J, Matsa DA. 2016. Boarding a sinking ship? An investigation of job applications to
      distressed firms. Journal of Finance. 71(2):507–50.
Burgard SA, Brand JE, House JS. 2007. Toward a better estimation of the effect of job loss on
      health. Journal of Health and Social Behavior. 48(4):369–84.
Caggese A, Cuñat V. 2008. Financing constraints and fixed‐term employment contracts.
      Economic Journal. 118(533):2013–46.
Caggese A, Cuñat V, Metzger D. 2018. Firing the wrong workers: Financing constraints and
      labor misallocation. Journal of Financial Economics. In press.
Calomiris CW, Orphanides A, Sharpe SA. 1997. Leverage as a state variable for employment,
      inventory accumulation and fixed investment. In Asset Prices and the Real Economy, ed.
      F Capie, GE Wood, pp. 169–96. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Campbell III CM, Kamlani KS. 1997. The reasons for wage rigidity: evidence from a survey of
     firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 112(3):759–89.
Campello M, Gao J, Qiu J, Zhang Y. 2018. Bankruptcy and the cost of organized labor: evidence
      from union elections. Review of Financial Studies. 31(3):980–1013.
Cavanaugh JK, Garen J. 1997. Asset specificity, unionization and the firm’s use of debt.
      Managerial and Decision Economics. 18(3):255–69.
Chaplinsky S, Niehaus G. 1994. The role of ESOPs in takeover contests. Journal of
       Finance. 49(4):1451–70.
Charles KK, Stephens Jr M. 2004. Job displacement, disability, and divorce. Journal of Labor
       Economics. 22(2):489–522.
Chemmanur TJ, Cheng Y, Zhang T. 2013. Human capital, capital structure, and employee pay:
     An empirical analysis. Journal of Financial Economics. 110(2):478–502.
Chen HJ, Kacperczyk M, Ortiz-Molina H. 2011. Labor unions, operating flexibility, and the cost
      of equity. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis. 46(1):25–58.
Chen HJ, Kacperczyk M, Ortiz-Molina H. 2012. Do nonfinancial stakeholders affect the pricing
      of risky debt? Evidence from unionized workers. Review of Finance. 16(2):347–383.

                                              36
Chodorow-Reich G. 2014. The employment effects of credit market disruptions: Firm-level
      evidence from the 2008–9 financial crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 129(1):1–59.
Clark AE. 2001. What really matters in a job? Hedonic measurement using quit data. Labour
       Economics. 8(2):223–42.
Cocco J. 2014. Corporate Pension Plans. Annual Review Financial Economics. 6:163–184.
Cooper RW, Ross TW. 2001. Pensions: theories of underfunding. Labour Economics. 8(6):667–
      89.
Core JE, Guay WR. 2001. Stock option plans for non–executive employees. Journal of Financial
       Economics. 61(2):253–87.
Corrado C, Hulten C, Sichel D. 2009. Intangible capital and U.S. economic growth. Review of
      Income and Wealth 55(3):661–85.
Cronqvist H, Heyman F, Nilsson M, Svaleryd H, Vlachos J. 2009. Do entrenched managers pay
      their workers more? Journal of Finance. 64(1):309–39.
Dasgupta S, Sengupta K. 1993. Sunk investment, bargaining and choice of capital structure,
      International Economic Review. 34:203–20.
Davis S, von Wachter T. 2011. Recessions and the costs of job loss. Brookings Papers on
      Economic Activity. 43(2):1–74.
Diamond P. 1982. Aggregate demand management in search equilibrium. Journal of Political
      Economy. 90:881–94.
Dickens WT, Goette L, Groshen EL, Holden S, Messina J, Schweitzer ME, Turunen J, Ward
      ME. 2007. How wages change: Micro evidence from the International Wage Flexibility
      Project. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 21(2):195–214.
Dickens WT, Leonard JS. 1985. Accounting for the decline in union membership, 1950–1980.
      ILR Review. 38(3):323–34.
Dixit AK, Pindyck RS. 1994. Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
       Press.
Donangelo A. 2014. Labor          mobility:   Implications   for   asset   pricing. Journal   of
      Finance. 69(3):1321–46.
Dube A, Freeman E, Reich M. 2010. Employee replacement costs. Institute for Research on
      Labor and Employment Working Paper 201–10.
Dunlop JT, Fledderus ML, van Kleeck M. 1944. Wage Determination Under Trade Unions. New
      York: Macmillan Company.
Duygan-Bump B, Levkov A, Montoriol-Garriga J. 2015. Financing constraints and
      unemployment: Evidence from the Great Recession. Journal of Monetary Economics.
      75:89–105.
Eisfeldt AL, Papanikolaou D. 2013. Organization capital and the cross‐section of expected
        returns. Journal of Finance. 68(4):1365–1406.
Eisfeldt AL, Papanikolaou D. 2014. The value and ownership of intangible capital. American
        Economic Review. 104(5):189–94.

                                              37
Ellul A, Pagano M. 2017. Corporate leverage and employees’ rights in bankruptcy. Working
       Paper, Indiana University.
Employee Benefit Research Institute. 2017. What Are the Trends in U.S. Retirement Plans?
      Washington, DC: Employee Benefit Research Institute. https://www.ebri.org/publications
      /benfaq/index.cfm?fa=retfaq14.
Falato A, Kadyrzhanova D, Sim JW. 2013. Rising intangible capital, shrinking debt capacity,
       and the U.S. corporate savings glut. Finance and Economics Discussion Paper 2013–67,
       Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Falato A, Liang N. 2016. Do creditor rights increase employment risk? Evidence from loan
       covenants. Journal of Finance. 71(6):2545–90.
Farber HS. 2005. What do we know about job loss in the United States? Evidence from the
       displaced workers survey, 1984–2004. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic
       Perspectives. 29:13–28.
Frazis H, Gittleman M, Joyce M. 2000. Correlates of training: An analysis using both employer
       and employee characteristics. ILR Review. 53(3):443–62.
Freeman RB, Medoff JL. 1984. What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic Books.
Frydman C, Jenter D. 2010. CEO compensation. Annual Review Financial Economics. 2:75–
      102.
Gibbons R, Katz LF. 1991. Layoffs and lemons. Journal of Labor Economics. 9:351–80.
Gorton G, Schmid F. 2004. Capital, labor, and the ﬁrm: A study of German codetermination.
      Journal of the European Economic Association. 2:863–905.
Graham JR. 2000. How big are the tax benefits of debt? Journal of Finance. 55:1901–41.
Graham JR, Kim H, Li S, Qiu J. 2016. Employee costs of corporate bankruptcy. Working Paper,
      Duke University.
Grossman SJ, Hart OD. 1982. Corporate financial structure and managerial incentives. In The
      Economics of Information and Uncertainty, ed. J McCall, pp. 107–140. Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press.
Gruber J. 1997. The consumption smoothing benefits of unemployment insurance. American
      Economic Review. 87:192–205.
Gustafson M, Kotter JD. 2017. Minimum wage and corporate policy. Working Paper,
       Pennsylvania State University.
Hamermesh DS, Pfann GA. 1996. Adjustment costs in factor demand. Journal of Economic
     Literature. 34(3):1264–92.
Hamermesh DS, Wolfe JR. 1990. Compensating wage differentials and the duration of wage
     loss. Journal of Labor Economics. 8(1, Part 2):S175–S197.
Hanka G. 1998. Debt and the terms of employment. Journal of Financial Economics. 48:245–82.
Harris M, Holmstrom B. 1982. A theory of wage dynamics. Review of Economic Studies.
       49(3):315–33.


                                             38
He J, Shu T, Yang H. 2017. The employee clientele of corporate leverage: Evidence from
      personal labor income diversification. Working Paper, University of Georgia.
Hennessy CA, Livdan D. 2009. Debt, bargaining, and credibility in firm-supplier relationships.
      Journal of Financial Economics. 93(3):382–99.
Hirsch BT. 1991. Labor Unions and the Economic Performance of Firms. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E.
       Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Hirsch BT, Macpherson DA. 2003. Union membership and coverage database from the current
       population survey: Note. Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 56(2):349–54.
Hortaçsu A, Matvos G, Syverson C, Venkataraman S. 2013. Are consumers affected by durable
       goods makers’ financial distress? The case of auto manufacturers. Review of Financial
       Studies. 26(5):1248–90.
Hotchkiss ES. 1995. Postbankruptcy performance and management turnover. Journal of
      Finance. 50(1):3–21.
Hsu JW, Matsa DA, Melzer BT. 2018. Unemployment insurance as a housing market
     stabilizer. American Economic Review. 108(1):49–81.
Ippolito RA. 1985. The economic function of underfunded pension plans. Journal of Law and
        Economics. 28(3):611–51.
Ippolito RA. 1997. Pension plans and employee performance: Evidence, analysis, and policy.
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jaggia PB, Thakor AV. 1994. Firm–specific human capital and optimal capital structure.
       International Economic Review. 35(2):283–308.
Jensen MC. 1986. Agency costs of free cash ﬂow, corporate ﬁnance, and takeovers. American
       Economic Review. 76:323–29.
Jensen MC. 1989. Eclipse of the public corporation. Harvard Business Review. 67(9–10):61–74.
Jensen MC, Meckling WH. 1976. Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and
       ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics. 3(4):305–60.
John K, Lang LH, Netter J. 1992. The voluntary restructuring of large firms in response to
      performance decline. Journal of Finance. 47(3):891–917.
Joskow PL. 1987. Contract duration and relationship–specific investments: Empirical evidence
      from coal markets. American Economic Review. 77(1):168–85.
Kahn S. 1997. Evidence of nominal wage stickiness from microdata. American Economic
      Review. 87(5):993–1008.
Kale JR, Ryan HE Jr, Wang L. 2016. Outside employment opportunities, employee productivity,
       and debt discipline. Journal of Corporate Finance. In press.
Kang JK, Shivdasani A. 1997. Corporate restructuring during performance declines in Japan.
      Journal of Financial Economics. 46(1):29–65.
Katz LF, Meyer BD. 1990. The impact of the potential duration of unemployment benefits on the
      duration of unemployment. Journal of Public Economics. 41(1):45–72.


                                             39
Kim   E, Ouimet P. 2014. Broad‐based employee               stock   ownership:   Motives    and
      outcomes. Journal of Finance. 69(3):1273–1319.
Kim H. 2015. How does labor market size affect firm capital structure? Evidence from large
     plant openings. Working Paper, Cornell University.
Klasa S, Ortiz-Molina H, Serfling M, Srinivasan S. 2018. Protection of trade secrets and capital
       structure decisions. Journal of Financial Economics. 128(2):266–86.
Kuzmina O. 2013. Operating flexibility and capital structure: Evidence from a natural
      experiment. Working Paper, New Economic School.
Kvistrum P, Kågerman H. 2012. Labor bargaining power and capital structure. Bachelor’s
       Thesis, Stockholm School of Economics.
Lazear EP. 2004. Output-based pay: Incentives, retention or sorting? In Accounting for Worker
       Well-Being (Research in Labor Economics, Volume 23), ed. Polachek SW, pp. 1–25.
       Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Lazear EP. 2009. Firm-specific human capital: A skill-weights approach. Journal of Political
       Economy. 117(5):914–40.
Lazear EP, Oyer P. Personnel Economics. 2012. In The Handbook of Organizational Economics,
       ed. Gibbons R, Roberts J, pp. 479–519. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Levy F, Murnane RJ. 2005. The New Division of Labor: How Computers Are Creating the Next
      Job Market. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Li EH. 1986. Compensating differentials for cyclical and noncyclical unemployment: the
      interaction between investors’ and employees’ risk aversion. Journal of Labor
      Economics. 4(2):277–300.
Lichtenberg FR, Siegel D. 1990. The effects of leveraged buyouts on productivity and related
       aspects of firm behavior. Journal of Financial Economics. 27(1):165–94.
Mandelker GN, Rhee SG. 1984. The impact of the degrees of operating and financial leverage on
      systematic risk of common stock. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.
      19(1):45–57.
Matsa DA. 2006. The impact of ﬁnancial incentives on ﬁrm behavior. Ph.D. Thesis,
      Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Matsa DA. 2010. Capital structure as a strategic variable: evidence from collective bargaining.
      Journal of Finance. 65:1197–1232.
Mauer DC, Triantis AJ. 1994. Interactions of corporate financing and investment decisions: A
      dynamic framework. Journal of Finance. 49(4):1253–77.
McDonald R, Siegel D. 1986. The value of waiting to invest. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
     101(4):707–727.
Messina J, Vallanti G. 2007. Job flow dynamics and firing restrictions: Evidence from Europe.
      Economic Journal. 117(521):F279–F301.
Michaels R, Page B, Whited TM. 2018. Labor and capital dynamics under financing frictions.
      Review of Finance. In press.

                                              40
Mishra A. 2015. The Real Cost of Hiring a Single Candidate. https://blog.interviewmocha.com/
       the-real-cost-of-hiring-a-single-candidate.
Modigliani F, Miller MH. 1958. The cost of capital, corporation finance and the theory of
      investment. American Economic Review. 48(3):261–97.
Monteverde K, Teece DJ. 1982. Appropriable rents and quasi–vertical integration. Journal of
      Law and Economics. 25(2):321–28.
Mortensen D. 1986. Job search and labor market analysis. In Handbook of Labor Economics,
      Vol. 2, ed. O Ashenfelter, R Layard, D Card, pp.849–919. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Mortensen DT, Pissarides CA. 1994. Job creation and job destruction in the theory of
      unemployment. Review of Economic Studies. 61(3):397–415.
Myers BW, Saretto A. 2016. Does capital structure affect the behavior of nonfinancial
      stakeholders? An empirical investigation into leverage and union strikes. Management
      Science. 62(11):3235–53.
Myers S, McConnell J, Peterson A, Roebuck S, Soter D, Stewart S, Stern J. 1998. Vanderbilt
      University roundtable on the capital structure puzzle. Journal of Applied Corporate
      Finance. 11:18–19.
Ofek E. 1993. Capital structure and firm response to poor performance: An empirical analysis.
      Journal of Financial Economics. 34(1):3–30.
Oi WY. 1962. Labor as a quasi–fixed factor. Journal of Political Economy. 70(6):538–55.
Oyer P. 2004. Why do firms use incentives that have no incentive effects? Journal of
      Finance. 59(4):1619–1650.
Oyer P, Schaefer S. 2005. Why do some firms give stock options to all employees? An empirical
       examination of alternative theories. Journal of Financial Economics. 76(1):99–133.
Pagano M, Volpin PF. 2005. Managers, workers, and corporate control. Journal of Finance.
      60(2):841–868.
Parsons DO. 1972. Specific human capital: An application to quit rates and layoff rates. Journal
       of Political Economy. 80(6):1120–43.
Perotti EC, Spier KE. 1993. Capital structure as a bargaining tool: The role of leverage in
        contract renegotiation. American Economic Review. 83(5):1131–41.
Prescott EC, Visscher M. 1980. Organization capital. Journal of Political Economy. 88(3):446–
       61.
Rauh JD. 2006. Investment and financing constraints: Evidence from the funding of corporate
      pension plans. Journal of Finance. 61(1):33–71.
Rosen S. 1986. The theory of equalizing differences. In Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 2,
      ed. O Ashenfelter, R Layard, D Card, pp. 641–92, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Salop J, Salop S. 1976. Self-selection and turnover in the labor market. Quarterly Journal of
       Economics. 90(4):619–627.
Sarig OH. 1998. The effect of leverage on bargaining with a corporation, Financial Review.
       33:1–16.

                                              41
Schoefer B. 2015. The financial channel of wage rigidity. Ph.D. Thesis, Harvard University.
Serfling M. 2016. Firing costs and capital structure decisions. Journal of Finance. 71(5):2239–
        86.
Sharpe SA. 1994. Financial market imperfections, firm leverage, and the cyclicality of
      employment. American Economic Review. 84(4):1060–74.
Sharpe WF. 1976. Corporate pension funding policy. Journal of Financial Economics. 3(3):183–
       193.
Shivdasani A, Stefanescu I. 2009. How do pensions affect corporate capital structure decisions?
       Review of Financial Studies. 23(3):1287–1323.
Shleifer A, Summers LH. 1988. Breach of trust in hostile takeovers. In Corporate Takeovers:
        Causes and Consequences, ed. Auerbach A, pp. 33–68. Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press.
Simintzi E, Vig V, Volpin P. 2015. Labor protection and leverage. Review of Financial Studies.
       28(2):561–91.
Smith A. 1976. An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations. In Glasgow
      Edition of the Works and Correspondence of Adam Smith, Vol. 2, ed. WB Todd. Oxford,
      UK: Oxford University Press.
Stevens AH, Schaller J. 2011. Short–dun effects of parental job loss on children’s academic
       achievement. Economics of Education Review. 30(2):289–99.
Saint-Paul G. 2002. The political economy of employment protection. Journal of Political
       Economy. 110(3):672–704.
Sullivan DG, von Wachter T. 2009. Job displacement and mortality: An analysis using
       administrative data. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 124(3):1265–1306.
Sundaram RK, Yermack DL. 2007. Pay me later: Inside debt and its role in managerial
      compensation. Journal of Finance. 62(4):1551–1588.
Tepper I. 1981. Taxation and corporate pension policy. Journal of Finance. 36(1):1–13.
Titman S. 1984. The effect of capital structure on a firm’s liquidation decision. Journal of
      Financial Economics. 13(1):137–151.
Titman S, Wessels R. 1988. The determinants of capital structure choice. Journal of Finance.
      43(1):1–19.
Tomer JF. 1987. Organizational Capital: The Path to Higher Productivity and Well-Being. New
      York: Praeger.
Topel RH. 1984. Equilibrium earnings, turnover, and unemployment: New evidence. Journal of
       Labor Economics. 2(4):500–22.
Visser J. 2006. Union membership statistics in 24 countries. Monthly Labor Review. 129:38–49.
Warga A, Welch I. 1993. Bondholder losses in leveraged buyouts. Review of Financial Studies.
      6(4):959–982.



                                              42
Wei C, Yermack D. 2011. Investor reactions to CEOs’ inside debt incentives. Review of
      Financial Studies. 24(11):3813–3840.
Zingales L. 2000. In search of new foundations. Journal of Finance. 55(4):1623–53.




                                              43
                         50



                                 Arts, entertainment,
                                 and recreation
                         40
                                                   Real estate and
Financial leverage (%)




                                                   rental and leasing
                              Other services                                   Construction

                                                                                      Transportation,
                                       Wholesale trade                                warehousing,
                         30                                                           and utilities
                                                   Accommodation
                                                   and food services
                                                                        Finance and                          Information
                                                                        insurance

                                                                   Nondurable goods                              Retail trade
                                                                   manufacturing
                         20
                                                                                                        Durable goods
                                                                               Mining and               manufacturing
                                                                               logging
                                                                                                    Professional and
                                                                                                    business services
                         10
                                       17                     18                 19                            20
                                                                   Layoff rate (%)

Figure 1. Layoff risk and leverage, 2016
This figure displays the recentered residuals from weighted regressions of industry average
market leverage in 2016 and the industry average annual rate of layoffs and discharges in
2001–2015 on hiring, quit, and other separation rates. The regression line is weighted by the
underlying number of firm observations, which is also represented by the size of the circles.
The educational services, health care, and social assistance industries, which have lower
layoff rates, are not displayed, but they do contribute to the regression line. Leverage data,
which are winsorized at 1% tails, are from Compustat for all publicly traded firms
incorporated in the United States and whose financial reports are denominated in US dollars;
workforce turnover rates are from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey.
                         27.5



                         27.0
Financial leverage (%)




                         26.5



                         26.0



                         25.5


                                4   6      8             10             12            14
                                        Unionization rate (%)

Figure 2. Unionization and leverage, 1990–2016
The binned scatter plot displays the average recentered residuals of regressions of firm
market leverage and industry union coverage rate on industry and year fixed effects. The
observations are grouped into 10 equal-sized union coverage bins and the regression line is
shown. Leverage data, which are winsorized at 1% tails, are from Compustat for all publicly
traded firms incorporated in the United States and whose financial reports are denominated in
US dollars; union coverage rates are from the Current Population Survey (Hirsch &
Macpherson 2003). Industry is defined using Census Industry Codes.
                         28.0



                         27.5
Financial leverage (%)




                         27.0



                         26.5



                         26.0



                         25.5


                                1.95   2.00       2.05       2.10       2.15       2.20
                                              Employment protection index

 Figure 3. Employment protection and leverage, 2006–2014
 The binned scatter plot displays the average recentered residuals of regressions of firm
 market leverage and an employment protection index on country and year fixed effects. The
 observations are grouped into 10 equal-sized employment protection bins and the regression
 line is shown. Leverage, which is winsorized at 1% tails, is calculated from consolidated
 financial statements obtained from Amadeus for all publicly traded firms with operating
 revenue ≥ €1 million, total assets ≥ €2 million, or employees ≥ 15; the employment protection
 index is from the OECD and measures the strictness of employment protection for individual
 dismissals of employees on regular contracts.
                                           32
Financial debt / Consolidated assets (%)




                                           30




                                           28




                                           26

                                                0   5              10             15            20    25
                                                        Pension liability / Consolidated assets (%)

 Figure 4. Pension liability and financial leverage, 1985–2016
 The binned scatter plot displays the average recentered residuals of regressions of the
 ratios of pension benefit obligation and financial debt to the consolidated market value of
 total operating and pension assets on the market-to-book ratio and firm and year fixed
 effects. The observations are grouped into 10 equal-sized pension liability bins and the
 regression line is shown. The data, which are winsorized at 1% tails, are from Compustat for
 all publicly traded firms incorporated in the United States and whose financial reports are
 denominated in US dollars.
Table 1
Estimates of compensation for unemployment risk by credit
rating


                                  Wage premium
                   Excluding         Including bankruptcies
 Credit rating    bankruptcies      With UI        Without UI
     (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)

     AAA              0.02             0.02             0.05
     AA               0.10             0.11             0.29
     A                0.12             0.13             0.34
     BBB              1.01             1.09             2.94
     BB               1.73             1.88             5.06
     B                2.30             2.50             6.72


Notes: The estimates are fractions of firm value. Based on Topel’s
(1984) measures of the compensating wage differential for
unemployment risk, the calculations follow Agrawal and Matsa’s
(2013) methodology but are based on a risk-free rate of 2.5%. The
estimates in column (2) do not include compensation for job loss in
bankruptcy. To compute the estimates in columns (3) and (4), I
assume that bankrupt firms reduce employment by 50%. Columns
(3) and (4) present the average compensating wage premiums
assuming mean unemployment insurance (UI) wage replacement and
no UI wage replacement, respectively.
Table 2
Employment protection, unemployment insurance, and financial
leverage, 1967–1995


Dependent variable: Financial leverage

                                       Coefficient        Standard error
Good faith                               -0.010**             0.005
Max UI benefit                           0.005*               0.002
Good faith × Max UI benefit              -0.004**             0.002

R2                                        0.76
N                                        88,997
Firm-year controls                          X
State-year controls                         X
Firm fixed effects                          X
Year fixed effects                          X


Notes: This table summarizes results from ordinary least squares
regressions of market leverage on employment protection, unemployment
insurance (UI) generosity, and their interaction. Good faith is an
indicator of whether the state in which a firm is headquartered has
adopted the good-faith exception to at-will employment, and Max UI
benefit denotes the maximum benefit available, in thousands of dollars,
over an unemployment spell from the state’s regular UI system. Max UI
benefit is demeaned with respect to its overall sample mean before it is
interacted with Good faith . Data are from Compustat, and the
specification and variable definitions are the same as in Table V, Panel B,
column (5), of Serfling (2016), with the addition of the UI variable and
its pairwise interactions with Good faith , Implied contract , and Public
policy. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. * and ** denote
statistical significance at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
