                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  FATAL ATTRACTION? EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS, LABOR FORCE
                       EXITS, AND MORTALITY

                                            Andreas Kuhn
                                            Stefan Staubli
                                       Jean-Philippe Wuellrich
                                          Josef Zweimüller

                                        Working Paper 25124
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25124


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2018




We thank Michael Anderson, Joshua Angrist, David Autor, Raj Chetty, Janet Currie, David Dorn,
Christian Dustmann, Marty Feldstein, Hans-Martin von Gaudecker, Pieter Gautier, Bas van der Klaauw,
Rafael Lalive, Attila Lindner, Lucija Muehlenbachs, Maarten Lindeboom, Erik Plug, Alois Stutzer,
Uwe Sunde, participants of the 2018 NBER Trans-Atlantic Public Economics Seminar and seminar
participants in Amsterdam, Basel, Bern, Engelberg, Linz, Madrid, MIT, St.Gallen and Zurich for helpful
comments and suggestions. Financial support from the Austrian Science Fund (S 10304-G16) and
the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant no. PBZHP1-133428) is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Andreas Kuhn, Stefan Staubli, Jean-Philippe Wuellrich, and Josef Zweimüller. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fatal Attraction? Extended Unemployment Benefits, Labor Force Exits, and Mortality
Andreas Kuhn, Stefan Staubli, Jean-Philippe Wuellrich, and Josef Zweimüller
NBER Working Paper No. 25124
October 2018
JEL No. I10,I12,J14,J26

                                          ABSTRACT

We estimate the causal effect of permanent and premature exits from the labor force on mortality.
To overcome the problem of negative health selection into early retirement, we exploit a policy
change in unemployment insurance rules in Austria that allowed workers in eligible regions to
exit the labor force 3 years earlier compared to workers in non-eligible regions. Using
administrative data with precise information on mortality and retirement, we find that the policy
change induced eligible workers to exit the labor force significantly earlier. Instrumental variable
estimation results show that for men retiring one year earlier causes a 6.8% increase in the risk of
premature death and 0.2 years reduction in the age at death, but has no significant effect for
women.

Andreas Kuhn                                     Jean-Philippe Wuellrich
Swiss Federal Institute for                      Department of Economics
Vocational Education                             University of Zurich
and Training SFIVET                              Schoenberggasse 1
Kirchlindachstrasse 79                           8001, Zurich
3052, Zollikofen                                 SWITZERLAND
SWITZERLAND                                      jean-philippe.wuellrich@econ.uzh.ch
andreas.kuhn@ehb.swiss
                                                 Josef Zweimüller
Stefan Staubli                                   Department of Economics
Department of Economics                          University of Zurich
University of Calgary                            Schoenberggasse 1
2500 University Drive NW                         8001, Zurich
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4                              SWITZERLAND
CANADA                                           josef.zweimueller@econ.uzh.ch
and CEPR
and also NBER
sstaubli@ucalgary.ca
1     Introduction

In many industrialized countries, demographic changes put governments under increasing pres-
sure to implement major reforms to old age social security systems. A particular focus of many
reforms is to increase the effective retirement age by restricting access to early retirement sche-
mes. Workers and their political representatives often strongly oppose such reforms. Among the
most important arguments is that, after having worked all their lives in physically demanding
jobs, workers should have the option to retire early and thus avoid emerging health problems.
While leaving an unhealthy work environment is, ceteris paribus, clearly conducive to good he-
alth, the health effects of permanently exiting the labor force may go in the opposite direction.
Indeed, the empirical evidence suggests that retirement is not only associated with lower income
and fewer resources to invest in one’s health, but also with less cognitive and physical activity
(Bonsang et al., 2012; Mazzonna and Peracchi, 2012; Rohwedder and Willis, 2010) as well as
with changes in daily routines and lifestyles which are potentially associated with unhealthy
behavior (e.g. Balia and Jones, 2008; Henkens et al., 2008).
    This paper presents new evidence on the causal effect of early retirement, defined as a perma-
nent exit from the labor force before the retirement age, on mortality. To solve the problem of
negative health selection into retirement, we take advantage of a major change to the Austrian
unemployment insurance (UI) system, which extended the maximum duration of UI benefits for
workers living in certain regions of the country for a limited time period. This unique policy
change allowed older workers in eligible regions to withdraw 3 years earlier from employment
than comparable workers in non-eligible regions. Exploiting differences in eligibility for extended
UI benefits across regions and birth cohorts allows us to overcome the problem of reverse causa-
lity. Since the program generates variation in the retirement age that is arguably exogenous to
individuals’ health status, we can estimate the causal impact of early retirement on mortality
using an instrumental variable (IV) estimation strategy.
    Our study has three features, which are helpful to identify the impact of early retirement on
mortality. First, our empirical strategy is based upon a policy change that generates a large shift
in the earliest age at which individuals can permanently leave the labor force. Indeed, we find
that men in eligible regions exit the labor force almost 6 months earlier than men in non-eligible
regions. The effect is even larger among eligible women who exit the labor market up to 9 months

                                                2
earlier, on average. Second, the policy change took place in the late 80s, allowing us to follow
individuals for several decades after the change. Third, we use administrative data containing
precise and reliable information on both the timing of retirement and the date of death for the
universe of private-sector workers in Austria. Austrian social security data are collected for the
purpose of assessing individuals’ eligibility to (and level of) social security benefits. Information
on any individual’s work history and the date of death is thus precise, and our estimates are
unlikely to be contaminated by measurement error.1
       Our empirical analysis can be summarized by four main findings. First, an earlier exit from
the labor force has a strong effect on mortality among men but not women. An additional
year in early retirement increases the risk of men dying before age 73 by 1.85 percentage points
(equivalent to a relative increase of 6.8 percent). The increased mortality risk reduces men’s age
at death by 0.2 years for each additional year in early retirement. On the other hand, we find
that for women early retirement is not associated with worse health outcomes. Second, our IV
estimates are always considerably smaller than the corresponding ordinary least squares (OLS)
estimates, which is consistent with selection into early retirement based on poor health. Third,
we also document heterogeneity in the mortality effects across subgroups of the population. Men
in blue-collar occupations, men with low-work experience, and men who have some pre-existing
health impairment display higher mortality effects than men in white-collar occupations, men
with high-work experience, and men in good health. Fourth, we show that early retirement is
associated with a significant reduction in lifetime earnings. However, individuals compensate
most of this earnings loss with transfers from other government transfer programs. As a conse-
quence, the change in lifetime income associated with early retirement is negligible and cannot
explain the increased mortality among men.
       Our findings that early retirement increases mortality and reduces the age at death among
men are robust to a variety of placebo and other specification checks. First, we find no significant
   1
     Measurement problems are non-negligible when based on self-reported health measures, rather than an ”ob-
jective” health indicators such as mortality. The distinction between subjective and objective measures appears
to be of special relevance, as even self-reported measures of physical health may be subject to considerable repor-
ting error (Baker et al., 2004). It is likely that truly subjective measures of health, i.e. individuals’ assessment of
their well-being, perform even worse because of ex-post justification bias (e.g. Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001).
Indeed, studies using subjective health measures tend to find beneficial effects of retirement (Charles, 2004; Coe
and Zamarro, 2011; Eibich, 2015; Grip et al., 2012; Insler, 2014; Johnston and Lee, 2009; Neuman, 2008) and
only a few find negative effects of retirement on subjective health (Behncke, 2012; Dave et al., 2008). It is also
conceivable that there is considerable measurement error with respect to retirement age in survey data, whereas
such error is arguably of minor importance in administrative data.


                                                          3
regional differences in early retirement and mortality trends across eligible and non-eligible
regions prior to the adoption and after the abolishment of extended UI benefits. Second, we
repeat our analysis for a sample of men and women who are not eligible for extended UI benefits,
because they have not contributed enough years to the UI system. For theses samples the IV
estimates are always insignificant, while the OLS estimates are quantitatively large and highly
significant. These two checks suggest that our estimates are not biased by pre-existing regional
differences in early retirement and mortality trends. Third, our estimates are also robust to the
underlying statistical model: we find similar effects if we estimate the mortality effects using a
proportional hazard model instead of a linear probability model.
       Recent studies on retirement and health that use mortality as the main outcome and try to
establish causality have found mixed results.2 Hernaes et al. (2013) estimate the effect of early
retirement on mortality using Norwegian register data. They focus on institutional changes in
the access to early retirement to instrument for the actual retirement age. The find no causal
effect of early retirement on the incidence to die before age 77, although the OLS estimates are
negative and statistically significant. Bloemen et al. (2017) focus on Dutch civil servants and
instrument individuals’ actual retirement age using targeted early retirement programs. They
find that early retirement reduces the risk of dying within five years after retirement. Hallberg
et al. (2015) also use targeted early retirement programs for Swedish army officers and find
that early retirement had a beneficial effect on retirees’ health. We contribute to this literature
by studying a policy change that generated an extremely large early retirement response. For
example, the change in early retirement rules studied by Hernaes et al. (2013) reduced the
effective retirement age by 2 to 3.5 months, which is less than half of the effect we find. Having a
large early retirement response helps us to identify the impact of early retirement on mortality,
especially if this effect is small.3
       It is important to note that our estimates as well as the estimates in previous studies apply
only to those who change their retirement behavior as a result of the policy change. Given the
   2
      A related literature looks at the impact of job loss on mortality. Studies using administrative data include
Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) who estimate the effects of job displacement on mortality matching earnings
and employment registers of Pennsylvanian workers to death records from the US social security register. They
find mortality rates increase substantially after displacement, particularly for displaced long-tenured workers.
Evidence supporting the idea that job loss increases mortality is also found in Eliason and Storrie (2009) for
Sweden and Browning and Heinesen (2012) for Denmark.
    3
      Indeed, for men the IV estimates of early retirement on mortality in Hernaes et al. (2013) are positive across
all specifications and in some case quite large, but imprecisely estimated.


                                                         4
differences in health and socio-economic characteristics of the affected populations across the
existing studies, and given that there may exist countervailing effects from early retirement on
health, it is perhaps not surprising that the empirical evidence is mixed. In our case, individuals
who retire early tend to have worked in low-skilled jobs, to be in poor health, and to have low-
work experience. By contrast, the affected individuals in Bloemen et al. (2017) and Hallberg
et al. (2015) tend to have higher earnings and higher education than the average individual in
the rest of the population.
   Two recent studies by Fitzpatrick and Moore (2018) and Black et al. (2017) examine popula-
tions more similar to ours and also find a negative effect of retirement on mortality. Fitzpatrick
and Moore (2018) study whether there is a change in aggregate mortality at age 62, the earliest
eligibility age for social security benefits in the United States. Using population data, they find
a 2% increase in male mortality immediately after age 62 and a much smaller and imprecisely
estimated effect on female mortality. They argue that the increase in male mortality is con-
nected to retirement from the labor force and associated lifestyle changes. Black et al. (2017)
estimate the effect of Disability Insurance (DI) benefit receipt on U.S. mortality. To overcome
the health selection problem, they exploit random DI assignment based on more or less lenient
judges deciding on DI applications. It turns out that receiving DI slightly increases mortality
within the first 10 years of benefit receipt. Because DI benefit receipt causes lower labor supply,
Black et al. (2017) argue that this result is consistent with the claim that withdrawing from
work increases mortality. This channel is likely to be important in our context as well, given
that the extension in UI benefits is associated with a significant drop in labor supply.
   The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we discuss the institutional
background for Austria, focusing on the institutional features that underlie our IV strategy.
Section 3 discusses the data source as well as the selection of our sample and presents some
descriptive statistics. Details of our econometric framework are given in section 4. The results
are presented in section 5. Section 6 concludes.




                                                5
2     Institutional Background

2.1     Retirement Pathways in Austria

Since our study focuses on workers retiring during the late 1980s and early 1990s, we start with
a description of the different retirement pathways in the Austrian pension and unemployment
insurance (UI) system during that time period.4 We define retirement as the date at which an
individual withdraws permanently from the labor market (see section 3 below for details).
    The Austrian public pension system covers almost all workers and provides old age (OA)
and disability insurance (DI) pensions, which are the main source of income in retirement. The
formula for computing the level of benefits is the same for both pensions. It consists of a
pension coefficient, which increases with the number of insurance years up to a maximum of
80% (about 45 insurance years), multiplied by an assessment basis, which corresponds to the
average indexed capped earnings over the best 15 years.5 All pensions are subject to income
taxation and mandatory health insurance contributions. The replacement rate after income and
payroll taxes is on average 75% of the pre-retirement net earnings.
    A first pathway into retirement is the direct transition from employment by claiming an
OA pension. The statutory retirement age is 65 for men and 60 for women, but workers with
sufficient insurance years may claim an OA pension at any age after 60 for men and 55 for
women.6 Apart from direct transitions from employment, the most important pathway into
retirement is the indirect transition via the UI system. Regular UI benefits replace 55 percent
of the prior net wage, subject to a minimum and maximum. On top of regular UI benefits,
family allowances are paid. Individuals above age 50 can claim UI benefits for up to 52 weeks
(30 weeks before August 1989). Individuals who exhaust the regular UI benefits can apply for
unemployment assistance. These means-tested transfers last for an indefinite period and are
about 70 percent of regular UI benefits. Unemployed men (women) aged 59 (54) or older can
   4
     There were several changes to the pension system starting in the mid-1990s. However, these changes affected
both the treatment and the control group in the same way. See Staubli and Zweimüller (2013) and Mullen and
Staubli (2016) for details.
   5
     Insurance years comprise both contributing years (periods of employment, including sickness, and maternity
leave) and qualifying years (periods of unemployment, military service, or secondary education).
   6
     These statutory ages were increased by pension reforms during the 2000s. Under the rules that were in place
during the study period, a worker must have had accumulated at least 35 insurance years to claim a pension
before the statutory retirement age; the insurance years requirement was only 25 years for workers who had
drawn UI benefits for the past year.



                                                       6
claim “special income support,” provided that they have contributed to the UI program for at
least 15 out of the previous 25 years.7 Thus, the UI system allows older men (women) to exit
the work force at age 58 (53) and bridge the gap to an old-age pension via regular UI benefits
and special income support.
       A third retirement pathway is via the DI program, which grants relaxed access to a DI pension
at age 55. Applicants below age 55 are awarded a DI pension if a physical or mental health
impairment reduces the earnings capacity to less than half relative to that of a healthy person
with comparable education in any “reasonable” occupation the individual could be expected to
hold. At age 55 the comparison changes from a healthy worker performing any type of work in
the economy to a healthy worker in a similar occupation.8 As a direct consequence, disability
enrollment rises significantly beginning at the age threshold.


2.2       The Regional Extended Benefit Program

The Regional Extended Benefit Program (REBP) was introduced in response to a steel crisis in
the late 1980s, which caused layoffs and downsizing of production plants, particularly in regions
where the steel industry was important. To protect older workers against adverse labor market
conditions in these regions, the Austrian government extended the potential UI benefit duration
from 52 to 209 weeks for workers who satisfied each of the following criteria: (i) aged 50 and
above, (ii) a continuous work history (15 employment years in the last 25 years), and (iii) at
least 6 months of residence in one of the 28 eligible regions.9
       The program was introduced in June 1988 and applied to all new unemployment spells star-
ting in June 1988 or later as well as to spells in progress in June 1988. In January 1992, a reform
became effective which abolished the benefit extension for new UI claims in 6 of the originally 28
regions. Moreover, eligibility criteria were tightened, as not only location of residence but also
an individual’s workplace had to be in a REBP region. In the remaining 22 regions, the REBP
was terminated in August 1993. The termination left all UI claims in progress unaffected; only
   7
     Special income support is equivalent to a regular UI spell in legal terms, but grants 25% higher benefits.
   8
     The age at which disability screening is relaxed was raised to 57 in 1996 for men and in 2000 for women (see
Staubli, 2011).
   9
     Previous evaluations of the REBP have found large effects of the program on realized unemployment durations
(Lalive, 2008; Lalive and Zweimüller, 2004a,b), labor market exit among the unemployed (Inderbitzin et al., 2016;
Winter-Ebmer, 1998), and search spillovers (Lalive et al., 2015).




                                                        7
new claims were no longer eligible for the benefit extension.

                                              Figure 1

    Figure 1 shows a map of treatment regions (TRs) and regions that were never treated (CRs).
TR1s were treated until 1991 and TR2s were treated until 1993. The regions eligible for the
program were selected by the minister for social affairs, a member of the ruling social democratic
party (SPÖ). Lalive and Zweimüller (2004a) show that both employment and unemployment
rates for (potentially) eligible workers were similar before the start of the program, but eligible
regions had a higher share of employment in the steel sector (17% compared to 5% in non-REBP
regions). In our analysis, we exclude individuals who have worked in the steel sector.
    Figure 2 illustrates that the introduction of the REBP significantly increased the incentive to
exit the labor force via the UI system. Thanks to the REBP, eligible men (women) could already
retire at age 55 (50) by claiming regular UI benefits for 4 years and special income support for 1
year, followed by claiming an OA pension at age 60 (55). In contrast, male and female workers
not eligible for the REBP could only retire at ages 58 and 53, respectively.
    Figure 2 shows that the REBP also increased the incentive to retire for men below age 55.
More specifically, without the REBP, men below age 55 could retire at age 54 by claiming UI
benefits for one year followed by claiming a DI pension at age 55. With the introduction of the
REBP, this option was already available at age 51.

                                              Figure 2



3     Data and Sample

Data. We use administrative data from the Austrian Social Security Database (ASSD), des-
cribed in more detail in Zweimüller et al. (2009). The ASSD covers the universe of Austrian
workers and contains detailed information on the labor market and earnings histories of indivi-
duals between 1972 and 2017. Information on insurance relevant states prior to 1972 is available
for individuals who have claimed a public pension by the end of 2008. The data also contain
a limited set of socio-economic characteristics (year and month of birth, sex, general occupa-
tion) and a unique firm identifier (from 1972 onward) that allows us to link several firm-level
characteristics (geographical location, industry affiliation, and size).

                                                 8
       A key feature of the ASSD is that it contains precise information on the date of retirement
(i.e. labor market exit) and the date of death up to 2017, as well as all information necessary
to determine an individual’s eligibility to the REBP. More specifically, the month of birth and
employment history allow us to determine whether a worker meets the age and employment
criteria set by the REBP. We do not observe the place of residence for all individuals and proxy
community of residence by the community of work. This introduces some measurement error
due to the false classification of REBP-eligible workers as non-eligible and vice versa. We find
that this issue is not a major drawback, as most individuals in our sample work in the same
labor market region where they live.10


Sample selection. Starting from the population data set, we impose four restrictions. First,
we focus on men born in January 1927 to December 1944 and women born in January 1932 to
December 1944. Men (women) born before June 1930 (June 1935) as well as men and women
born after July 1943 did not benefit from the REBP. They were either older than age 58 (age
53 for women) when the REBP was introduced and could retire early without the REBP, or
they were younger than age 50 when the REBP was abolished and thus not eligible. On the
other hand, men born in June 1930 to July 1943 and women born in June 1935 to July 1943
could benefit from the REBP, because they eventually turned age 50 during the REBP and were
younger than age 58 (men) or age 53 (women) when the REBP was introduced.
       Second, we exclude workers from the steel sector because the REBP did not induce changes in
the retirement age for them. Apart from the REBP, there was a nation-wide program to alleviate
problems associated with mass redundancies in the steel sector, the “steel foundation”. The steel
foundation guaranteed regular UI benefits of three (later four) years to displaced workers in the
steel sector, regardless of place of residence. We therefore do not find any difference in the
retirement age between steel-workers in TRs and CRs. Third, we focus on workers who meet
the experience criterion of the REBP (i.e. at least 15 employment years in the last 25 years),
but use workers who do not satisfy this criterion for placebo tests. We also drop individuals who
permanently leave the labor force or die before age 49. Fourth, we concentrate on workers living
  10
     We can check the extent of measurement error introduced by this proxy because we can observe the place of
residence for individuals on unemployment benefits. We correctly assess REBP-eligibility for more than 90% of
all individuals in this subsample if place of work instead of place of residence is used to assess REBP eligibility.




                                                         9
within 77 kilometer driving distance to the border between TRs and CRs.11 This restriction
implies that regional differences in access to health care and labor market conditions are unlikely
to contaminate our estimates.12 We choose 77 kilometers because the maximum driving distance
from a treated region community to the nearest control region community is 76.5 kilometers.
However, we also test the robustness of our results by contrasting all TRs and CRs.


Key variables. The key variables of our analysis are measures of early retirement and mor-
tality. Because information on labor-market histories and mortality is available until December
2017, cohorts in our sample can be tracked at least up to age 73. We define two outcome va-
riables related to mortality. The first is a dummy indicating whether an individual died before
reaching age 73. Since workers in our sample have to be alive at age 50, this indicator measures
whether or not an individual in our sample dies between ages 50 and 73. This is a meaningful
indicator in the present context, because we are considering older cohorts whose life expectancy
is quite low. In our sample, the probability of death before age 73 is 27.5 percent for men and
14.0 percent for women. The second measure is the age at death. This measure is interesting
because it comprises both the effect of early retirement on (i) the probability of premature death
and (ii) the length of a life. We censor age at death at age 73 for those individuals who are still
alive at age 73.
       Our main treatment variable is the number of years an individual spends in early retirement.
This variable measures the time span between the statutory retirement age (age 65 for men and
age 60 for women) and the date when the individual permanently withdraws from working life.
More precisely, we define the date of retirement as the day after the end of the individual’s last
regular employment spell.13 Hence, a positive number on the treatment variable implies that an
individual has retired before the statutory retirement age.
  11
     The distance measure reflects the kilometers required to drive from the center of one community to the
center of the closest community that is located on the other side of the border using the shortest road connection
between these two communities (see Lalive (2008) for details).
  12
     As in most industrialized countries, access to health care in Austria varies significantly between urban and
rural areas (OECD, 2013)). For example, the number of physicians per 1,000 inhabitants varies from 3.6 in
Vorarlberg to 6.6 in Vienna. Similarly, the number of hospital beds per 10,000 inhabitants varies between 34 in
Tyrolian Oberland to 155 in Graz.
  13
     This definition implies that an individual does not have to be retired in the legal sense of drawing an
OA pension. Instead, effective retirement hinges upon the last day of employment and does not refer to a
particular transfer an individual gets after ceasing work permanently. Retired individuals in our sample can
draw unemployment benefits, disability benefits, old-age benefits, some other type of benefit, or no transfer.




                                                       10
Descriptive statistics. In our analysis, we stratify the sample by gender because early re-
tirement rules and mortality patterns differ for men and women. Our final sample consists of
310,440 men and 144,532 women. Table 1 present summary statistics by gender and region
before/after the REBP (men born in January 1927–May 1930 or August 1943–December 1944
and women born in January 1932–May 1935 or August 1943–December 1944) and during the
REBP (men born in June 1930–July 1943 and women born in June 1935–July 1943).
    Panel A displays summary statistics for the outcome variables of interest. TRs exhibit a
drop in the retirement age and an increase in the years in early retirement during the REBP
relative to before/after the REBP. This pattern is consistent with the REBP inducing individuals
to retire early, although CRs also show a decline in the retirement age and an increase in the
years in early retirement. The probability to die before age 73 generally declines during the
REBP relative to before/after the REBP, and this decline was somewhat smaller for men in TRs
compared to CRs. The age at death in TRs, relative to CRs, exhibits a slightly larger drop for
men and a smaller increase for women.
    Panel B displays summary statistics for the background characteristics. These characteristics
are measured at age 49 or before when individuals are not yet eligible for the REBP. Individuals in
TRs tend to earn lower wages and work more in blue-collar occupations and manufacturing, and
less in wholesale trade, but overall the differences in background characteristics across regions
are small.


                                             Table 1



4     Empirical Strategy

Our primary aim is to estimate the causal effect of early retirement on mortality using regressions
of the following form:


                         yicr = β0 + β1 ERicr + X0icr β2 + λc + ηr + icr ,                    (1)


where i denotes individual, c denotes the year-month of birth, r denotes the region of residence,
and yicr is a mortality outcome (such as an indicator for death before age 73 or the age at


                                                11
death). ER denotes the years spent in early retirement, i.e. the difference between the statutory
retirement age and the date of permanent exit from work, X is a set of individual controls, λc
and ηr are full sets of birth year-month and region fixed effects, respectively, and  is an error
term.14
    In observational data, inference on the parameter of interest β1 is hampered if unobserved
characteristics, such as health shocks, affect both mortality and early retirement. If β1 > 0 and if
unobserved health shocks are positively correlated with early retirement, OLS overestimates the
magnitude of the coefficient on early retirement.15 To deal with unobserved health shocks, we
instrument the years spent in early retirement by workers’ eligibility for the REBP. Because the
REBP induced individuals to retire early, as we document below, differences in REBP eligibility
across regions and birth cohorts give rise to exogenous variation in the number of years an
individual spends in early retirement.
    Specifically, we estimate equation (1) by two-stage least squares (2SLS), using the following
first-stage equation:
                            ERicr = γ0 + γ1 Dicr + X0icr γ2 + θc + ωr + µicr ,                              (2)

where Dicr is an indicator measuring whether individual i born in year-month c and living in
region r could take advantage of the REBP or not.16 The corresponding reduced-form effect of
REBP on mortality is estimated by the following equation:


                              yicr = δ0 + δ1 Dicr + X0icr δ2 + πc + ζr + νicr ,                             (3)


in which yicr is a mortality outcome.
    We interpret the coefficient on ER from 2SLS estimation of equation (1) as a local average
treatment effect of early retirement on mortality (Imbens and Angrist, 1994). In other words, the
estimate of β1 captures the causal effect of early retirement on mortality among the individuals
who retire early with the REBP and who would not retire early without the REBP (i.e. the
  14
     Individual controls include dummies for industry at age 49, blue collar status at age 49, daily wage at age
49 as well as number of years on sick leave, unemployed, and employed between ages 44-48.
  15
     There is ample evidence documenting a negative health selection into retirement (e.g. Disney et al., 2006;
Dwyer and Mitchell, 1999).
  16
     More specifically, Dicr denotes the years of additional UI benefits an individual could draw with the REBP
before reaching age 58 (53), divided by the maximum years of additional UI benefits offered by the REBP (3
years). For example, men in TRs born in June 1932 where age 56 when the REBP was introduced and we
therefore set D equal to 2/3.


                                                      12
compliers). Because we have one endogenous variable and one instrument, the local average
treatment effect estimate of β1 is given by the ratio of the reduced-form coefficient (equation
                                                      δ1
3) and the first-stage coefficient (equation 2), or   γ1
                                                         .   Since the main source of the exogenous
variation in the retirement age is at the cohort-region level, all standard errors we report are
adjusted for clustering at this level.
   In order for REBP eligibility to be a valid instrument for early retirement, individuals’ assig-
nment of REBP eligibility must be independent of unobserved characteristics that are correlated
with mortality and early retirement. Since we can control for region-specific and cohort-specific
level differences, this assumption essentially boils down to whether there are unobserved region-
specific shocks. One concern with this assumption is that workers may move from CRs to TRs
in order to become eligible for the program. This is unlikely to be the case because eligibility
rules require residence in a treated region for at least 6 months prior to claiming UI benefits.
Moreover, mobility is low among older workers in Austria. For example, statistics from the
Austrian census show that in 1991 only 3 percent (4 percent) of individuals aged 55-59 (50-54)
moved across regions within states or across states within the last 5 years.
   We test the validity of the identifying assumption in two ways. First, we examine early
retirement and mortality trends for cohorts that were too old or too young to benefit from the
REBP. If the identifying assumption holds, then we should not find any significant differences in
early retirement or mortality trends between TRs and CRs for those cohorts. Second, we examine
early retirement and mortality trends for individuals who have less than 15 employment years
in the past 25 years and are therefore not eligible for the REBP. Again, for these individuals we
should not find any significant differences in early retirement and mortality trends between TRs
and CRs if our identifying assumption is valid.
   While the absence of unobserved region-specific shocks that are correlated with early retire-
ment and mortality is sufficient for a causal interpretation of the reduced form effect of the REBP
on mortality, we need three additional assumptions in order for the IV estimates to measure the
causal impact of early retirement on mortality. First, there is a first-stage relationship between
REBP eligibility and the early retirement date (i.e. γ1 > 0 in equation 2). This assumption is
uncontroversial, as the REBP has a strong impact on early retirement behavior. Second, REBP
eligibility affects mortality only through its impact on the duration of early retirement, and not


                                                13
directly in any other way. It is likely that this assumption holds in the present context, because
it is difficult to imagine that the mere eligibility for extended UI benefits should have a direct
effect on mortality.
    Third, the monotonicity assumption requires that REBP eligibility would not result in in-
dividuals retiring later. This assumption is not uncontroversial because the REBP could have
had general equilibrium effects. Indeed, Lalive et al. (2015) find that non-eligible job losers in
REBP regions had higher job finding rates and lower unemployment durations. Two testable
implication of the monotonicity assumption are that the first stage estimates should be non-
negative for non-eligible workers and for subsamples of eligible workers. Indeed, in line with
the monotonicity assumption, we find that first stage estimates are insignificant for non-eligible
workers and are consistently positive and sizeable for different subgroups of individuals.



5     Results

5.1    The First Stage: The REBP and Early Retirement

Main results. Table 2 presents first-stage estimates of equation (2) for men and women who
have at least 15 employment years in the past 25 years, a necessary condition to be eligible for
the REBP. For men, we also report estimates for two subsamples, which include the same before-
and after-REBP birth cohorts as the full sample, but differ in the during-REBP birth cohorts.
The during-REBP cohorts in “access to DI pathway” are men who were younger than age 55
when the REBP was in effect. Given the institutional setting in Austria (see Figure 2), these
men would use the REBP to retire early via the DI pathway. In contrast, the during-REBP
cohorts in “access to OA pathway” were age 55 or older during the REBP and could retire early
via the OA pathway. Thus, contrasting these two subgroups is interesting to understand whether
the mortality effects of early retirement depend on the choice of pathway.
    Column 1 of Panel A shows that among men REBP eligibility increases the time spent in
early retirement by 0.45 years or about 5.5 months. This represents a substantial 6.5 percent
increase relative to the baseline in CRs during the REBP. The point estimates are similar when
we split the male sample by the type of retirement pathway individuals had access to (columns
2 and 3). Column 4 of Panel A show that the estimate is significantly larger for women. Being

                                               14
eligible for the REBP increases the time spent in early retirement by 0.72 years, or almost 9
months. As Panel B shows, the point estimates barely change when we include additional control
variables that capture observed characteristics of individuals.
   The statistical significance of the early retirement effects is also reflected in the relevant F-
statistic, reported at the bottom of each panel. It amounts to 133 or higher for all the estimates
reported, well above the threshold value of 10 above which IV is not supposed to be subject to
a weak instruments critique (Staiger and Stock, 1997).


                                             Table 2


Different pathways. To further explore the impact of the REBP on early retirement, we
estimate equation (2) for each age in the interval 49-63 for men and 49-60 for women separately.
We define three dependent variables to highlight the pathways through which individuals exit
the labor force. The first is simply an indicator for whether an individual retires at a given
age. The second is an indicator for whether an individual retires at a given age by eventually
claiming a DI pension (retirement via DI pathway). The third is an indicator for whether an
individual retires at a given age by eventually claiming an OA pension, without having claimed
a DI pensions before (retirement via OA pathway).
   Figure 3 illustrates the results for men, with dots on the solid line showing the coefficient
estimates and the dashed lines indicating 95 percent confidence intervals. As shown in Panel
(a), the probability to retire does not change for men younger than age 50, but is positive
and statistically significant for men between ages 50 and 55, consistent with the retirement
incentives created by the REBP. On the other hand, coefficient estimates turn negative and
significant between ages 56 and 61. This suggests that the excess retirements between ages 50
and 55 are driven by men who, in the absence of the REBP, would have retired between ages 56
and 61. After age 61, we do not see significant differences in the probability to retire between
TRs and CRs.
   Panel (b) shows that many men retiring between ages 50 and 55 do so via the DI pathway.
In fact, most claim the DI pension when turning age 55, the age at which DI eligibility rules are
relaxed. Retirement via the DI pathway is lower between ages 56 and 58, suggesting that some
men who, without the REBP, would have retired via the DI pathway between ages 56 and 58


                                                15
use the REBP to retire via the OA pathway or via the DI pathway at an earlier age. Consistent
with this idea, Panel (c) shows a significant spike at age 55 in the fraction of men in TRs who
retire via the OA pathway.

                                             Figure 3

   Figure 4 shows the corresponding estimates for women. As Panel (a) illustrates, the difference
in the probability to retire between TRs and CRs during the REBP relative to before/after the
REBP is close to zero at age 49, but displays a large spike at age 50. Age 50 is the earliest age
at which women can retire through the UI system during the REBP (Figure 2). The probability
to retire is also significantly higher at ages 51 and 52 for women in TRs relative to CRs. In
contrast, the incidence of retirement between ages 53 and 56 is significantly lower and becomes
insignificant at ages 57 to 60.
   Panel (b) shows that the REBP had almost no effect on retirements via the DI pathway
among women. The point estimates are negative and statistically significant between ages 50
to 54, suggesting that some women who would have retired via the DI pathway use the REBP
to bridge the time until age 55 when they become eligible for an OA pension. However, this
substitution effect from the DI pathway to the OA pathway is quantitatively small. Instead,
Panel (c) suggests that the REBP affected retirement behavior of women primarily through the
possibility to exit the labor force at age 50 and receive UI benefits for 5 years, and then claim
an OA pension at age 55.

                                             Figure 4


Differential trends. We next examine whether the size of the early retirement response varies
across birth cohorts. More specifically, we generalize equation (2) by replacing Dicr with a set of
birth cohort (at half-year intervals) times T R interaction terms (where T R is an indicator taking
the value one if an individual lives in a TR). These interaction terms also offer the possibility
to test whether early retirement trends are the same across regions before and after the REBP.
Evidence for differential trends in the absence of the REBP would suggest that the assumption
of no unobserved region-specific shocks is violated, and estimates are biased.
   Figure 5 plots the estimated coefficients of the interaction terms with years spent in early
retirement as dependent variable. Several things can be observed from the figure. First, the

                                                16
time spent in early retirement is significantly higher for birth cohorts eligible for the REBP
(those in between the two vertical lines) in TRs relative to CRs. Consistent with Table 2, the
point estimates are larger for women (panel b) compared to men (panel a). Second, the point
estimates are generally smaller for older eligible cohorts and become larger for younger eligible
cohorts. This pattern is expected: when the REBP was introduced, older cohorts were already
close to the earliest age they could retire without the REBP (age 58 for men and age 53 for
women) and therefore only needed to rely on the extended UI benefits for a short duration. In
contrast, younger cohorts could take full advantage of the REBP to retire early. Third, the
estimated coefficients fluctuate around 0 for birth cohorts who are not eligible for the REBP
because they were either too old when the REBP was introduced or too young when the REBP
was abolished. This finding supports the assumption that trends in early retirement between
TRs and CRs would have been similar in the absence of the REBP and are not affected by
unobserved region-specific shocks.

                                              Figure 5


5.2    The Effect of Early Retirement on Mortality

Main results. In this section we present our main estimates of the causal effect of early
retirement on mortality. Table 3 reports estimates for the equation (1) using OLS and IV
(estimated by 2SLS) as well as the reduced form effects of the REBP on mortality. We examine
two mortality outcomes: the incidence of death before age 73 (measured in percent) and the age
at death in years (censored at age 73). The first row of Panel A presents the OLS estimates of
equation (1). We find that among men an additional year in early retirement is associated with
a 2.48 percentage points increase in the probability to die before age 73. This corresponds to a
relative increase in the risk of premature death of about 9.1% (=2.48/27.28). The OLS estimates
are similar for the subgroups of men who had access to the DI pathway or the OA pathway,
respectively. The corresponding OLS estimates for women are about three times smaller, but
also highly significant. These are still sizeable effects when expressed in relative terms because
women are less likely to die before age 73.
   The second row of Panel A presents reduced form estimates of the REBP on the probability
to die before age 73. We find that being eligible for the REBP increases the probability to die

                                                17
before age 73 by 0.84 percentage points among men. The effect is slightly larger for men who
have access to the DI pathway (0.96 percentage points) and slightly smaller (and statistically
insignificant) for men who have access to the OA pathway (0.60 percentage points). In contrast,
we do not find a statistically significant effect for women. The third row of Panel A presents
the IV estimates of the impact of early retirement using the REBP as an instrument. The IV
estimates are consistently smaller than the OLS estimates, but quantitatively still sizeable. The
IV estimate implies that an additional year in early retirement increases the probability to die
before age 73 by 1.85 percentage points (6.8%) among all men, 2.21 percentage points (8.8%)
among men with access to the DI pathway, and by 1.30 percentage points (4.6%) among men
with access to the OA pathway, although this estimate is not statistically significant. Consistent
with the reduced form estimates, we do not find a significant effect for women.
   Panel B of Table 3 reports analogous estimates of the effect of early retirement on the age
at death. This outcome has not been examined in previous studies, even though it has the
advantage to capture the effect of early retirement on the likelihood of death (extensive margin)
and the length of a life (intensive margin). The estimates for the age at death show a similar
pattern as the estimates for the incidence of death. The OLS estimates are large and statistically
significant in all cases. For men they range from -0.330 years to -0.362 years, while for women
the estimate is about three times smaller in absolute terms (-0.122 years).
   The second row of Panel B presents reduced form estimates of the REBP on the age at death.
We find that being eligible for the REBP reduces men’s age at death by 0.095 years and this
effect is statistically highly significant. The reduction in the age at death appears to be similar
for men with access to the DI pathway (-0.090 years) or the OA pathway (-0.098 years). In
contrast, the reduced form estimate is about four times smaller for women (-0.026 years) and
statistically insignificant. The IV results (third row of Panel B) suggests that an additional year
in early retirement is associated with a reduction in the men’s age at death of 0.208 years, which
is about two thirds of the corresponding OLS estimate, and has no effect on women’s age at
death. The estimates are similar for men with access to the DI pathway (-0.207 years) or the
OA pathway (-0.213 years), suggesting that the effect of early retirement on the age at death
does not depend on the choice of retirement pathway per se.

                                             Table 3

                                                18
    Other studies that look at mortality as their main outcome variable have found effects that
are broadly consistent with ours, although some are imprecisely estimated and thus not sta-
tistically significant. For example, Hernaes et al. (2013) find that a one-year reduction in the
effective retirement age increases the probability to die before age 74 by 2.4 percentage points
(not statistically significant). Black et al. (2017) find that the disability insurance benefit receipt
increases the mortality within the first 10 years by 1.44 percentage points (statistically signifi-
cant at the 10%-level). Fitzpatrick and Moore (2018) find that male retirement at the earliest
eligibility age for social security benefits in the U.S. increases mortality by about 20%, which is
larger than the 6.8% increase for men we estimate. One reason is that the baseline mortality at
age 62 is much lower than at age 73. Two exceptions are Bloemen et al. (2017) and Hallberg
et al. (2015) who find that early retirement reduces mortality among civil servants and army
officers.


Differential trends. Figure 6 plots the estimated coefficients of the interaction terms with the
probability to die before age 73 (Panel A) and the age at death (Panel B) as dependent variables.
The figure shows that the probability to die before 73 and the age at death are not significantly
different between TRs and CRs for birth cohorts who are not eligible for the REBP because
they were too old when the REBP was introduced (those to the left of the first vertical line) or
too young when the REBP was abolished (those to the right of the second vertical line). This
finding again supports the claim that our estimates do not simply capture pre-existing difference
in mortality trends between TRs and CRs. The point estimates are mostly insignificant for
birth cohorts eligible for the REBP. For men they are mostly positive for the probability of
death before age 73 and negative for the age at death, particularly for the younger cohorts, but
they are also quite imprecisely estimated.


                                              Figure 6


Cumulative mortality. Our estimates above suggest that early retirement increases the pro-
bability of a premature death. However, these estimates are not informative at which age
mortality rates start to accelerate. To examine this issue in more detail, we separately estimate
the reduced form effect of the REBP on the probability to die before age 51, 52, 53, ..., 73 using


                                                  19
regression specification (3). Panel A of Figure 5 plots the estimated δ1 -coefficients for the full
sample of men. It shows that the REBP had no effect on the probability to die before age 55
for eligible men in TRs relative to CRs. After this age the probability to die starts to increase
among eligible men in TRs relative to CRs up to age 58 – the age at which men in CRs can
start to retire early via the OA pathway. The difference in the probability to die across TRs and
CRs continues to increase after age 58, albeit at a slower rate, and reaches a maximum of 0.84
percentage points at age 73.
   Panel B of Figure 5 plots the estimated δ1 -coefficients when we restrict the during REBP
cohorts to those who had access to the DI pathway. The same pattern is visible as for the full
sample, and even more pronounced. The difference in the probability to die across TRs and CRs
starts to increase continuously after age 55. At age 73 the difference in the cumulative mortality
for men in TRs relative to CRs reaches 0.96 percentage points. This finding suggests that
among men with access to the DI pathway excess mortality in TRs relative to CRs continuously
increases with age.
   Panel C of Figure 5 plots the estimated δ1 -coefficients when we restrict the during REBP
cohorts to those who had access to the OA pathway. We see that the difference in the cumulative
mortality rate across TRs and CRs starts to increase quite steeply at around age 55 and reaches
a peak at age 63 after which it is quite stable at a rate slightly below the rate at the peak. This
finding suggests that most of the excess mortality in TRs occurs between the ages 55 to 63,
while mortality rates follow a similar pattern in TRs and CRs after age 63. This pattern also
explains why Table 3 shows a significant effect of early retirement on the age at death but not
on the probability to die before age 73 among men who had access to the OA pathway.


                                             Figure 7


Heterogeneity. There is no reason to expect that the effect of the REBP on early retirement
and mortality is the same among subgroups of individuals, defined by observed characteristics.
Table 4 presents separate estimates for groups of men defined by occupation (blue-collar vs
white-collar), time spent on sick leave, and work experience. The first column in each panel
displays the results of our baseline sample for comparison. We focus on men here because for




                                                20
women we did not find a significant causal effect of early retirement on mortality.17
       Panel A of Table 4 presents first-stage estimates of the effect of the REBP on the number
of years spent in early retirement. The coefficient is significantly positive for all groups, and its
magnitude varies substantially across groups. For example, eligible men in blue collar occupati-
ons spend an additional 0.559 years in early retirement, while the estimate is only 0.231 years for
eligible men in white collar occupations. We also find a stronger early retirement effect among
men who have spent some time on sick leave in the 10 years before age 50 (0.525 years) relative
to those who have not (0.419 years). Lastly, we find that eligible men with low work experience
are more responsive to the REBP incentives than those with high work experience.
       In Panel B of Table 4 we present estimates of the effect of early retirement on the incidence of
death before age 73 for the same subgroups for which we have estimated the first stage. The OLS
estimates are always positive and statistically significant, and they vary from 2.00 percentage
points (white collar workers) to 3.11 percentage points (blue collar workers). The IV estimates
are consistently smaller than the OLS estimates, except for men who have spent some time on
sick leave before age 50, and there are striking differences among certain subgroups. We find
that an additional year in early retirement increases the probability to die before age 73 by 1.91
percentage points for blue collar men, 3.45 percentage points among men who have spent some
time on sick leave, and by 2.42 percentage points among men with low work experience. The
reduced form estimates are also statistically significant for all these subgroups and smaller in
magnitude than the IV estimates because they are not scaled up by the first stage estimate. By
contrast, the IV and reduced-form estimates are statistically insignificant for white collar men,
men who have not spent time on sick leave, and men with high work experience.
       Panel C of Table 4 reports analogous estimates of the effect of early retirement on the
age at death. An advantage of this measure is that it captures the effect of early retirement
on both the likelihood of death and the length of a life. The estimates for the age at death
show a similar pattern as the estimates for the incidence of death. The OLS estimates are
large and statistically significant in all cases, they range from -0.267 years to -0.464 years. The
corresponding IV estimates are generally smaller and more heterogenous than the OLS estimates.
  17
    Indeed, performing a similar heterogeneity analysis for women yields insignificant IV estimates of the effect
of early retirement on mortality for all subgroups, despite the fact that the first stage is always large and highly
significant.



                                                        21
The IV estimate imply that an additional in early retirement reduces the age at death by 0.227
years among men in blue-collar jobs, by 0.39 years among men who have spent some time on sick
leave, and by 0.326 years among men with low work experience. Reassuringly, we find the same
qualitative patterns in the reduced form estimates. The reduced form is estimated via OLS and
therefore unbiased, while the IV could be biased if the first stage is not sufficiently strong.


                                              Table 4


5.3    Robustness and Mechanisms

Placebo and Robustness. Table 5 presents several placebo and robustness checks to examine
the sensitivity of our estimates. Panel A reports estimates of a proportional hazard model where
we assume that the baseline hazard follows a Gompertz distribution. In a Gompertz model, the
logarithm of the mortality is linear in age and, as shown by Chetty et al. (2016), this log-linear
approximation fits age-specific mortality rates very well. The estimates confirm our findings
when using the age at death or the probability of death before age 73 as mortality outcomes.
Being eligible for the REBP is associated with a 3.5% increase in the mortality hazard among
men and has no effect on the mortality hazard among women. The estimate appears to be
somewhat larger for men with access to the DI pathway compared to men with access to the
OA pathway, but the difference is not statistically significant.
   Our main analysis focuses on individuals living within 77 kilometers driving distance to the
border between TRs and CRs. A natural question to ask is whether our findings are robust
when we extend the sample to include all regions in Austria. Panel B reports estimates for the
same birth cohorts as in our main sample when we include all regions in Austria. The first row
of Panel B shows that men and women in TRs spend significantly more years in early retirement
during the REBP than their counterparts in CRs. The point estimates are very similar to those
using the geographically restricted sample. The second and third rows show the corresponding
IV estimates for the incidence of death before age 73 and the age at death. As for the restricted
sample, we find that early retirement is associated with a higher incidence of death before age 73
and a lower age at death for men but not for women. The point estimates are somewhat smaller
compared to the restricted sample, but economically still meaningful. Specifically, we find that


                                                22
among men an additional year in early retirement increases the incidence of death before age 73
by 1.45 percentage points and reduces that age at death by 0.18 years.
    Panel C reports estimates from a placebo test in which we estimate the same set of regressions
for the sample of individuals who have less than 15 employment years. These individuals are
not eligible for the REBP and we should therefore not find any significant effects of the REBP
on early retirement and mortality for this sample. Indeed, all point estimates are statistically
insignificant and much smaller in magnitude than for the main sample. These findings further
support the idea that the REBP, and not some underlying region-specific shock, drives the
observed changes in early retirement and mortality among eligible individuals.

                                                     Table 5


Mechanisms. Another question of interest is what is the mechanism that is driving these
results. One potentially important determinant of mortality is income. In particular, retiring
(early) is associated with a loss in earnings and one might argue that this loss in earnings is the
key driver behind our results. However, the different social insurance programs in Austria offer
generous income replacement which help to compensate the loss in earnings. Since our data con-
tain detailed information on earnings and transfers from different social insurance programs, we
can examine whether early retirement is associated with change in lifetime income, i.e. the sum
of lifetime earnings and government transfers. Specifically, we follow the approach in Inderbitzin
et al. (2016) and calculate, based on an individual’s observed earnings history and retirement
path, how much an individual receives in total earnings, UI benefits, SI benefits, DI benefits,
and OA benefits between ages 50-73 (measured in 2016 euros).18
    Table 6 reports estimates of equation (2) using as dependent variable our measure for either
total earnings or total transfers from a specific program. We also report estimates for the total
income between ages 50-73, which is simply the sum of earnings and all transfers. Panel A shows
that among men the REBP is associated with a loss in earnings of 11,837 euros, or about 4.9%
relative to the baseline in CRs. However, it turns out that about 40% of the earnings loss is
   18
      Inderbitzin et al. (2016) calculate the fiscal costs of the REBP for a sample of male job losers between ages
50-59. Their calculations differ in several aspects: (1) they assume that everybody receives an OA pension after
age 65 (while we use the effective number of years receiving an OA pension after age 65), (2) they assume that
all individuals life to age 78 – the average life expectancy of men during that time period (while we calculate the
effects up to age 73 and use individuals’ effective date of death), and (3) they discount future income streams
with a discount rate of 2.5% (while we assume a discount rate of 0%).


                                                        23
compensated through an increase in UI benefits. On average, men in TRs collect an additional
4,860 euros in UI benefits. Moreover, we also find a significant increase in the amount of DI
benefits that people collect (4,794 euros) because they are more likely to exit the labor force at
age 55 through the DI program. On the other hand, we find no significant changes in SI benefits
or OA benefits. Summing all up all transfers and earnings, we find that the REBP reduces men’s
total income between ages 50-73 by 1,893 euros.
   Panel B shows analogous estimates for women. We find that the REBP reduces women’s
total earnings between ages 50-73 by 11,189 euros, but about 80% of the loss in earnings is
compensated by additional UI benefits (8,959 euros). Interestingly, we find that eligible women
collect slightly less DI benefits and more OA benefits. The reason is that some women who in
the absence of the REBP would have entered the DI program, now use the extended UI benefits
to bridge the time until age 55 when they become eligible for an OA pension. Summing up all
the different income sources, we find that the total income of women in TRs slightly declines
during the REBP, but the point estimate is not statistically significant.
   In sum, the estimates in Table 6 suggest that changes in lifetime income cannot explain the
increase in mortality associated with early retirement. We find that the total income between
ages 50-73 declines by only 0.4% among men and by less than 0.3% among women. Another
potential explanation is that reduced employment and retirement-related lifestyle changes drive
the increase in mortality. Two recent studies by Fitzpatrick and Moore (2018) and Black et al.
(2017) find a negative effect of retirement on mortality and provide additional evidence that the
increase in mortality is likely connected to retirement from the labor force and associated lifestyle
changes. This channel may also play an important in our context, given that the extension in UI
benefits led to a significant drop in employment. Moreover, the differential mortality patterns
we find between blue and white collar men on the one side and women and men on the other are
also suggestive that retirement-related lifestyle changes are important to the extent that they
differ among those subgroups.


                                              Table 6




                                                 24
6     Conclusions

In this paper, we estimate the causal effect of early retirement on mortality. To resolve the
problem of negative health selection into early retirement, we exploit a policy change to the
Austrian unemployment insurance system, which allowed workers in eligible regions to with-
draw permanently from employment 3 years earlier than workers in non-eligible regions. The
program generated substantial exogenous variation in the effective early retirement age: eligible
male (female) workers retired, on average, almost 6 (9) months earlier than their non-eligible
counterparts. This provides us with an empirical design to identify the causal impact of early
retirement on mortality using an instrumental variable approach.
    We find that the reduction in the retirement age causes a significant increase in the risk of
dying before age 73 and a significant reduction in the age at death among men. Specifically,
an additional year in early retirement increases men’s probability to die before age 73 by 1.85
percentage points (equivalent to a relative increase of 6.8 percent) and reduces the age at death
by 0.2 years. On the other hand, we find that for women early retirement is not associated with
worse health outcomes, which is in line with previous evidence (e.g., Fitzpatrick and Moore,
2018). There are several reasons why female mortality is not affected by early retirement. It
may be that women are more able to cope with major life events, have less unhealthy retirement-
related lifestyle changes, and suffer less from a loss of social status than men. Our IV estimates
are consistently smaller than the corresponding ordinary least squares estimates, which highlights
the importance of controlling for selection into early retirement based on poor health.
    Our finding that early retirement has a negative effect on male mortality is robust to a
variety of placebo and other specification checks. We find no differences in mortality and early
retirement trends between eligible and non-eligible regions prior to the extension of UI benefits
and after its abolishment. We also run a placebo analysis for a sample of men and women who are
not eligible for the benefit extension and find no statistically significant effects. Finally, we show
that early retirement is associated with a significant reduction in lifetime earnings. However,
individuals compensate most of this earnings loss with transfers from other government transfer
programs. Thus, the change in lifetime income associated with early retirement is negligible and
cannot explain the increased mortality among certain groups of the population.
    From a policy perspective, our results suggest that policies forcing older workers into early

                                                 25
retirement may be detrimental for their health. Policies that foster employment of older workers
can therefore generate a double dividend. They not only improve government budgets, they
would also increase individuals’ welfare by prolonging their lives, particularly for men. Labor
market policies should therefore try to incentivize both firms to keep older workers in employment
and workers to abstain from premature retirement.
   However, one needs to exercise caution: our estimates apply to workers who change their
retirement behavior due to the policy change. They are more likely to work in blue collar
occupations, have some pre-existing health conditions, and have low-work experience. Moreover,
the policy change allowed workers to retire from the labor force at a very early age, compared
to what is the norm in other countries. This may limit the generalizability of our findings, and
more research will be required to better understand the link between retirement and mortality.




                                               26
References
Baker, M., Stabile, M., and Deri, C. (2004). What do self-reported, objective, measures of health
  measure? Journal of Human Resources, 39(4), 1067.
Balia, S. and Jones, A. (2008). Mortality, lifestyle and socio-economic status. Journal of Health
  Economics, 27(1), 1–26.
Behncke, S. (2012). Does retirement trigger ill health? Health Economics, 21(3), 282–300.
Bertrand, M. and Mullainathan, S. (2001). Do people mean what they say? Implications for
  subjective survey data. American Economic Review , 91(2), 67–72.
Black, B., French, E., McCauley, J., and Song, J. (2017). The effect of disability insurance
  receipt on mortality. mimeo, University College London.
Bloemen, H., Hochguertel, S., and Zweerink, J. (2017). The causal effect of retirement on
  mortality: Evidence from targeted incentives to retire early. Health Economics, 26, 204–218.
  IZA Discussion Paper No. 7570.
Bonsang, E., Adam, S., and Perelman, S. (2012). Does retirement affect cognitive functioning?
  Journal of Health Economics, 31(3), 490–501.
Browning, M. and Heinesen, E. (2012). Effect of job loss due to plant closure on mortality and
  hospitalization. Journal of Health Economics, 31, 599–616.
Charles, K. (2004). Is Retirement Depressing? Labor Force Inactivity and Psychological Well-
 Being in Later Life. Research in Labor Economics, 23, 269–299.
Chetty, R., Stepner, M., Abraham, S., Shelby, L., Scuderi, B., Turner, N., Bergeron, A., and
 Cutler, D. (2016). The association between income and life expectancy in the united states,
 2001-2014. Journal of the American Medical Association, 315(16), 1750–1766.
Coe, N. B. and Zamarro, G. (2011). Retirement effects on health in europe. Journal of Health
  Economics, 30(1), 77–86.
Dave, D., Rashad, I., and Spasojevic, J. (2008). The effects of retirement on physical and mental
  health outcomes. Southern Economic Journal , 75(2), 497–523.
Disney, R., Emmerson, C., and Wakefield, M. (2006). Ill health and retirement in Britain: A
  panel data-based analysis. Journal of Health Economics, 25(4), 621–649.
Dwyer, D. and Mitchell, O. (1999). Health problems as determinants of retirement: Are self-rated
 measures endogenous? Journal of Health Economics, 18(2), 173–193.
Eibich, P. (2015). Understanding the effect of retirement on health: Mechanisms and heteroge-
  neity. Journal of Health Economics, 43, 1–12.
Eliason, M. and Storrie, D. (2009). Does Job Loss Shorten Life? Journal of Human Resources,
  44(2), 277.
Fitzpatrick, M. D. and Moore, T. J. (2018). The mortality effects of retirement: Evidence from
  social security elgibility at age 62. Journal of Public Economics, 157, 121–137.
Grip, A. D., Lindeboom, M., and Montizaan, R. (2012). Shattered dreams: the effects of
  changing the pension system late in the game. Economic Journal , 112(559), 1–25.

                                               27
Hallberg, D., Johansson, P., and Josephson, M. (2015). Is an early retirement offer good for
  your health? quasi-experimental evidence from the army. Journal of Health Economics, 44,
  274–285. Journal of Health Economics.

Henkens, K., Van Solinge, H., and Gallo, W. (2008). Effects of retirement voluntariness on
  changes in smoking, drinking and physical activity among Dutch older workers. European
  Journal of Public Health, 18(6), 644.

Hernaes, E., Markussen, S., Piggott, J., and Vestad, O. L. (2013). Does retirement age impact
  mortality? Journal of Health Economics, 32(3), 586–598.

Imbens, G. and Angrist, J. (1994). Identification and estimation of local average treatment
  effects. Econometrica, 62(2), 467–475.

Inderbitzin, L., Staubli, S., and Zweimüller, J. (2016). Extended unemployment benefits and
  early retirement: Program complementarity and program substitution. American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 8(1), 253–288.

Insler, M. (2014). The health consequences of retirement. Journal of Human Resources, 49(1),
  195–233.

Johnston, D. and Lee, W. (2009). Retiring to the good life? The short-term effects of retirement
  on health. Economics Letters, 103(1), 8–11.

Lalive, R. (2008). How do extended benefits affect unemployment duration? A regression
  discontinuity approach. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 785–806.

Lalive, R. and Zweimüller, J. (2004a). Benefit Entitlement and the Labor Market: Evidence
  from a Large-Scale Policy Change. In J. Agell, M. Keen, and A. J. Weichenrieder, editors,
  Labor Market Institutions and Public Regulation, pages 63–100. MIT Press.

Lalive, R. and Zweimüller, J. (2004b). Benefit entitlement and unemployment duration. The
  role of policy endogeneity. Journal of Public Economics, 88(12), 2587–2616.

Lalive, R., Landais, C., and Zweimüller, J. (2015). Market externalities of large unemployment
  insurance extension programs. American Economic Review , 105(12), 3564–3596.

Mazzonna, F. and Peracchi, F. (2012). Ageing, cognitive abilities and retirement. European
 Economic Review , 56(4), 691–710.

Mullen, K. and Staubli, S. (2016). Disability benefit generosity and labor force withdrawal.
 Journal of Public Economics, 143, 49–63.

Neuman, K. (2008). Quit Your Job and Get Healthier? The Effect of Retirement on Health.
  Journal of Labor Research, 29(2), 177–201.

OECD (2013). OECD Regions at a Glance 2013. Technical report, Organisation for Economic
 Co-operation and Development.

Rohwedder, S. and Willis, R. J. (2010). Mental retirement. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  24(1), 119–138.

Staiger, D. and Stock, J. (1997). Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments.
  Econometrica, 65(3), 557–586.


                                              28
Staubli, S. (2011). The impact of stricter criteria for disability insurance on labor force partici-
  pation. Journal of Public Economics, 95, 1223–1235.

Staubli, S. and Zweimüller, J. (2013). Does raising the early retirement age increase employment
  of older workers? Journal of Public Economics, 108, 17–32.

Sullivan, D. and von Wachter, T. (2009). Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using
  Administrative Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1265–1306.

Winter-Ebmer, R. (1998). Potential unemployment benefit duration and spell length: lessons
 from a quasi-experiment in Austria. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 60(1), 33–45.

Zweimüller, J., Winter-Ebmer, R., Lalive, R., Kuhn, A., Ruf, O., Wuellrich, J.-P., and Büchi,
  S. (2009). The Austrian Social Security Database (ASSD). IEW Working Paper No 410.




                                                29
                                               Table 1: Summary statistics



                                                             Men                                       Women
                                                 TRs                      CRs         TRs                 CRs
                                        Before/     During       Before/    During    Before/   During    Before/   During
                                        after                    after                after               after
 A. Outcomes
 Retirement age (years)                 58.3        57.3         58.8       58.1      55.1      54.4      55.6      55.4
 Years in early retirement              6.75        7.75         6.23       6.94      4.87      5.60      4.41      4.60
 Percent died by age 73                 27.69       26.25        29.29      27.28     13.20     11.85     15.27     14.10
 Age at death (years)                   70.89       70.83        70.72      70.71     72.00     72.06     71.75     71.86

 B. Background characteristics
 Years employed, ages 44-48             4.84        4.81         4.82       4.79      4.78      4.80      4.78      4.79
 Years sick leave, ages 44-48           0.050       0.029        0.047      0.031     0.029     0.028     0.034     0.030
 Years unemployed, ages 44-48           0.076       0.127        0.080      0.130     0.110     0.111     0.105     0.109
 Daily wage at age 49 (euro)            89.1        94.3         92.1       97.0      65.6      68.7      71.1      74.5
 Share blue collar at age 49            .621        .622         .526       .541      .517      .461      .418      .381
 Share industries at age 49
   Agriculture                          .110        .092         .044       .040      .042      .033      .015      .013
   Utilities                            .035        .032         .031       .028      .006      .009      .007      .008
   Manufacturing                        .391        .387         .358       .338      .319      .297      .259      .250
   Construction                         .148        .153         .148       .156      .030      .039      .026      .030
   Wholesale trade                      .105        .114         .143       .147      .174      .190      .208      .213
   Accommodation                        .012        .010         .018       .018      .044      .044      .066      .065
   Transportation                       .036        .042         .049       .055      .022      .024      .038      .035
   Finance and insurance                .141        .147         .175       .183      .256      .259      .278      .282
   Health care                          .014        .013         .016       .015      .086      .086      .081      .082
   Arts and entertainment               .007        .009         .018       .019      .019      .019      .022      .024

 Observations                           21,438      60,452       57,803     170,747   10,317    20,815    36,523    76,877
Notes: Sample consists of men born between January 1927 and December 1944 and women born between January 1932 and December
1944. “Before/after” denotes men (women) born between January 1927 (1930) and May 1930 (1935) as well as men and women born
between August 1943 and December 1944. “During” denotes men born between June 1930 and July 1943 and women born between
June 1935 and July 1943. Daily wage is adjusted for inflation.




                                                                 30
                             Table 2: Effect of REBP on years in early retirement


                                                                     Men                         Women
                                              Full         Access to         Access to
                                              sample       DI pathwaya       OA pathwayb
                         A. Base Controls
                           Coefficient    0.449???         0.445???          0.423???            0.716???
                                          (0.030)          (0.039)           (0.036)             (0.044)
                           Mean in CRs        6.94         6.92              6.88                4.60
                           F-statistic        224.9        132.5             139.5               270.0

                         B. Full controls
                           Coefficient        0.455???     0.435???          0.460???            0.698???
                                              (0.028)      (0.036)           (0.034)             (0.042)
                           Mean in CRs        6.94         6.92              6.88                4.60
                           F-statistic        261.3        143.3             187.3               282.2

                         Observations         310,440      190,802           222,628             144,532
Notes: ??? , ?? , ? denotes statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Standard errors are adjusted for
clustering on the cohort-region level. All regressions include dummies for birth year-month and region. Additional control variables
are dummies for industry at age 49, blue collar status at age 49, daily wage at age 49 as well as number of years on sick leave,
unemployed, and employed between ages 44-48. Reported means are for REBP-eligible birth cohorts in CRs. Full sample consists of
men born between January 1927 and December 1944 and women born between January 1932 and December 1944.
a Access to DI pathway: men born between January 1927-May 1930 and August 1938-December 1944. Treated birth cohorts were

younger than age 55 during the REBP and could only use the REBP to exit the labor force via the DI pathway.
b Access to OA pathway: men born between January 1927-July 1938 and August 1943-December 1944. Treated birth cohorts reached

age 55 during REBP and could also use the REBP to exit the labor force via the OA pathway.




                                                                31
                                 Table 3: Effects of early retirement on mortality


                                                                        Men                           Women
                                                Full          Access to          Access to
                                                sample        DI pathwaya        OA pathwayb
                         A. Died by age 73
                           OLS             2.48???            2.36???            2.58???              0.84???
                                           (0.02)             (0.03)             (0.03)               (0.02)
                           Reduced form         0.84??        0.96??             0.60                 -0.16
                                                (0.33)        (0.41)             (0.43)               (0.40)
                           IV                   1.85??        2.21??             1.30                 -0.23
                                                (0.73)        (0.93)             (0.91)               (0.57)
                           Mean in CRs          27.28         25.17              28.41                14.10

                         B. Age at death
                           OLS                  -0.349???     -0.330???          -0.362???            -0.122???
                                                (0.003)       (0.004)            (0.004)              (0.003)
                           Reduced form         -0.095???     -0.090??           -0.098??             -0.026
                                                (0.035)       (0.042)            (0.045)              (0.039)
                           IV                   -0.208???     -0.207??           -0.213??             -0.037
                                                (0.074)       (0.094)            (0.095)              (0.056)
                           Mean in CRs          70.71         70.85              70.64                71.86

                         Observations           310,440       190,802            222,628              144,532
Notes: ??? , ?? , ?
                  denotes statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering
on the cohort-region level. All regressions include dummies for birth year-month, dummies for region, dummies for industry at age
49, blue collar status at age 49, daily wage at age 49 as well as number of years on sick leave, unemployed, and employed between
ages 44-48. Reported means are for REBP-eligible birth cohorts in CRs. Full sample consists of men born between January 1927
and December 1944 and women born between January 1932 and December 1944.
a Access to DI pathway: men born between January 1927-May 1930 and August 1938-December 1944. Treated birth cohorts were

younger than age 55 during the REBP and could only use the REBP to exit the labor force via the DI pathway.
b Access to OA pathway: men born between January 1927-July 1938 and August 1943-December 1944. Treated birth cohorts reached

age 55 during REBP and could also use the REBP to exit the labor force via the OA pathway.




                                                                   32
                                                Table 4: Heterogeneity, men


                              Full          Blue-          White-         Past sick     Past sick      Low work         High work
                              sample        collar         collar         leave = 0     leave > 0      experience       experience
      A. Years early retirement
        Coefficient       0.455???          0.559???       0.231???       0.419???      0.525???       0.480???         0.418???
                          (0.028)           (0.033)        (0.050)        (0.037)       (0.041)        (0.038)          (0.039)
        Mean in CRs       6.94              7.91           5.8            6.21          8.29           7.71             6.18

      B. Died by age 73
        OLS             2.48???             3.11???        2.00???        2.15???       3.11???        2.71???          2.20???
                        (0.02)              (0.03)         (0.03)         (0.02)        (0.04)         (0.03)           (0.03)
         Reduced form         0.84??        1.07??         0.35           0.23          1.81???        1.16??           0.43
                              (0.33)        (0.45)         (0.50)         (0.40)        (0.57)         (0.49)           (0.43)
         IV                   1.85??        1.91??         1.53           0.54          3.45???        2.42??           1.03
                              (0.73)        (0.79)         (2.12)         (0.95)        (1.07)         (1.00)           (1.02)
         Mean in CRs          27.28         32.12          21.58          22.98         35.23          32.64            21.97

      C. Age at death
        OLS                   -0.349???     -0.459???      -0.267???      -0.294???     -0.464???      -0.390???        -0.304???
                              (0.003)       (0.005)        (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.005)        (0.004)          (0.004)
         Reduced form         -0.095???     -0.127???      -0.028         -0.022        -0.205???      -0.156???        -0.023
                              (0.035)       (0.048)        (0.048)        (0.040)       (0.064)        (0.052)          (0.044)
         IV                   -0.208???     -0.227???      -0.121         -0.051        -0.390???      -0.326???        -0.056
                              (0.074)       (0.084)        (0.203)        (0.095)       (0.117)        (0.106)          (0.104)
         Mean in CRs          70.71         70.26          71.24          71.14         69.93          70.2             71.21

      Observations            310,440       173,686        136,754        194,109       116,331        155,074          155,366
Notes: ??? , ?? , ? denotes statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering
on the cohort-region level. Blue/white collar measured at age 49. Past sick leave: years on sick leave between ages 39-48, low (high)
experience: employment years last 15 years before age 49 below (above) median. Regressions include dummies for birth year-month,
dummies for region, dummies for industry at age 49, blue collar status at age 49, daily wage at age 49 as well as number of years on
sick leave, unemployed, and employed between ages 44-48. Reported means are for REBP-eligible birth cohorts in CRs.




                                                                     33
                                       Table 5: Robustness and placebo checks


                                                                              Men                         Women
                                                       Full          Access to        Access to
                                                       sample        DI pathway       OA pathway
                      A. Hazard rate (reduced-form)
                        Coefficient              0.035??             0.039??          0.027              -0.023
                                                 (0.015)             (0.020)          (0.020)            (0.035)
                        Observations                   310,440       190,802          222,628            144,532

                      B. All regions
                        Years early retirement         0.454???      0.439???         0.462???           0.705???
                                                       (0.028)       (0.036)          (0.033)            (0.042)
                        Died by age 73                 1.47??        1.71?            0.98               -0.17
                        (IV)                           (0.72)        (0.92)           (0.90)             (0.57)
                        Age at death                   -0.18??       -0.173?          -0.189??           -0.038
                        (IV)                           (0.074)       (0.092)          (0.094)            (0.056)
                        Observations                   356,417       219,168          256,461            162,263

                      C. < 15 employment years
                        Years early retirement 0.024                 0.147            -0.092             0.141
                                               (0.083)               (0.106)          (0.112)            (0.091)
                        Died by age 73                 -0.19         0.39             -0.66              0.15
                        (reduced form)                 (0.57)        (0.70)           (0.75)             (0.38)
                        Age at death                   -0.006        -0.067           0.058              -0.034
                        (reduced form)                 (0.066)       (0.080)          (0.089)            (0.039)
                        Observations                   94,080        60,037           70,183             93,464
Notes: ??? , ?? , ?
                  denotes statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering
on the cohort-region level. All regressions include dummies for birth year-month, dummies for region, dummies for industry at age
49, blue collar status at age 49, daily wage at age 49 as well as number of years on sick leave, unemployed, and employed between
ages 44-48. Reported means are for REBP-eligible birth cohorts in CRs. Full sample consists of men born between January 1927
and December 1944 and women born between January 1932 and December 1944.
a Access to DI pathway: men born between January 1927-May 1930 and August 1938-December 1944. Treated birth cohorts were
younger than age 55 during the REBP and could only use the REBP to exit the labor force via the DI pathway.
b Access to OA pathway: men born between January 1927-July 1938 and August 1943-December 1944. Treated birth cohorts reached

age 55 during REBP and could also use the REBP to exit the labor force via the OA pathway.




                                                                   34
                    Table 6: Effect on program costs and earnings between ages 50-73


                               Earnings        UI           DI            OA          SI          Total
                               benefits                     benefits      benefits    benefits    income
                               (A)             (B)          (C)           (D)         (E)         (A+B+C+D+E)
            A. Men
            Coefficient        -11,837***      4,860***     4,794***      334         -44         -1,893*
                               (837)           (399)        (324)         (620)       (74)        (987)
            Mean in CRs        239,610         22,084       21,175        199,654     4,983       487,506
            Observations       310,440         310,440      310,440       310,440     310,440     310,440

            B. Women
            Coefficient        -11,189***      8,959***     -237*         2,072**     -478***     -872
                               (858)           (380)        (121)         (836)       (64)        (1,077)
            Mean in CRs        124,821         13,059       1,959         23,2425     2,162       374,425
            Observations       144,532         144,532      144,532       144,532     144,532     144,532
Notes: ??? , ?? , ? denotes statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Standard errors are adjusted for
clustering on the cohort-region level. The variables earnings, UI benefits, SI benefits, DI benefits, OA benefits, and total income
measure earnings received, UI benefits received, SI benefits received, DI benefits received, OA benefits received, and total income
received between ages 50 and 73. All amounts are in 2016 euros. All regressions include dummies for birth year-month, dummies for
region, dummies for industry at age 49, blue collar status at age 49, daily wage at age 49 as well as number of years on sick leave,
unemployed, and employed between ages 44-48. Reported means are for REBP-eligible birth cohorts in CRs. Sample consists of
men born between January 1927 and December 1944 and women born between January 1932 and December 1944.




                                                                35
                                     Figure 1: Distribution of REBP Treatment and Control Regions


                 Control regions (CRs)
                 Treated regions 1 (TR1s)
                 Treated regions 2 (TR2s)




36
     Notes: The figure shows the REBP and non-REBP regions. The REBP was introduced in June 1988 in TR1s and TR2s. The REBP was in effect
     until December 1991 (July 1993) in TR1s (TR2s).
                   Figure 2: Retirement Pathways with/without REBP Eligibility

                                                 (a) Men

      50      51                    54     55                     58      59   60
                                                                                               Age

                                                                                  Old-Age Pension



                                                 with REBP                 Special Income Support



                       with REBP             Relaxed Disability Pension



                                                (b) Women

      50                     53     54     55
                                                                                               Age
                                                Old-Age Pension



           with REBP                  Special Income Support




Notes: Black arrows denote maximum duration of regular UI benefits without REBP (1 year) and red
arrows denote maximum duration of regular UI benefits with REBP (4 years). See text for details.




                                                   37
                                                   Figure 3: Effects on retirement at different ages by pathway, men

                                    (a) Retirement                                                                  (b) Retirement via DI pathway                                                                   (c) Retirement via OA pathway




                                                                                                                    2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                    2




                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                    1
Percentage Points




                                                                                                Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                Percentage Points
                    0




                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                    −1




                                                                                                                    −1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −1
                    −2




                                                                                                                    −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −2
                    −3




                                                                                                                    −3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −3
                     49

                          50

                               51

                                    52

                                         53

                                              54

                                                   55

                                                        56

                                                             57

                                                                  58

                                                                       59

                                                                            60

                                                                                 61

                                                                                      62

                                                                                           63




                                                                                                                     49

                                                                                                                          50

                                                                                                                               51

                                                                                                                                    52

                                                                                                                                         53

                                                                                                                                              54

                                                                                                                                                   55

                                                                                                                                                        56

                                                                                                                                                             57

                                                                                                                                                                  58

                                                                                                                                                                       59

                                                                                                                                                                            60

                                                                                                                                                                                 61

                                                                                                                                                                                      62

                                                                                                                                                                                           63




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      49

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                51

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     52

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          53

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               54

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    55

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         56

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              57

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   58

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        59

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             60

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  61

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       62

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            63
                                                        Age                                                                                             Age                                                                                              Age


                         Notes: The figure plots the difference between TRs and CRs in the age-specific probability that
                         men retire (panel a), retire via the DI pathway (panel b), and retire via the OA pathway (panel c),
                         respectively. Dashed lines show 95% confidence bands.




                                                                                                                                                   38
                                          Figure 4: Effects on retirement at different ages by pathway, women

                                 (a) Retirement                                                        (b) Retirement via DI pathway                                                     (c) Retirement via OA pathway




                                                                                                       9
                    9




                                                                                                                                                                                          9
                                                                                                       6
                    6




                                                                                                                                                                                          6
Percentage Points




                                                                                   Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                     Percentage Points
                                                                                                       3
                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                       0
                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                    −3




                                                                                                       −3




                                                                                                                                                                                          −3
                    −6




                                                                                                                                                                                          −6
                                                                                                       −6
                     49

                           50

                                51

                                     52

                                          53

                                               54

                                                     55

                                                          56

                                                               57

                                                                    58

                                                                         59

                                                                              60




                                                                                                        49

                                                                                                             50

                                                                                                                  51

                                                                                                                       52

                                                                                                                            53

                                                                                                                                 54

                                                                                                                                       55

                                                                                                                                            56

                                                                                                                                                 57

                                                                                                                                                      58

                                                                                                                                                           59

                                                                                                                                                                60




                                                                                                                                                                                           49

                                                                                                                                                                                                50

                                                                                                                                                                                                     51

                                                                                                                                                                                                          52

                                                                                                                                                                                                               53

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    54

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          55

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               56

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    57

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         58

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              59

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                    Age                                                                               Age                                                                                Age


                         Notes: The figure plots the difference between TRs and CRs in the age-specific probability that
                         women retire (panel a), retire via the DI pathway (panel b), and retire via the OA pathway (panel
                         c), respectively. Dashed lines show 95% confidence bands.




                                                                                                                                 39
                          Figure 5: Effects of REBP on years in early retirement

                          (a) Men                                              (b) Women
        .75




                                                                     1
        .5




                                                                     .75
                                                                     .5
Years




                                                             Years
        .25




                                                                     .25
        0




                                                                     0
        −.25




                                                                     −.25
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
               19 h2
                    h2




                                                                                  h2

                                                                                  h2

                                                                                  h2

                                                                                  h2

                                                                                  h2

                                                                                  h2

                                                                                  h2

                                                                                  h2

                                                                                  h2

                                                                                  h2

                                                                                  h2

                                                                                  h2

                                                                                  h2
                 27
                 28
                 29
                 30
                 31
                 32
                 33
                 34
                 35
                 36
                 37
                 38
                 39
                 40
                 41
                 42
                 43
                 44




                                                                               32

                                                                               33

                                                                               34

                                                                               35

                                                                               36

                                                                               37

                                                                               38

                                                                               39

                                                                               40

                                                                               41

                                                                               42

                                                                               43

                                                                               44
         19




                                                                       19

                                                                            19

                                                                            19

                                                                            19

                                                                            19

                                                                            19

                                                                            19

                                                                            19

                                                                            19

                                                                            19

                                                                            19

                                                                            19

                                                                            19
                             Birth cohort                                          Birth cohort


        Notes: The figure plots the difference in the number of years spent in early retirement between TRs
        and CRs by half-year birth cohorts for men and women. The reference category are men and women
        born in 1927h1. Birth cohorts in between the two vertical lines could take advantage of the REBP.
        Dashed lines show 95% confidence bands.




                                                        40
                Figure 6: Effects of REBP eligibility on different measures of mortality

                                       A. Probability to die before age 73
                            (a) Men                                                                    (b) Women




                                                                      6
                6




                                                                      4
                4




                                                                      2
                2
      Percent




                                                            Percent
                                                                      0
                0




                                                                      −2
                −2




                                                                      −4
                −4




                                                                      −6
                −6

                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                            h2




                                                                              h2

                                                                                       h2

                                                                                             h2

                                                                                                      h2

                                                                                                            h2

                                                                                                                     h2

                                                                                                                           h2

                                                                                                                                    h2

                                                                                                                                          h2

                                                                                                                                                   h2

                                                                                                                                                         h2

                                                                                                                                                                  h2

                                                                                                                                                                        h2
                         27
                         28
                         29
                         30
                         31
                         32
                         33
                         34
                         35
                         36
                         37
                         38
                         39
                         40
                         41
                         42
                         43
                         44




                                                                             32

                                                                                   33

                                                                                            34

                                                                                                  35

                                                                                                           36

                                                                                                                 37

                                                                                                                          38

                                                                                                                                39

                                                                                                                                         40

                                                                                                                                               41

                                                                                                                                                        42

                                                                                                                                                              43

                                                                                                                                                                       44
                 19




                                                                        19

                                                                                  19

                                                                                        19

                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                                                                   19
                               Birth cohort                                                                          Birth cohort


                                                B. Age at death
                            (c) Men                                                                    (d) Women
                .75




                                                                      .75
                .5




                                                                      .5
                .25




                                                                      .25
      Percent




                                                            Percent
                0




                                                                      0
                −.25




                                                                      −.25
                −.5




                                                                      −.5
                −.75




                                                                      −.75
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                       19 h2
                            h2




                                                                              h2

                                                                                       h2

                                                                                             h2

                                                                                                      h2

                                                                                                            h2

                                                                                                                     h2

                                                                                                                           h2

                                                                                                                                    h2

                                                                                                                                          h2

                                                                                                                                                   h2

                                                                                                                                                         h2

                                                                                                                                                                  h2

                                                                                                                                                                        h2
                         27
                         28
                         29
                         30
                         31
                         32
                         33
                         34
                         35
                         36
                         37
                         38
                         39
                         40
                         41
                         42
                         43
                         44




                                                                             32

                                                                                   33

                                                                                            34

                                                                                                  35

                                                                                                           36

                                                                                                                 37

                                                                                                                          38

                                                                                                                                39

                                                                                                                                         40

                                                                                                                                               41

                                                                                                                                                        42

                                                                                                                                                              43

                                                                                                                                                                       44
                 19




                                                                        19

                                                                                  19

                                                                                        19

                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                                                                   19
                               Birth cohort                                                                          Birth cohort


Notes: Notes: The figure plots the difference in the probability to die before age 73 (Panel A) and
the age at death (Panel B), respectively, between TRs and CRs by half-year birth cohorts for men
and women. The reference category are men and women born in 1927h1. Birth cohorts in between
the two vertical lines could take advantage of the REBP. Dashed lines show 95% confidence bands.




                                                       41
                                     Figure 7: Effects on cumulative mortality at different ages, men

                       (a) Full sample                                                   (b) Access to DI pathwaya                                                (c) Access to OA pathwayb
          2




                                                                                   2




                                                                                                                                                            2
          1.5




                                                                                   1.5




                                                                                                                                                            1.5
          1




                                                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                            1
Percent




                                                                         Percent




                                                                                                                                                  Percent
          .5




                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                            .5
          0




                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                            0
          −.5




                                                                                   −.5




                                                                                                                                                            −.5
            51

                 53

                      55

                           57

                                59

                                     61

                                           63

                                                65

                                                     67

                                                          69

                                                               71

                                                                    73




                                                                                     51

                                                                                          53

                                                                                               55

                                                                                                    57

                                                                                                         59

                                                                                                              61

                                                                                                                    63

                                                                                                                         65

                                                                                                                              67

                                                                                                                                   69

                                                                                                                                        71

                                                                                                                                             73




                                                                                                                                                              51

                                                                                                                                                                   53

                                                                                                                                                                        55

                                                                                                                                                                             57

                                                                                                                                                                                  59

                                                                                                                                                                                       61

                                                                                                                                                                                             63

                                                                                                                                                                                                  65

                                                                                                                                                                                                       67

                                                                                                                                                                                                            69

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 71

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      73
                                          Age                                                                      Age                                                                      Age



                Notes: The figure shows reduced form estimates (and corresponding 95% confidence intervals) of the
                effect of the REBP on the probability to die before age 51, 52, ...., 73.
                a
                  Access to DI pathway: men born between January 1927-May 1930 and August 1938-December 1944.
                Treated birth cohorts were younger than age 55 during the REBP and could only use the REBP to
                exit the labor force via the DI pathway.
                b
                  Access to OA pathway: men born between January 1927-July 1938 and August 1943-December
                1944. Treated birth cohorts reached age 55 during REBP and could also use the REBP to exit the
                labor force via the OA pathway.




                                                                                                              42
