NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REVEALED PREFERENCE ANALYSIS WITH FRAMING EFFECTS
Jacob Goldin
Daniel Reck
Working Paper 25139
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25139

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018

The authors wish to thank Oriana Bandiera, Doug Bernheim, Sebastien Bradley, Charlie Brown,
Ryan Bubb, Raj Chetty, Henry Farber, Nikolaj Harmon, James Hines, Bo Honore, Louis Kaplow,
Sarah Kotb, Miles Kimball, Alvin Klevorick, Henrik Kleven, Claus Kreiner, David Lee, Charles
Manski, Alex Mas, Ted O'Donoghue, Soren Leth-Petersen, Joel Slemrod, and seminar
participants at Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon, the University of Chicago, the University of
Copenhagen, Cornell, the Federal Reserve Board, Harris School of Public Policy, Harvard, the
London School of Economics, the University of Michigan, New York University, Oxford,
Princeton, and Stanford, for helpful discussion and comments. We are especially grateful to
Brigitte Madrian and Aon Hewitt for providing us with data, and to Charlie Rafkin for his
excellent assistance with the data. An earlier version of the article was circulated under the title
“Preference Identification Under Inconsistent Choice.” The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25139.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jacob Goldin and Daniel Reck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Revealed Preference Analysis with Framing Effects
Jacob Goldin and Daniel Reck
NBER Working Paper No. 25139
October 2018
JEL No. C1,D03,D60
ABSTRACT
In many settings, decision-makers' behavior is observed to vary based on seemingly arbitrary
factors. Such framing effects cast doubt on the welfare conclusions drawn from revealed
preference analysis. We relax the assumptions underlying that approach to accommodate settings
in which framing effects are present. Plausible restrictions of varying strength permit either
partial- or point-identification of preferences for the decision-makers who choose consistently
across frames. Recovering population preferences requires understanding the empirical
relationship between decision-makers’ preferences and their sensitivity to the frame. We develop
tools for studying this relationship and illustrate them with data on automatic enrollment into
pension plans.

Jacob Goldin
Stanford Law School
559 Nathan Abbott Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
jsgoldin@law.stanford.edu
Daniel Reck
London School of Economics
Department of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
d.h.reck@lse.ac.uk

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25139

Introduction
In many settings, people’s choices depend on seemingly arbitrary features of the
decision-making environment, such as which option is the default, the order in which
options are presented, or which features of the decision are salient. Such framing
effects cast doubt on the welfare conclusions that emerge from revealed preference
analysis. For example, suppose an internet company adopts an opt-out data collection
policy, under which it can use a customer’s data to target advertising, unless the
customer indicates otherwise. Prior research suggests that switching to an opt-in
policy, under which customers must give permission before the company can use
their data in this way, would reduce the number of customers who allow the company
to do so (Johnson, Bellman and Lohse, 2002). Suppose 40 percent of customers give
permission when the policy is opt-in and 65 percent do so when the policy is opt-out.
Both policies let customers control the use of their data, but the choices observed
under the two policies imply different conclusions about what customers prefer.
In this paper, we relax the assumptions underlying revealed preference analysis
to accommodate choice data contaminated by framing effects. We focus on binary
decisions in which the choices of some decision-makers vary according to a preferenceirrelevant feature of the environment, which we refer to as a frame (Salant and Rubinstein, 2008). Examples of frames might include: (1) which option is presented as
the default; (2) the order in which options are displayed; (3) the reference point from
which an option is evaluated; (4) whether the menu of options includes an irrelevant
alternative; (5) the point in time at which a decision is made; or (6) which features of
the available options are made salient. We assume that when decision-makers choose
consistently across frames, those choices reflect their preferences.1
Within this framework, we derive conditions for identifying preferences of various
groups of decision-makers. First, we show that when a frame pulls the choices of all
decision-makers in a uniform direction (frame monotonicity), one can identify the distribution of preferences for the consistent decision-makers – the subgroup unaffected
by the framing effect. This is true even when each decision-maker is observed making
only one decision and observers lack ex ante knowledge about which decision-makers
are consistent. Under frame monotonicity, a decision-maker who chooses “against
1

By preferences, we mean the relative degree to which the available options further a decisionmaker’s objectives, whatever those may be. Preferences are not defined according to observed
choices; doing so would assume away the possibility of framing effects.

1

the frame” – for example, someone who chooses the option that is not the default –
is consistent and prefers the option that she chooses. This fact, along with an exogeneity assumption concerning the assignment of decision-makers to frames, allows
us to point-identify the preferences of the consistent decision-makers. Without frame
monotonicity, the preferences of this group are partially identified, and we derive the
corresponding bounds.
Next, we turn to the problem of identifying preferences for the full population of
decision-makers. Our key insight is that this problem shares important features with
the classic selection-into-treatment problem from the program evaluation literature.
That is, once we have identified preferences for the subgroup of decision-makers who
are consistent, we can account for selection into that subgroup to recover preferences
for the overall population. Stated this way, the transformed problem is both more
familiar and more tractable than the original: economists have developed a range of
tools for dealing with endogeneity problems of this sort, and we adapt several to our
setting.
The first approach we develop is to extrapolate the preferences of the consistent
decision-makers to the inconsistent decision-makers by adjusting for observable differences between the two groups. Recovering population preferences requires that
consistency and preferences be uncorrelated conditional on these observables. As
in other settings where researchers rely on matching or regression, the plausibility
of this assumption depends on the nature of selection and what information about
decision-makers the researcher can observe.
Second, we develop decision quality instruments, which exploit variation in decisionmakers’ susceptibility to a frame, but not affect decision-makers’ preferences. For example, decision-makers who are experimentally manipulated to have a higher shadow
value of leisure (e.g., by facing greater time pressure) may be more likely to choose
according to the frame, but such a manipulation is unlikely to affect which option
they actually prefer. Decision quality instruments identify the distribution of preferences for those decision-makers whose susceptibility to the frame they affect. We
develop techniques to extrapolate the preferences of this subgroup to the population.
Finally, we derive bounds on population preferences, based on the consistent
decision-makers. The usefulness of the bounds depend on the strength of the frame
– the bounds are tighter when when more decision-makers are consistent. One surprising finding from this analysis is that absent frame monotonicity, it may be that
2

a majority of the population prefers one option even though a majority selects the
other option under every frame that is observed.
A growing literature confronts the problem of preference identification in settings
with framing effects. One proposal is to restrict preference inferences to the subset
of observed choices in which a given decision-maker chooses consistently (Bernheim
and Rangel, 2009). In practice, however, individual decision-makers are typically
observed choosing under only one frame, which makes it difficult to detect which
choices are consistent. Worse, this approach yields no information on the inconsistent
decision-makers – the very group whose behavior is shaped by the choice of frame.
Further “refinements” can provide a path forward if the researcher can observe choices
in a frame in which all decision-makers are known to select their most-preferred
option (Chetty, Looney and Kroft, 2009; Allcott and Taubinsky, 2015), but in many
applications, such as those in which behavior is sensitive to defaults or ordering effects,
there is little reason to believe that any of the observed frames satisfies this condition.
A different solution is to rely on a positive model of behavior that fully specifies the mapping from decision-makers’ preferences to their (potentially sub-optimal)
behavior (Rubinstein and Salant, 2012). Inverting the model allows one to recover
preferences from the decision-makers’ observed choices. However, in many cases the
resulting welfare conclusions are sensitive to the researcher’s choice between competing positive models that are difficult to distinguish observationally. In some cases,
even a fully specified behavioral model is insufficient to recover preferences from choice
data (Benkert and Netzer, Forthcoming).
We contribute to this literature by developing a framework for preference identification that strikes a middle ground between these approaches. Relative to Bernheim
and Rangel (2009), our approach requires additional structure, but the payoff to that
additional structure is significant: one can apply our results to the realistic class of
settings in which individual decision-makers are observed under only one frame and in
which the researcher is not confident that any one of the observed frames induces all
decision-makers to choose optimally. Relative to imposing a specific behavioral model,
an advantage of our framework is its generality: our central behavioral assumptions –
that consistent decision-makers choose optimally and frame monotonicity – hold under a wide range of models for why framing effects occur. Consequently, our approach
can recover the preferences of the consistent decision-makers, as well as bounds on
population preferences, while remaining reasonably agnostic about the precise under3

lying model that generates the observed framing effect. In contrast, point-identifying
population preferences requires pinning down the relationship between preferences
and consistency, and implicitly, restricting the behavioral model that governs which
decision-makers are sensitive to the frame. We develop empirical tools to shed light
on this relationship under a range of assumptions about the available data and underlying behavioral model. Finally, our framework compliments model-based approaches
by making transparent the role the model’s assumptions play in identification: within
a broad class of models, distinguishing between behavioral or functional form assumptions matters only to the extent the assumptions offer conflicting predictions for the
relationship between preferences and consistency.2
We illustrate our framework using data on participation in an employer-sponsored
pension plan with varying default enrollment regimes. We show how the preference
information that can be recovered from the data depend on the strength of the assumptions the researcher is willing to impose. Under relatively weak assumptions,we
find that a sizable majority of the consistent employees prefer enrollment. We also
document a strong positive relationship between employees’ sensitivity to framing
effects (opt-in versus opt-out enrollment) and their preferences for enrollment in the
plan. We conclude that under plausible assumptions, the data imply a majority of
employees prefer participation in the pension plan, but that there is significant heterogeneity. For example, employees that are likely to leave the firm within two years
disproportionately prefer not to participate.
Focusing on binary choices and binary frames permits us to view identification
through the lens of the potential outcomes framework commonly used in the program
evaluation literature (Angrist, Imbens and Rubin, 1996),3 but the intuition we develop
is useful outside of those settings as well, as we illustrate in an extension. We also
describe how the preference information identified by our approach can be combined
2

We also contribute to a strand of literature that uses the preferences of a reference group of
decision-makers (whose choices are assumed to be optimal) as a guide to the rest of the population.
In previous work, the reference group consists of experts, identified based on information about
experience, occupation, or familiarity with the subject matter (Bronnenberg et al., 2015; Handel
and Kolstad, 2015; Johnson and Rehavi, 2016). Our contribution is to develop a method of applying
this approach to settings characterized by framing effects, in which no ex ante information is available
to identify members of the reference group. Rather, inclusion in the reference group (composed of
the consistent decision-makers) emerges endogenously from observable decision-making behavior.
3
Unlike other applications of the potential outcomes framework of which we are aware, our goal
is not to identify the causal effects of one variable on another, but rather to remove variation in
observed choices due to framing effects, isolating the variation due to preferences.

4

with price variation to estimate traditional measures of cardinal welfare.
The paper proceeds as follows: Section 1 presents our notation and main assumptions. Section 2 presents our results relating to the preferences of the consistent
decision-makers. Section 3 presents our results relating to the full population. Section 4 illustrates our identification results using data on defaults and enrollment into
employer-provided pension plans. Section 5 describes how the preference information
we recover can be combined with price variation to derive conventional measures of
cardinal welfare. The Online Appendix contains: derivations of standard errors; additional results relating to decision quality instrument extrapolation; supplementary
material relating to the empirical application; and, generalizations relating to nonbinary frames, non-binary menus, and settings in which decision-makers’ assignment
to frames is non-random.

1

Formal Framework

This section introduces our notation and core assumptions.
Each decision-maker i is observed to choose from a fixed menu S = {0, 1} under
one of two possible frames Di ∈ {0, 1}.4 Let Yi (0) and Yi (1) denote what i would
choose under frames Di = 0 and Di = 1, respectively. Decision-makers have strict
ordinal preferences over the available options, with the most-preferred option denoted
by Yi∗ ∈ {0, 1}. Each decision-maker is characterized by a vector of random variables
(Yi (0), Yi (1), Di , Yi∗ ), drawn from some underlying population distribution. For each
i, the researcher observes the pair (Yi , Di ), where Yi = Yi (1)Di + Yi (0)(1 − Di ). The
researcher does not observe Yi∗ , Yi (0), or Yi (1).
We denote mean choices among decision-makers assigned to each frame by Y (1) ≡
E[Yi | Di = 1] and Y (0) ≡ E[Yi | Di = 0]. Unless otherwise noted, the operator
E[.] denotes an expectation over the population distribution of the random variable
inside the square brackets (which may be a function of primitive random variables).
We assume for exposition that these population moments are directly observable to
the researcher, deferring issues of finite-sample statistical inference to the Online
Appendix. Without loss of generality, Y (1) ≥ Y (0). To illustrate the notation using
the privacy example from the introduction, let Yi indicate whether i allows a company
to use her data, Di = 1 indicate the opt-out regime, and Di = 0 indicate the opt-in
regime, so that Y (1) = 0.65 and Y (0) = 0.40.
4

Because the menu is constant across decision-makers, our notation conditions on it implicitly.
The Online Appendix considers generalizations to non-binary menus and non-binary frames.

5

Decision-makers either choose consistently or choose in a way that is sensitive to
the frame. We denote consistency by Ci = 1 − |Yi (1) − Yi (0)|. Because each decisionmaker is observed once, Ci is not observed. We assume that the fraction of consistent
decision-makers is strictly positive, E[Ci ] > 0.
The following four assumptions form the core of our analysis.
A1 (Frame Separability) For all i, Yi∗ does not depend on D.
Frame separability is an assumption about the content of decision-makers’ preferences.
It is implicit in the above notation because we do not index Yi∗ by Di – otherwise,
individuals would have two random variables for Yi∗ (one for each frame). A1’s role is
to define which features of the decision-making environment are treated as a frame.5
Features of a decision that affect choice but that are relevant to decision-makers’
preferences over the available options are not frames. For example, if a decision-maker
chooses hot chocolate from {hot chocolate, ice cream} under D = 0 and ice cream
from {hot chocolate, ice cream} under D = 1, there would be no framing effect if D
indicates whether the season is winter or summer. Importantly, frame separability
does not require decision-makers to be irrational; a feature of the environment that
imposes a cognitive cost for selecting one of the options would constitute a frame,
as long as it did not also affect decision-makers’ preference for ending up with one
option or the other.6
The remaining assumptions concern the distribution of (Yi (0), Yi (1), Di , Yi∗ ) in
the population.
A2 (Frame Exogeneity) (Yi (0) , Yi (1)) ⊥ Di .
Frame exogeneity is an assumption about the data-generating process by which
decision-makers are assigned to frames. The assumption ensures that differences in
observed choices under different frames are due to the effect of the frames, rather than
to differences in the decision-makers observed under each frame. Frame exogeneity is
guaranteed when decision-makers are randomly assigned to frames.7
We now turn to the link between choices and preferences. The standard revealed preferences approach is to infer decision-makers’ preferences directly from their
5

This assumption is explicit in Salant and Rubinstein (2008) and implicit in Bernheim and Rangel
(2009), who require it for determining when two potentially conflicting choice situations differ in
terms of the frame or in terms of the available menu items. In this sense, frame separability is the
property that distinguishes variation in frames from variation in menu items.
6
For a discussion of related issues, see Bernheim and Taubinsky (Forthcoming).
7
The Online Appendix considers several generalizations in which frame exogeneity is relaxed.

6

choices:
RPA (Revealed Preferences Assumption) For all i, Yi∗ = Yi .
In our setting, a framing effect occurs when A1 and A2 are satisfied and one observes
Y (1) 6= Y (0). By definition, framing effects violate the RPA assumption. This is
because A2 implies Y (0) = E[Yi (0)] and Y (1) = E[Yi (1)], and E[Yi (0)] 6= E[Yi (1)]
implies Yi (1) 6= Yi (0) for some subset of decision-makers. But for any such decisionmaker, A1 and RPA imply Yi (1) = Yi∗ = Yi (0), yielding a contradiction. The next
assumption weakens RPA to accommodate choice data in which framing effects are
present:
A3 (Consistency Principle) For all i, Ci = 1 =⇒ Yi = Yi∗ .
Under the consistency principle, preferences are revealed by choices only for decisionmakers who choose consistently across frames. Because consistency is a function of
Yi (0) and Yi (1), the assumption constrains the joint distributions of Yi (0), Yi (1), and
Yi∗ . It is easy to see that the consistency principle weakens RPA by the minimum
necessary to accommodate an apparent framing effect. In the online privacy example
described above, the assumption implies that a customer who would choose to keep
her data private under both the opt-in and opt-out frames does in fact prefer that
her data be kept private. Like RPA, the assumption fails when decision-makers suffer
from biases that cause them to make the same mistake under every frame in which
they are observed.
The following monotonicity assumption permits us to recover aggregate information about consistency even though Ci is not observable at the individual level.
A4 (Frame Monotonicity) For all i, Yi (1) ≥ Yi (0).
Frame monotonicity requires that when a frame affects choice, it does so in the same
direction for each affected decision-maker. It thus constrains the joint distribution
of Yi (0) and Yi (1). In the online privacy example, frame monotonicity fails if some
customers choose to allow access to their data if and only if doing so is not the
default. Much of our discussion will assume frame monotonicity, but we also derive
partial-identification results for settings in which it fails.
Examples of Framing Effects
The following are examples of behavioral models that might generate a particular
observed framing effect.
Example 1: Default Effects Our running example will concern default effects.
The frame, D ∈ S, encodes which option is the default. Decision-makers choose
7

according to their (fixed) preferences ui (Y ) over a subset Γi ⊆ S of options that
they consider (as in Masatlioglu, Nakajima and Ozbay, 2012). Decision-makers can
be either active or passive. When active, decision-makers consider both options,
Γi (D) = S. When passive, they consider only the option that is the default, Γi (D) =
D. Because ui does not depend on the default, frame separability is satisfied. To
see that the consistency principle holds, suppose some individual i chooses the same
option under both defaults, Yi (0) = Yi (1) = 1. Because i chooses 1 under D = 0, we
know that 1 ∈ Γ(0), and therefore that i is active under D = 0, with ui (1) > ui (0). To
see that frame monotonicity holds, suppose Yi (0) = 1 (when Yi (0) = 0, the condition
holds trivially). As above, Yi (0) = 1 implies i is active under D = 0 and prefers
option 1. Because 1 ∈ Γi (1) as well, we know that Yi (1) = 1. Hence, Yi (1) ≥ Yi (0).
Example 2: Time Inconsistency At date t, decision-makers choose between
receiving some amount y0 at date t+k or some other amount y1 > y0 at date t+k +1.
As in Laibson (1997), individuals choose according to the following behavioral utility
P
t
function: ũit = u(zt ) + βi ∞
k=1 δi u(zt+k ), where zt is total income at time t, βi ≤ 1,
and δit < 1 ∀t. The frame denotes whether k = 0 (D = 0) or k > 0 (D = 1).
Assuming the amounts in y0 and y1 are small relative to background income, it is
straightforward to show that when D = 0, i chooses y1 iff yy01 < βi δi , and that when
D = 1, i chooses y1 iff yy01 < δi . Welfare may be evaluated either according to βi δit
(the short-term view) or δit (the long term view) (Bernheim, 2009). In either case,
it is straightforward to verify that the consistency principle holds and that frame
monotonicity holds as long as βi ≤ 1 for all i. In addition, frame separability holds
as long as the welfare-relevant discount rate does not vary within an individual based
on the time the decision is made (as it would under ũit ).
Example 3: Bias Unrelated to Observed Framing Effect Consider a setting
in which both default effects and present-bias are present. As above, decision-makers
choose between y0 at date t + k and y1 > y0 at date t + k + 1, but now either y0 or
P
t
y1 is set to be the default. Welfare is given by uit = u(zt ) + ∞
k=1 δi u(zt+k ). As in
Example 1.2, some decision-makers are passive, and choose whichever option is set
as the default. The other decision-makers are active (but present-biased), and choose
P
t
according to ũit = u(zt ) + βi ∞
k=1 δi u(zt+k ). Choices are observed only at k = 0,
with decision-makers randomly assigned across defaults. The consistency principle
fails here because the decision-makers who are consistent with respect to the default
are present-biased: an active decision-maker chooses y1 if yy10 < βi δi but prefers y1 if
8

y0
y1

< δi . Hence, some of those who consistently select y0 would actually prefer y1 .
This example highlights that our framework can recover preferences only when any
mistakes are due to an observed framing effect. In settings where a bias is present,
but no inconsistency is observed, our approach (like traditional revealed preference
analysis) would incorrectly infer preferences from choices. If choices were observed
under each frame and also under both k = 0 and k > 0, one could apply our approach
to first eliminate the framing effect at each value of k and second to use those results
to estimate the behavioral parameters β and δ.

2

Identifying Consistent Preferences

We initially focus on the consistent decision-makers – i.e., those whose behavior is
not affected by the frame. Recovering the preferences of this group would be trivial if
decision-makers were observed under each frame; in that case an observer could identify which decision-makers were consistent and, using the consistency principle, which
options the consistent decision-makers preferred. However, many real-world datasets
do not have this property, and even when they do the order in which decision-makers
are exposed to frames may itself affect behavior (LeBoeuf and Shafir, 2003). The
following proposition provides conditions for the identification of consistent decisionmakers’ preferences when each decision-maker is observed under a single frame.
Y (0)
.
Proposition 1 Let Y C ≡ Y (0)+1−Y
(1)
∗
(1.1) Under A1 - A4, E[Yi | Ci = 1] = Y C .
(1.2) Under A1 - A3, Y C ≥ 12 ⇐⇒ E[Yi∗ | Ci = 1] ≥ Y C
Proposition 1.1 follows from the insight that, under frame monotonicity, only consistent decision-makers choose against the frame (i.e., they choose Yi (0) = 1 or
Yi (1) = 0). Frame exogeneity guarantees that the assignment of individuals to frames
is uncorrelated with preferences or consistency, which means that we can treat the set
of decision-makers choosing against the frame as a representative sample of all consistent choosers. In turn, the consistency principle ensures that the observed choices
of this group reveal the preferences of the corresponding decision-makers. As a result,
the denominator of Y C measures the fraction of decision-makers who are consistent
and the numerator measures the subset of that group with Yi∗ = 1. A formal proof
of Proposition 1.1, and of all further results, is contained in the Appendix.
Proposition 1.2 provides a partial identification result that is robust to failures of
frame monotonicity. Borrowing terminology from Angrist, Imbens and Rubin (1996),

9

Table 1: Illustration of Proposition 1
Choose not to enroll,
Choose to enroll,
opt-in regime,
opt-in regime,
Yi (0) = 0
Yi (0) = 1
Choose not to enroll,
0.35
0.00
opt-out regime,
Yi (1) = 0
Choose to enroll,
0.25
0.40
opt-out regime,
Yi (1) = 1
Under frame monotonicity, top-right quadrant= 0; top-left
quadrant= 1 − Y (1); bottom-right quadrant = Y (0); bottom-left
quadrant= Y (1) − Y (0).
Fraction consistent:

E[Ci ] = 0.4 + 0.35= 0.75

Fraction of
consistent
preferring option 1:

E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] = Y C =

Bounds on
consistent
preferences, without
A4:

0.4
0.4+0.35 ≈

0.53

0.53 ≤ E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] ≤ 1
Y C is biased toward 21 , as frame defiers are equally
assigned to the top-left and bottom-right quadrants by
frame exogeneity (by definition they cannot be in the
bottom-left quadrant).

define frame-defiers as the subset of inconsistent decision-makers who select Yi (0) = 1
and Yi (1) = 0. Frame-defiers would be misclassified as consistent by the logic underlying Proposition 1.1. To understand the intuition behind the proof, note that
decision-makers choosing against the frame under either frame may be either consistent choosers or frame-defiers. Because frame-defiers are assigned to the two different
frames in equal proportions (by frame exogeneity), Proposition 1.1 will classify half
of the frame-defiers as choosing Yi = 1 consistently and half as choosing Yi = 0
consistently. Ignoring the presence of frame-defiers therefore biases Y C toward 12 .
The reasoning behind Proposition 1 is further illustrated in Table 1, which applies the result to the online privacy example from the Introduction. The preference
information recovered by Proposition 1 is important for several reasons. First, if
one’s philosophical starting point is that inconsistent decision-makers lack normatively relevant preferences (see Fischhoff, 1991), Proposition 1 is the end-point of the
analysis; it isolates the normatively relevant parameter from the noise induced by
10

the frames.8 Second, when population preferences are known – what Bernheim and
Rangel (2009) refer to as a “refinement” – Proposition 1 can be used in conjunction
with that information to recover the preferences of the inconsistent decision-makers.9
The preferences of this group can be an input into welfare calculations (see Section
5), but are not directly revealed under a refinement. Finally, the preferences of the
consistent decision-makers may be used to recover the preferences of the remainder of
the population by accounting for selection into the consistent sub-population, which
is our focus in the next section.

3

Identifying Population Preferences

This section develops several methods for using the preferences of the consistent
decision-makers to shed light on the rest of the population. To frame the problem,
one can use the law of iterated expectations to write:
E[Yi∗ ] = E[Ci ] E[Yi∗ | Ci = 1] + (1 − E[Ci ]) E[Yi∗ | Ci = 0]

(1)

From Proposition 1.1, E[Ci ] and E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] are identified under A1-A4, but
E[Yi∗ |Ci = 0] is entirely unrestricted. Consequently, the formal challenge in recovering E[Yi∗ ] is the same as the standard sample selection problem that arises in the
program evaluation literature (Manski, 1989).10 Specifically, when selection into the
consistent sub-population is non-random, the preferences of that group can yield a
biased estimate for the preferences of the population:11
E[Yi∗ ] = E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] −

1
cov (Yi∗ , Ci )
E[Ci ]

(2)

However, when susceptibility to the frame is uncorrelated with preferences – a condition we refer to as consistency independence – Equation (2) highlights that E[Yi∗ ] =
E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1]. In that case, Proposition 1 permits identification of population pref8

For example, suppose the fraction of voters supporting a referendum varies based on the question
wording. It is straightforward to show that randomizing the wording evenly across two options biases
the average vote share toward 0.5, which can affect the outcome if the referendum requires a supermajority to pass. In cases like this, isolating the average choices of the consistent voters may be the
best option.
9
Formally, when E[Yi∗ ] is known, the law of iterated expectations allows us to recover E[Yi∗ |Ci =
E[Yi∗ ]−E[Yi∗ |Ci =1] E[Ci ]
0] =
.
1−E[Ci ]
10
One important difference is that in the typical sample selection context, the researcher can
identify which units have been selected into the sample and which have not. In contrast, consistency
is unobservable in our setup.
11
Equation (2) follows from the definitions of covariance and conditional expectation.

11

erences without further adjustments. More generally, Equation (2) shows that under
A1 - A4, the covariance between preferences and consistency is a sufficient statistic for
identifying the ordinal preferences of the population; the particulars of the behavioral
model only matter to the extent they shape this relationship.
The nature of the selection in (1) and (2) depends on the model determining which
agents are consistent. To illustrate, consider the following two potential models for
default effects, both of which are nested by the default effects example in Section 1.
Decision-Making Types Model of Default Effects Suppose that sensitivity
to the default is an innate characteristic or influenced by factors such as education
or prior experience that are exogenous to the specific choice being considered (as
in Chetty et al., 2014). The distribution of active types depends on the following statistical model: Ci = 1 ⇐⇒ Cei ≥ 0, Cei = β C θiC + ηiC , where θiC denotes
the vector of individual characteristics that determine whether one is active, and ηic
denotes idiosyncratic variation across individuals. Similarly, Yi∗ = 1 ⇐⇒ Yei ≥ 0,
Yei = β Y θiY +ηiY , where θiY denotes the vector of characteristics that determine ordinal
preference and ηiY denotes idiosyncratic variation. Assume ηiC and ηiY are independent of the other random variables in the model and of one another. We then have
cov(Yi∗ , Ci ) = p(Yei > 0; Cei > 0)−p(Yei > 0)p(Cei > 0). Consistency independence fails
if θiC and θiY contain common characteristics, or characteristics that are correlated in
the population of decision-makers.
Bounded Rationality Model of Default Effects Suppose instead that variation
in consistency is driven in part by the utility stakes of the choice at hand. Decisionmakers must incur a cognitive cost, γi ≥ 0, to choose actively and consider an option
that is not the default. Decision-makers first choose whether to be active or passive, and then choose from the options they consider. Let ∆ui = ui (1) − ui (0), and
let F∆ (.) denote its cumulative distribution over the population of decision-makers.
Here, consistency will be determined by the net benefit to i of choosing her mostpreferred option when that option is not the default, Cei = |∆ui | − γi , and we let FCe(.)
describe its cumulative distribution. Decision-makers are active iff Cei > 0, so the fraction of consistent decision-makers in the population is given by E[Ci ] = 1 − FB (0).
Similarly, the fraction with Yi∗ = 1 is given by E[Yi∗ ] = 1 − F∆ (0). One can
then derive the relationship between preferences and consistency as cov(Yi∗ , Ci ) =
h
i
(1 − F∆ (0)) FCe(0) − FC|∆u>0
(0) . Setting aside the trivial case in which preferences
e
are uniform, consistency independence requires FCe(0) = FC|∆u>0
(0). This would
e
12

obtain, for instance, when the foregone utility from following the default when the
default is not optimal is symmetric across agents with opposite ordinal preferences.
Intuitively, the identification challenge in this model is that consistency depends on
the “stakes” of the decision, and empirically, the stakes may differ among decisionmakers with different ordinal preferences. When this source of variation is unimportant relative to decision-maker characteristics in explaining consistency, as would
be the case when the variance of |∆ui | is negligible relative to the variance in γi ,
this model approximates the decision-making types model described above (see also
Appendix Figure 3).
Note that in this example we assume the decision-maker knows ∆ui with certainty
(see also Conlisk, 1996). One could alternatively suppose that the individual decides
whether to choose actively based on whether the expected net benefit of doing so
exceeds the cost. As it is nested by the model presented in Example 1, such a model
would not violate our core assumptions. The model imposes a similar set of challenges
for extrapolation to population preferences as the model with certainty. We discuss
additional nuance introduced by this type of model in Online Appendix A.
These examples illustrate that consistency independence is likely to fail in many
applications. The remainder of this section proposes a range of empirical methods
for shedding light on the relationship between preferences and consistency.

3.1

Partial Identification

The following result clarifies the limits of what can be learned about population
preferences without the imposition of additional behavioral assumptions.
Proposition 2
i
h
(2.1) Under A1-A4, E[Yi∗ ] ∈ Y (0), Y (1) .
n

o

n

o

(2.2) Under A1 -A3, max Y (0) − (1 − Y (1)) , 0 ≤ E[Y ∗ ] ≤ min Y (0) + Y (1) , 1 .
The result in (2.1) follows directly from the equivalence of the standard sample selection problem and our setting, once the assumptions required for Proposition 1 are
assumed (Manski, 1989). Intuitively, the fraction of the population that prefers an
option lies between the fraction choosing that option under each of the two frames.
As a result, the bounds will be relatively informative when the fraction of inconsistent
decision-makers is small.
Without frame monotonicity, we obtain weaker, one-directional bounds for population preferences. The result in (2.2) follows from substituting the partial identification results in Proposition (1.2) into Equation (1). In particular, E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] and
13

E[Ci ] can be identified given information on the prevalence of frame-defiers. Knowing that E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] ∈ [0, 1] constrains the prevalence of frame-defiers, which then
yields bounds on the value of E[Yi∗ ]. The further Y (0) is from 1 − Y (1), the more
informative the bounds will be.12 Notably, when frame monotonicity fails, (2.2) shows
it is possible that a majority of decision-makers choose one option under both frames
even though the other option is preferred by a majority of all decision-makers.

3.2

Adjusting for Observable Correlates of Consistency

A classic approach to overcoming selection problems is to condition on observables.
Such an approach is useful here when the correlation between preferences and consistency is driven by characteristics of decision-makers that are observable to the
researcher.
Formally, suppose that decision-makers exhibit a vector of observable characteristics, denoted by random variable Xi ∈ X. Define Y (D, X) = E[Yi (D)| Di = D, Xi =
X] to be the cell-specific analogs to the population means defined above. Define
q(X) as the ratio of consistent decision-makers with Xi = X relative to all consistent
(1,X)
, where EXi [.] is the expectation over
decision-makers, q(X) = E Y Y(0,X)+1−Y
Xi [ (0,Xi )+1−Y (1,Xi )]
the random variable Xi .We define s(X) as the corresponding ratio for the inconsis(0,X)
. Last, we assume frame exogeneity
tent decision-makers, s(X) = E Y[Y(1,X)−Y
(1,Xi )−Y (0,Xi )]
Xi
holds conditional on each value of X:
A2’ (Conditional Frame Exogeneity). For all X ∈ X, (Yi (1), Yi (0)) ⊥ Di | Xi = X.
The identification strategy we propose in such settings is to: first, estimate the preferences of consistent decision-makers with a given set of observable characteristics; second, extrapolate preferences from consistent to inconsistent decision-makers with the
same observable characteristics; and third, aggregate preferences across cells based on
the estimated distribution of characteristics in the full population or sub-population
of inconsistent decision-makers. A barrier to employing this familiar approach in our
context is that we cannot directly observe consistency. The following lemma, analogous to Abadie (2003), provides conditions under which the aggregate distribution of
characteristics among the consistent and inconsistent decision-makers can nonetheless
be identified.
Lemma 1 Under A1, A2’, A3, and A4:
12

When Y (0) = 1 − Y (1), the bounds are entirely uninformative because the data do not constrain
the fraction of frame-defiers and, as a result, we cannot rule out E[Ci ] = 0. Consequently, when
Y (0) = 1 − Y (1), any E[Yi∗ ] ∈ [0, 1] is feasible.

14

(L1.1) For any X, p(Xi = X| Ci = 1) = q(X) p(Xi = X)
(L1.2) For any X, p(Xi = X| Ci = 0) = s(X) p(Xi = X).
The next step in the identification strategy proceeds using the following assumption:
A5 (Conditional Consistency Independence) For all individuals i and all observable
characteristics X ∈ X, cov(Yi∗ , Ci | Xi = X) = 0.
Conditional consistency independence requires that consistent and inconsistent decisionmakers with the same observable characteristics have the same distribution of preferences. The assumption is analogous to one commonly employed in the program
evaluation literature, i.e., that observationally equivalent individuals do not sort on
the unobserved gain to treatment (e.g., Angrist and Fernandez-Val, 2013). It is also
similar to the type of assumption that has been relied on in the line of papers described in the introduction (e.g., Bronnenberg et al., 2015), in which the preferences
of a reference group of experts is extrapolated to the population.
Exploiting Lemma 1 along with conditional consistency independence, the following proposition formalizes the matching-on-observables identification strategy described above:
Ȳ (0,X)
. Under Assumptions A1, A2’, A3,
Proposition 3 Let Y C (X) = Ȳ (0,X)+1−
Ȳ (1,X)
A4, and A5 :
h
i
(3.1) E [Yi∗ ] = EXi Y C (Xi )
h

i

(3.2) E [Yi∗ |Ci = 0] = EXi s(Xi ) Y C (Xi ) 13
As with any matching-on-observables approach, the plausibility of this approach will
depend on the detail and nature of the observable characteristics as well as the underlying positive model of behavior, as demonstrated by the following two examples.
Decision-Making Types Model of Default Effects As before, suppose that
preferences and consistency in the population are (respectively) characterized by latent index models Yei = β Y θiY + ηiY and Cei = β C θiC + ηiC , but unlike before, we now
interpret θiY and θiC to denote the vector of observable characteristics. Accordingly, ηiY
and ηiC denote the unobservable determinants of preferences and consistency. Condi

tional consistency independence requires cov ηiY , ηiC | θiY , θiC = 0. For example, it
could be that highly educated customers are less likely to prefer that companies use
their personal data and are more likely to choose consistently across default regimes;
13

Replacing assumption A2 with A2’ in (1.1) implies that E[Ci ] = EXi [Ȳ (0, Xi ) + 1 − Ȳ (1, Xi )],
and E[Y ∗ |Ci = 1] = EXi [q(Xi )Y C (Xi )]. Even when A2 is satisfied, this revised estimator for E[Ci ] is
preferable for applying Proposition 3 in finite samples, due to possible spurious correlation between
the observables and the frame.

15

but that conditional on education, preferences and consistency are uncorrelated.
Bounded Rationality Model of Default Effects Let FC|X
e (·) denote the cumulative density of Cei after conditioning on Xi = X. It is straightforward to show
that conditional consistency independence requires FC|X
(0) for each
e (0) = FC|X,∆u>0
e
X. This holds if the observed characteristics absorb enough variation in |∆ui | and
γi such that the remaining, unobserved variation in consistency is uncorrelated with
ordinal preferences. For example, suppose the set of observables is rich enough to
absorb variation in consistency associated with the utility stakes of the decision,
Xi = Xj =⇒ |∆ui | = |∆uj | for any two individuals i and j. Conditional consistency
independence would then hold if the remaining variation in opt-out costs is uncorrelated with the remaining variation in ordinal preferences, a sufficient condition for
which is that the structural parameters of the model are (conditionally) independently
distributed, cov(γi , ∆ui |X) = 0. In contrast, when the (conditional) variation in consistency is driven by selection on the gains to choosing actively, both consistency and
ordinal preferences are driven by the same underlying structural parameter (∆ui );
hence one would not expect their distributions to be independent, except in special
cases.14 .

3.3

Decision Quality Instruments

When conditioning on observables does not yield a credible identification strategy,
researchers sometimes turn to instrumental variables designs. To develop the analog
to that strategy here, we introduce the notion of a decision quality instrument, a component of the decision-making environment that affects decision-makers’ consistency
but that is unrelated to their preferences.15
Formally, the decision quality instrument is a a new random variable, Zi ∈ {0, 1}.
Choices can depend on both the frame and the instrument, Yi (D, Z), so there are
now four potential outcomes. Each decision-maker chooses once under a single (D, Z)
combination. For each i, we observe (Yi , Di , Zi ), where Yi = Yi (Di , Zi ). Consistency
is defined at each value of the instrument, Ci (Z) = 1−|Yi (1, Z)−Yi (0, Z)|. We denote
14

A similar challenge arises in the program evaluation context, when individuals select into treatment based on the gains from doing so, as in the Roy model (Heckman et al., 1996).
15
A standard instrumental variable might be used to identify the effect of a treatment on choice,
say E [Yi (1) − Yi (0)], when assignment to frames is confounded with individuals’ potential outcomes.
In contrast, we propose to use exogenous variation in whether an individual is consistent. In other
words, we are “instrumenting” for C, not for D (which would be standard). To map our prior results
into this notation, one can interpret Yi (D) in previous sections as Yi (D, Z) for some fixed value of
Z.

16

the fraction of decision-makers choosing Yi = 1 under a given (D, Z) combination by
Y (D, Z) ≡ E [Yi (Di , Zi ) | Di = D, Zi = Z].
The following assumptions establish the type of variation that constitutes a valid
decision quality instrument:
A2” (Exogeneity of D and Z) (Yi (0, 0), Yi (1, 0), Yi (1, 0), Yi (1, 1)) ⊥ (Di , Zi )
A6 (Decision Quality Monotonicity) For all i, Ci (1) ≥ Ci (0) and E[Ci (1)−Ci (0)] > 0.
A7 (Decision Quality Exclusion Restriction) For all i, Yi∗ does not depend on Z.
Assumption A2” modifies frame exogeneity, which now requires both Di and Zi to
be uncorrelated with confounding factors. A6 requires the effect of Z on consistency
to be weakly monotonic for all decision-makers and strictly monotonic for some. A7
requires that variation in the decision-making environment induced by Z be irrelevant
from the perspective of decision-makers’ preferences; it ensures that Z affects behavior
by altering consistency, not by changing which option decision-makers prefer.16 Like
frame separability, A7 does not rule out variation in Z affecting welfare by altering
the real costs of choosing against the frame. Although generally untestable with the
type of data we assume, A7 may be tested if one observes variation in Z affecting
choices in a setting without framing effects (in which case the variation in Z should
not affect behavior).
Variation in Z might arise from natural experiments or be induced by researchers.
For example, suppose that some decision-makers were randomly assigned to a treatment group aimed at manipulating their “cognitive load” – such as by memorizing
a 10-digit number – prior to making the decision being studied. Such experimental
designs could plausibly manipulate decision-makers’ susceptibility to a frame (e.g.,
Pocheptsova et al., 2009) in ways that are unrelated to their preferences. Other examples of decision quality instruments might include the time pressure for making a
decision, the cost of obtaining or processing information about the available choices,
the opportunity cost of cognitive resources at the time of decision-making, the intensity of the frame (e.g., the degree to which one alternative is more salient than
another), or the complexity of the choice presented (as in Brown et al., 2017).
Like frame separability, A7 is an assumption about whether Yi∗ must be indexed by Z, rather
than a distributional assumption.
16

17

Proposition 4 Assume that A1, A3, and A4 hold at each fixed value of Z, and
assume A2”, A6, and A7. Then
E [Yi∗ | Ci (1) > Ci (0)] =

Y (0, 1) − Y (0, 0)


.

Y (1, 0) − Y (0, 0) − Y (1, 1) − Y (0, 1)

Proposition 4 is best understood by analogy to the identification of a local average
treatment effect (LATE, see Imbens and Angrist, 1994). The monotonicity assumption (A7) permits us to divide the population into three groups: the always-consistent
(Ci (1) = Ci (0) = 1), the sometimes-consistent Ci ((1) = 1; Ci (0) = 0), and the neverconsistent (Ci (1) = Ci (0) = 0). The denominator of the expression in Proposition 4
measures the reduction in the size of the inconsistent sub-group as we move from
Z = 0 to Z = 1, which identifies the size of the sometimes-consistent group (the
analog of the compliers in the standard LATE framework). The expression in the
numerator measures the change in the fraction choosing Y = 1 under D = 0 as Z
changes, which identifies the fraction of decision-makers who are sometimes-consistent
and prefer Yi∗ = 1. Dividing the latter by the former yields the fraction of the
sometimes-consistent with Yi∗ = 1. Table 2 further illustrates the intuition behind
the Proposition by applying it to hypothetical data from the online privacy example
first described in the Introduction. The table highlights that Proposition 4 works
by essentially applying Proposition 1.1 separately by values Z, and then identifying
E [Yi∗ | Ci (1) > Ci (0)] by comparing E [Yi∗ | Ci (0) = 1] to E [Yi∗ | Ci (1) = 1]. Several
other comparisons to the IV literature are worth noting. First, unlike conventional
instrumental variable analyses, the variable affected by a decision quality instrument
(consistency) is not directly observable to the researcher. Consequently, Proposition
4 requires frame monotonicity in addition to the standard IV monotonicity assumption (A6) in (Imbens and Angrist, 1994). Second, Proposition 4 can motivate a
Wu-Hausman over-identification test of consistency independence; however, such a
test requires E[Y ∗ |Ci (1) > Ci (0)] = E[Yi∗ ], which may fail depending on the nature
of selection into consistency. Finally, Proposition 4 may be extended beyond binary
instruments by applying the result to each pair-wise combination of Z values. Such
variation allows the researcher to non-parameterically trace out the relationship between consistency and preferences, similar to identification of the marginal treatment
effect in Heckman and Vytlacil (2007).
As with a standard instrument, the quantity identified by Proposition 4 corre-

18

Table 2: Illustration of Proposition 4
When Z = 0

When Z = 1

Yi (0, 0) = 0

Yi (0, 0) = 1

-

-

0.35

0.00

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.25

0.40

-

-

-

Yi (1, 0) = 0

Yi (1, 0) = 1
-

Fraction
consistent:
Fraction consistent
and prefer option
1:
Consistent
preferences:

Yi (0, 1) = 0
Yi (1, 1) = 0
Yi (1, 1) = 1
Fraction
consistent:
Fraction consistent
and prefer option
1:
Consistent
preferences:

E[Ci (0)] = 0.40 + 0.35= 0.75
E [Ci (0) Yi∗ ] = 0.40
E[Yi∗ |Ci (0) = 1] =
0.53

0.4
0.4+0.35 =

Fraction sometimes consistent:
Fraction sometimes-consistent and prefer option 1:

Yi (0, 1) = 1

-

-

0.50

0.00

-

-

-

-

0.05

0.45

-

-

E[Ci (1)] = 0.50 + 0.45= 0.95
E [Ci (1) Yi∗ ] = 0.45
E[Yi∗ |Ci (1) = 1] =
0.47

0.45
0.5+0.45 =

E[Ci (1)] − E[Ci (0)] = 0.95 − 0.75 = 0.20
E [(Ci (1) − Ci (0)) Yi∗ ] = 0.45 − 0.40 = 0.05
E[Yi∗ |Ci (1) > Ci (0)] =

Sometimes consistent preferences:

0.05
0.20

= 0.25

sponds to a specific sub-group of the population – in our setting, it is those whose
sensitivity to the frame varies by Z. This quantity can be of interest for several
reasons. First, consider a government deciding which value of Z to implement, for
example a regulator deciding how streamlined privacy controls should be. The solution to this problem trades off the cost of selecting a value of Z that induces greater
consistency against the welfare gain from doing so. The latter depends on the preferences of the decision-makers who choose consistently at one candidate Z but not in
another, which Proposition 4 can be used to estimate.
Second, Proposition 4 can shed light on the underlying behavioral model. For a
decision-quality instrument that affects present bias, for example, the “long-run” view
of welfare in the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model described Section 1 predicts all
of the sometimes-consistent choosers will prefer to consume the larger amount at the
later date. Estimating E[Yi∗ |Ci (1) > Ci (0)] can test this hypothesis.
Finally, the relationship between the preferences identified by Proposition 4 and
the preferences identified by Proposition 1 can be extrapolated to shed light on the
relationship between preferences and consistency for the full population.17 Because
17
An interesting special case occurs when, under Z = 1, all decision-makers are consistent, i.e.,
E[Ci (1)] = 1. In this case, E[Yi∗ |Ci (1) = 1] = E[Y ∗ ], so choices under Z = 1 are a “refinement”
in which the preferences of the full population are identified. Furthermore, when Ci (1) = 1 for
all individuals, E[Yi∗ |Ci (1) > Ci (0)] = E[Yi∗ |Ci (0) = 0]. Consequently, the empirical quantity in
Proposition 4 identifies the preferences of the inconsistent choosers at Z = 0. Consequently, one can

19

this extrapolation problem depends on the positive model generating the framing
effects, we shall discuss it in the context of our running examples.
Decision-Making Types Model of Default Effects In this model, a decision
quality instrument exploits variation that induces a passive type to become active, or vice-versa – e.g., being warned about the bias before making the decision. Incorporating the decision quality instrument into the statistical model yields
Cei = β C θiC + δiC Zi + ηiC and Yei = β Y θiY + δiY Zi + ηiY , where we now allow ηiC and
ηiY to have arbitrary correlation with one another to reflect unobserved determinants
of consistency and preferences. Note that A6 corresponds to δiY = 0 ∀i and A7 corresponds to δiC ≥ 0 ∀i and δiC > 0 for some i. Proposition 4 sheds light on the
relationship between ηiC and ηiY , which, depending on the functional form of their
joint distribution, can be used to recover the distribution of population preferences
in the spirit of Heckman (1979) (see Online Appendix Section C.1). Again, richer
variation in Z would allow one to identify the joint distribution of ηic and ηiy more
flexibly; we describe one such approach in Online Appendix Section C.2.
Bounded Rationality Model of Default Effects In the bounded rationality
model, a natural source for decision quality instruments is variation in the distribution
of costs associated with choosing actively, γi . For example, such variation might make
it easier or more difficult to select the non-default option, perhaps by simplifying the
opt-out process (expanding or reducing the number of forms to fill out or the amount
of red tape). Suppose that γi = γ0i − δZi , where Zi is the binary decision quality
instrument and δ > 0. In this case, the sometimes-consistent choosers are those with
−δ < |∆ui | − γ0i < 0. Reducing γ induces this group to start choosing actively.
Variation in Z thus provides information on the distribution of ∆ui , F∆ . With a
binary instrument, identifying E[Yi∗ ] requires imposing a functional form for F∆ .
With more variation in Z, F∆ can be estimated more flexibly. We provide additional
detail in Online Appendix Section C.3.

4

Application to Automatic 401(k) Enrollment

In this section we illustrate our framework with data on enrollment decisions into
employer-provided 401(k) pension plans. Such plans can either be opt-in, so that
new employees must actively enroll in the plan to participate, or opt-out, so that
new employees are enrolled by default. A large body of research documents strikrecover the preferences of the population and of the inconsistent decision-makers without further
extrapolation.

20

ing differences in enrollment and savings behavior between opt-in and opt-out plan
designs (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Choi et al., 2006; Chetty et al., 2014). Unless employee saving preferences depend on whether enrollment is the default, such findings
undermine the use of traditional revealed preference analysis in this setting. In contrast, our approach accounts for the observed framing effect to shed light on employee
preferences.

4.1

Data

Our data come from the large health care and insurance firm studied in Madrian and
Shea (2001). The firm switched from an opt-in to an opt-out enrollment policy in
April 1998. Under the opt-out policy, passive employees were automatically enrolled
at a default contribution rate of 3 percent of salary. Under both designs, the employer
provided a 50% match on employee contributions of up to 6 percent, and employee
contributions into the plan were capped at 15 percent.
We observe whether employee i enrolls in the plan (indicated by Yi ) and whether
the default is opt-in (Di = 0) or opt-out (Di = 1) at the date of hire. We also observe
annual compensation, age, sex, and race for each employee.18 The income, age, and
racial composition of the firm’s employees are typical of a large employer in the US,
although the firm’s workforce is disproportionately female. Employer contributions
vest in the pension after two years of employment. We refer readers to Madrian and
Shea (2001) for additional details regarding the data and the change in plan design.
As expected, participation is greater under opt-out than under opt-in, y 0 = 0.491
and y 1 = 0.859 (we use lower-case letters to denote estimated sample analogs to the
population moments described in earlier sections).

4.2

Recovery of Consistent Preferences

Under A1-A4, Proposition 1 allows us to identify the preferences of the consistent
employees. Frame separability (A1) requires that preferences over plan participation
do not depend on whether the design is opt-in or opt-out. This seems likely to hold,
as it is difficult to imagine an employee’s preferences over how much to save depend
on how her employer chooses to structure enrollment into its sponsored retirement
plan.19 Absent A1, the behavior observed by Madrian and Shea would not constitute
18

For confidentiality purposes, we received binned data on compensation and age.
Enrollment preferences could depend on the default if employees are uncertain over whether
they should enroll in the plan and interpret the default as advice from their employer. However,
employees in the firm we study who were not automatically enrolled did not shift their 401(k)
contributions to the default contribution rate that applied to automatically enrolled employees, as
19

21

a framing effect and standard revealed preference analysis would suffice to recover
employee preferences.
Frame exogeneity (A2) requires that an employee’s hire date (within the window
studied) be uncorrelated with whether she chooses to participate under either plan
design. This is the same assumption required to identify the causal effect of the
change in plan design on participation; Madrian and Shea present evidence that it
holds by showing the observable characteristics of employees hired before and after
the change in plan design are similar. Appendix Table 1 replicates that analysis for
the modified sample we study; our results are quite similar to theirs.
The consistency principle (A3) requires that employees who choose to participate
in the plan under both the opt-out and opt-in design actually prefer participation,
and similarly, that employees who choose non-participation under both designs prefer
not to participate. In contrast, the standard revealed preference assumption requires
that all employees – even those whose choices depend on the participation default
– prefer the option that they choose. The consistency principle will be violated if
employees’ choices are characterized by biases that manifest themselves across both
frames; for example, if employees who consistently choose not to enroll only make
that decision because of present-bias.20 If employee participation decisions are biased
for reasons unrelated to automatic enrollment (the observed framing effect), further
deviations from revealed preference analysis beyond the consistency principle would
be needed to accurately recover preferences.
Finally, frame monotonicity (A4) requires that no employee chooses to enroll when
enrollment is opt-in, but chooses not to enroll when enrollment is opt-out. Frame
monotonicity is not directly testable without observing employees making repeated
choices across multiple frames, but it can be falsified if we observe a reduction in participation rates under opt-out enrollment for any subgroup of employees. Appendix
Figure 2 plots employee participation by frame, for each subgroup of employees we
would be expected if they acted on the default as advice (Carroll et al., 2009). Particularly in the
401(k) context, default effects being driven primarily by trust in one’s employer would be surprising
given the countervailing incentives that arise when pension plans have an employer match (Bubb
and Warren, 2017).
20
Not all forms of present-bias would cause the consistency principle to fail. In the models of
default-sensitivity studied by Carroll et al. (2009) and Bernheim, Fradkin and Popov (2015), for
example, present-bias causes individuals to procrastinate and stick with the default until they make
an active choice, at which time the amount they choose to save will be optimal. Such behavior
satisfies the consistency principle because those individuals who choose consistently have selected
their most-preferred option.

22

observe. For each group, participation is greater under opt-out enrollment, consistent
with frame monotonicity.
Under A1-A4, Proposition 1.1 point-identifies the preferences of the consistent
decision-makers for enrollment. Substituting the estimated population moments into
the definition of Y C in Proposition 1 yields y C = 0.777, with a standard error of
0.006.21 Thus, under frame monotonicity, of the 63.2 percent of employees whose
enrollment decisions are insensitive to the enrollment default, we conclude that 77.7
percent prefer enrollment. Without frame monotonicity, Proposition 1.2 implies the
fraction of consistent employees that prefer enrollment is at least 77.7 percent. Thus,
we conclude that a large majority of the consistent employees prefer to participate in
the plan.

4.3

Recovery of Population Preferences

Table 3 presents the conclusions about population preferences that can be drawn
from the data under assumptions of varying strength. With only A1-A3 (Column 1),
the answer is not much: Proposition 2 implies one can only rule out values of E[Yi∗ ]
below 0.350. The scope of this uncertainty is striking given that nearly 50 percent
of employees choose to participate even when enrollment is opt-in. Adding frame
monotonicity (Column 2) allows us to tighten these bounds significantly, yielding
0.491 ≤ E[Yi∗ ] ≤ 0.859. Thus, under A1-A4, an observer can conclude that at least a
(near) majority of employees prefer enrollment.
Determining how large of a majority prefers enrollment requires understanding
the relationship between employee preferences and consistency. As a benchmark,
consistency independence (Column 3) implies E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] = E[Yi∗ |Ci = 0], so that
E[Yi∗ ] = 0.777. To shed light on the plausibility of this assumption in our data, Figure 1 plots estimates of E[Ci ] and Y C for each demographic subgroup we observe. If
consistency independence was satisfied, we would expect the slope of this relationship
to be flat. Instead, the figure suggests a strongly positive relationship between preferences and consistency: groups with more consistent employees are also more likely to
contain more employees who prefer participation. The slope of the estimated best-fit
line is 0.78. Characterizing this result as a formal test of unconditional consistency
independence requires assuming conditional consistency independence. Even so, for
(unconditional) consistency independence to hold given this finding, it would have to
21

Standard errors on y C and other finite-sample statistics were obtained using the delta method.
See Section B of the Online Appendix for details.

23

Figure 1: Consistency versus Preference for Enrollment in a 401(k) Plan

Notes: Estimates based on calculations on data from Madrian and Shea (2001) provided to the authors. Each point on the scatter
plot consists of all workers with given values of compensation, age, sex, and race. The fraction consistent and fraction of consistent
decision-makers preferring enrollment are calculated using the take-up rates before and after automatic enrollment in each cell. The
size of the cell is proportional to the area of the circle.

be the case that conditional consistency independence fails, and the within-subgroup
correlation between preferences and consistency exactly offsets the observed betweensubgroup correlation. Because we see little reason to expect this correlation to be
positive between subgroups while negative within subgroups, we treat this possibility
as remote. Hence, we interpret Figure 1 as suggestive evidence against consistency
independence holding in our population. Motivated by Figure 1, an observer might
feel comfortable imposing that the relationship between consistency and preferences
is positive for the employees in our data, even without being confident about exactly
what the relationship is. Column 4 shows the implication of this assumption for
population preferences: 0.491 ≤ E[Yi∗ ] ≤ 0.777; roughly speaking, the assumption
suggests somewhere between one-half and three-quarters of employees prefer enrollment. If the estimated slope in Figure 1 had instead been negative, the resulting
bounds would be even narrower: 0.777 ≤ E[Yi∗ ] ≤ 0.859.
We next consider conditional consistency independence. In our setting, this assumption requires that among employees with the same income, age, gender, and
race, preferences for enrollment are uncorrelated with consistency. As discussed in
Section 3.2, this assumption is most likely to hold when the remaining variation in
employees’ sensitivity to the default is mostly driven by factors exogenous to the
specific decision being considered. This can be satisfied in a types model of default

24

Table 3: Estimates of Population Preferences
(1)

(2)

Assumptions:

A1-A3

A1-A4

Fraction of consistent
preferring enrollment (%)
Fraction of inconsistent
preferring enrollment (%)
Fraction of population
preferring enrollment (%)

[77.7, 1]
(0.6, ·)
[0, 1]
(·)
[35.0, 1]
(0.9, ·)

77.7
(0.6)
[0, 1]
(·)
[49.1, 85.9]
(0.8, 0.5)

(3)
A1-A4,
Consistency
Independence

77.7
(0.6)
77.7
(0.6)
77.7
(0.6)

(4)
A1-A4,
cov(Y ∗ , C) ≥ 0

77.7
(0.6)
[0, 77.7]
(·, 0.6)
[49.1 , 77.7]
(0.6, ·)

(5)

(6)

A1-A4,
Conditional
Consistency
Independence
77.7
(0.6)
70.9
(1.2)
75.0
(0.8)

A1-A4,
Bounded
Rationality
Model
77.7
(0.6)
56.1
(4.7)
69.2
(3.5)

Note: This table illustrates the estimation of enrollment preferences among consistent employees, inconsistent employees, and the population, under various sets of assumptions. Column 1 applies Propositions 1.2 and 2.2 under our
core assumptions excluding frame monotonicity. Column 2 adds the assumption of frame monotonicity and applies
Propositions 1.1 and 2.1. Column 3 adds the assumption of consistency independence. Column 4 assumes, based on
the group-level evidence in Figure 1, that the covariance between consistency and principles is positive. Column 5
assumes conditional consistency independence (Proposition 3) using the same set of employee characteristics as Figure
1. Column 6 reports results from the structural estimation of a bounded rationality model of default effects with all
variation in consistency due to variation in utility stakes. All estimates are based on data from Madrian and Shea
(2001) provided to the authors. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are calculated using the delta method; see
Section B of the Online Appendix for derivations.

effects, or a bounded rationality model in which the characteristics we observe capture
most of the variation in preference intensity. In both cases, the remaining variation
in preferences must not correlated with unobserved variation in the “stickiness” of
the default.22
Column 5 of Table 3 presents the results of the matching analysis. We estimate
that the fraction of inconsistent employees preferring enrollment is 70.8 percent –
approximately 7 percentage points lower than the corresponding preferences for consistent employees. The difference in estimated preferences between the consistent and
inconsistent employees is statistically significant (p < 0.001). For the full population
of employees, the analysis implies that 74.9 percent prefer enrollment.
Finally, recall that under a bounded rationality model of defaults, conditional
consistency independence tends to fail when most of the remaining variation in consistency (after conditioning on observables) is driven by unobserved variation in the
22

For example, if cognitive ability was positively correlated with both consistency and preferences
among employees of the same age, gender, race, and income, our results would yield an upwardlybiased estimate for the preferences of thehinconsistent employees.
The bias in the matching estimator
i
cov(Yi∗ , Ci | X=Xi )
∗
is given by E[Yi ] − EX [Y C (Xi )] = EX
.
E[Ci |X=Xi ]
With the right data, one could attempt to recover population preferences by exploiting a decision
quality instrument. For example, one might randomly assign certain employees to a streamlined
process for actively choosing a plan or financial counseling services to help determine whether 401(k)
participation is consistent with the employee’s goals for saving and retirement.

25

utility “stakes” of the decision across decision-makers. Suppose that this is indeed the
case, and that decision-makers behave as described by the bounded rationality model
of defaults developed above. We allow the cost of active choice to vary by demographic group. Within each group, the distribution of utility gains from enrollment
2
are normally distributed. Thus γi = γX and F∆|X (∆ui ) ∼ N (µX , σX
) for all i such
that Xi = X, where Xi denotes i’s group. Note that this setup represents the extreme case in which conditional consistency independence fails, since, by assumption,
all of the remaining variation in consistency is driven by the stakes of the decision,
|∆ui |.23 Within each group, observing the fraction of consistent decision-makers and
the preferences of that group allow us to identify µX /σX and γX /σX , which in turn,
allow us to recover the preferences of the inconsistent employees within the group.
Finally, aggregating the group-specific preferences using the prevalence of each group
in the population (or, using the weights in Lemma 1, the prevalence of each group
among the inconsistent decision-makers) allows us to recover population preferences
and preferences among the inconsistent employees.
The results of this analysis are reported in Column 6 of Table 3. Because assumptions A1-A4 are satisfied by this model of behavior, our estimate for the preferences
of the consistent employees is the same as in the other columns. In contrast, this
model suggests that just 56 percent of the inconsistent employees prefer enrollment.
Combining the consistent and inconsistent employees, we estimate the fraction of the
population preferring enrollment is approximately 69 percent. From this, we conclude
that a literal application of conditional consistency independence is not necessary for
obtaining the result that consistent employees prefer enrollment at a higher rate than
do inconsistent employees.
To better understand why we estimate a positive relationship between enrollment
preferences and consistency among the employees in our data, it is useful to investigate how differences in preferences and consistency relate to employee characteristics.
23

In the Online Appendix, we consider the case in which γ follows a log-normal distribution.
Appendix Figure 3 illustrates how different assumptions about the relative variance between γ and
∆u imply different conclusions about population preferences. When the variance of γ is relatively
small, estimated population preferences approaches the case in which γ is homogeneous, and all
the variation in consistency is driven by ∆u. In contrast, when the variance of γ is relatively
large, variation in consistency is driven primarily by variation in that term. And because the model
assumes that γ and ∆ui are independently distributed, estimated population preferences in this case
approaches the estimates one obtains from assuming consistency independence. Consequently, one
can interpret Columns 4 and 6 as two extreme forms of a bounded rationality model in which the
distribution of structural parameters can vary by observable group membership.

26

Although we cannot directly observe either preferences or consistency for individual employees, the results in section 3.2 allow us to investigate differences based on
employees’ observable characteristics. We estimate a regression of the form
E[Yi | D, X] = α0 + α1 D + X 0 β0 + X 0 β1 D

(3)

where Y and D are defined as above and X is a vector of employee characteristics.
Applying Proposition 1 (conditional on a given realization of X) implies that:
0

E[Ci | Xi = X] = 1 − α1 − X β1

(4)

0

E[Yi∗ | Ci = 1, Xi = X] =

α 0 + X β0
1 − α1 − X 0 β1

(5)

The results of the analysis are reported in Table 4. We find that both consistency
and the preferences of consistent choosers vary systematically by employee characteristics. Variation in consistency is strongly related to variation in compensation,
with those in the highest compensation bin (annual income over $50K), 40 percent
more likely to choose consistently than those in the lowest bin (annual income less
than $20K), and 41 percent more likely to prefer enrollment. After controlling for
income, preferences for enrollment, but not consistency, also vary by age, race, and
gender. These findings are consistent with the non-parametric evidence of a positive
relationship between consistency and consistent preferences in Figure 1.
Table 4 shows that preferences for 401(k) participation are lowest among young
and low-income employees (for example, in all four groups with employees below age
30 and salary below $20,000, we estimate that a majority prefers non-participation).
One explanation could be that younger and lower-income employees are more susceptible to present-bias, so that the consistency principle (A3) is more strongly violated
for them than for other groups. The preferences revealed by consistent choices would
then still contain some bias, as in Example 3 of Section 1. Alternatively, it could be
that these employees expect their tenure at the firm to be too short for the employer
matching contribution to vest, in which case even a modest preference for liquidity
could lead to a preference for non-enrollment. Figure 2 investigates this hypothesis
by plotting preferences for enrollment by demographic group against the fraction of
the group remaining at the firm two years from the date of hire – the time at which
the 50 percent employer matching contribution vests. The observed relationship is
strong and positive. In addition, the best-fit line for the group-level regression has

27

Table 4: Consistency and Preference by Observable Characteristics

Consistency

(2)
Consistent
Preferences

0.123***
(0.028)
0.218***
(0.033)
0.267***
(0.035)
0.398***
(0.034)

0.197***
(0.032)
0.319***
(0.033)
0.368***
(0.034)
0.407***
(0.033)

-0.033
(0.022)
0.025
(0.023)
-0.015
(0.021)
0.003
(0.021)
9,887

0.008
(0.017)
0.068***
(0.017)
0.087***
(0.016)
-0.059***
(0.017)
9,887

(1)

Compensation
$20K-$29K
$30K-$39K
$40K-$49K
>$50K
Age
30-39 years
40-64 years
White
Male
Observations

Notes: Estimates are based on equations (3)-(5), using disaggregated data from Madrian and Shea (2001) provided
to the authors. The left-out groups for each demographic characteristic are 1) employees with compensation less
than $20K, 2) employees with age less than 30 years, 3) non-white employees, and 4) female employees. Column (1)
examines the conditional probability that an employee is consistent . Column (2) examines the conditional
probability that a consistent chooser prefers enrollment, holding other characteristics constant. Standard errors
calculated using the delta method are reported in parentheses. *** indicates p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.1.

an R2 of over 90%, suggesting that our estimated preferences are a strong predictor of ultimate tenure at the firm for most groups. This evidence is reassuring, as
it is consistent with the hypothesis that the preference information recovered by our
analysis is driven by rational differences in employee expectations, rather than simply
reflecting unobserved biases.

4.4

Discussion

The above results illustrate how researchers can use our proposed framework to recover more credible estimates of preference information than what would otherwise
be available. Using the type of data that is already routinely collected, we show
how the preference information that can be learned depends on the strength of the
assumptions an observer is willing to impose. A central virtue of this approach is
its transparency – researchers who rely from the start of their analysis on a specific
behavioral model often implicitly impose A1-A4 in addition to some relationship between preferences and consistency. Thus, even if one ends up relying on a specific
behavioral model, our approach highlights how the assumptions of the model contribute to identification – i.e., how they narrow the identification region relative to

28

Figure 2: Retention Rates and Preferences for Enrollment

Notes: Estimates are based on calculations on data from Madrian and Shea (2001) provided to the authors. We plot the retention rate
at 24 months against the fraction preferring enrollment, for each observable group. Each point on the bubble scatter plot consists of
all workers with given values of compensation, age and sex. The size of the cell is proportional to the area of the circle. Our
interpretation of the figure assumes conditional consistency independence; without this assumption the x-axis can be interpreted as
the fraction of consistent choosers preferring enrollment. Due to additional sample size restrictions necessary to study retention rates,
we do not include race as a covariate. Earlier matching results are similar without using race as a covariate. Data on retention is
calculated using captures of the relevant data at specific dates roughly 6 months apart. An employee is counted as retained in a
month if he or she is still at the firm as of the most recent date of observation. Results are similar using retention at 12 or 18 months.

weaker assumptions, such as A1-A4 alone.
In the specific application we study, our results show that under relatively weak
assumptions (A1-A4), the vast majority (78%) of consistent employees at the firm
we study prefer 401(k) enrollment, as do between 49 and 86 percent of all employees. Adding an additional assumption about the direction of the relationship between
preferences and consistency based on the non-parametric evidence in Figure 1 allows
one to narrow these bounds to conclude that the fraction of all employees preferring
enrollment is somewhere between 49% and 78%. Imposing a stronger, but still plausible, assumption in the form of conditional consistency independence allows one to
point-estimate the fraction of employees preferring enrollment at 74%. Alternatively,
one can pin down the relationship between preferences and consistency by imposing
a specific behavioral model; the one we consider yields a lower estimate of population preferences (69%), but agrees with our matching estimator that the inconsistent
employees tend to prefer enrollment at a lower rate than the consistent employees.

5

Cardinal Welfare Metrics and Price Variation

Thus far we have focused exclusively on the identification of ordinal preferences, the
object directly identified by conventional revealed preference analysis. In this section,

29

we consider how the preference information recovered by our approach relates to
standard money-metric welfare measures. As is the case without framing effects,
constructing these welfare measures requires observing variation in the relative price
of the available options.
Let p ∈ R denote the price of option 1 relative to option 0. We assume the fraction
of individuals choosing option 1 is observed (or can be estimated) at any price p and
under each frame D ∈ {0, 1}, and denote it Y (p, D) = E[Yi (p, D)].
Holding price fixed, this model is isomorphic to the main model considered above.
Our identifying assumptions have simple analogs here, supposing that they hold at
any fixed price. In that case, the results we describe can be used to identify E[Yi∗ (p)],
for any fixed p.24 One can then trace out this measure of frame-free demand for
option 1 – that is, demand once framing effects have been eliminated and individuals
∗
choose according to Yi∗ (p) – at each p to obtain the frame-free demand curve, Y (p).
Denote the inverse of this demand curve by p∗ (Y ).
For simplicity, assume that decision-makers have quasi-linear preferences, Ui (Yi , xi ) =
u(Yi ) + xi for some numeraire xi , and budget constraint pYi + xi = zi . Given quasilinearity, we can express the money-metric difference in utility between the two options as Ui (1) − Ui (0) = p∗i − p, where p∗i denotes the reservation price for individual
´
i, p∗i ≡ ui (1) − ui (0). Social welfare is W (p, D) = i Ui (Yi (p, D), p).
∗
Knowledge of Y (p) alone is sufficient to answer a number of questions of interest.
Intuitively, the function substitutes for the standard demand curve used to estimate
equivalent or compensating variation. For example, one could evaluate the welfare
effect of assigning each individual with option 1 versus assigning each individual with
option 0 by integrating p∗ (Y ) over the population. As another example, one could
∗
use Y (p) to calculate the welfare effect on consumers of a price change that occurs
under a “refinement” frame (D∗ ) in which all individuals choose according to Yi∗ (p).
Conducting welfare comparisons when some choices are made under D = 0 or
D = 1 requires additional structure because these comparisons depend on the joint
distribution of Yi (0, p), Yi (1, p), and Yi∗ (p). We sketch one strategy for dealing with
this issue here:
(A8) For each individual i and frame D, there exists a unique reservation price,
pi (D), such that p < pi (D) ⇐⇒ Yi (p, D) = 1
(A9) There exists a common index i such that Yi (p, 0) > Yi0 (p, 0) ⇐⇒ Yi (p, 1) >
24

∗

We set aside the assumption of exactly which approach is used to identify Y (p) .

30

Yi0 (p, 1) ⇐⇒ Yi∗ (p) > Yi∗0 (p) for any i, i0 .
For example, these two assumptions would be satisfied under a model in which
decision-makers are consistent whenever the intensity of their preference exceeds
some threshold. Given this additional structure, we are guaranteed to have three
well-defined inverse demand curves: p(Y , 1), p(Y , 0), and p∗ (Y ), corresponding (re∗
spectively) to Y (p, 1), Y (p, 0), and Y (p). Note that frame monotonicity implies
p(Y , 1) ≤ p∗ (Y ) ≤ p(Y , 0) for any Y .
Assumptions (A8) and (A9) allow us to perform welfare comparisons for most
policy changes one might be interested in. These comparisons are possible because,
given the common index structure (A9), we know that at a given value of Y , the
values of the inverse demand curves p(Y , 1), p(Y , 0), and p∗ (Y ) correspond to the
three individual reservation prices pi (1), pi (0), and p∗i for the same individual. Thus,
recovering the three aggregate demand curves also allows us to recover the joint distribution of individual demand curves that is essential to the welfare calculation. The
following proposition describes two such welfare comparisons.
Proposition 5 Suppose that (A1)-(A4) hold at any price; (A8) and (A9) imply
(5.1) The welfare impact of an increase in price from p0 to p1 under the frame D = 0
´ Y (p ,0)
is W (p1 , 0) − W (p0 , 0) = −(p1 − p0 )Y (p1 , 0) − Y (p01,0) [p∗ (Ȳ ) − p0 ]dY
(5.2) The welfare impact of changing the frame from D = 0 to D = 1 is W (p, 1) −
´ Y (p,1)
W (p, 0) = Y (p,0) [p∗ (Y ) − p]dY .
Figure (3) illustrates these welfare calculations. Figure (3a) illustrates (5.1), the
welfare effect of increasing the price under D = 0. The price change reduces welfare
by inducing some of those who were consuming option 1 to switch to option 0, and
also by raising the price for those who continue to consume option 1. The welfare
calculation for a price change under D = 1 is analogous.
Figure 3b illustrates (5.2), the welfare effect of changing the frame from D = 0 to
D = 1, at some fixed price p. The welfare effect of changing the frame falls entirely
on inconsistent choosers in this model because these are the individuals who change
their behavior when the frame changes.25 The inconsistent choosers who prefer option
0 at price p are made worse off by a switch to D = 1 (the red shaded region in the
25

One could incorporate a cost of choosing against the frame into individual welfare, in which
case the consistent individuals would also matter for evaluating the change in welfare (see Goldin
and Reck, 2018).

31

Figure 3: Illustration of Welfare Calculations
(a) Change in Price in Frame D = 0

(b) Change frame from D = 0 to D = 1
Note:

This figure illustrates the welfare effects of a change in the price under a frame D = 0 (Sub-Figure a) and a change
in frame from D = 0 to D = 1 at fixed price p (Sub-Figure b). Decreases in welfare are represented as red-shaded
regions; increases are represented as grey-shaded regions.

graph) and the inconsistent choosers who prefer option 1 are made better off (the
black shaded region). The amount by which a given individual is better or worse off
is determined by p∗i − p. By integrating the estimated demand functions, one can
therefore determine whether welfare is higher under D = 0 or D = 1. The figure is
drawn for the case in which D = 0 leads to higher welfare at the specified price.

6

Conclusion

Recovering preferences when framing effects are present is a fundamental challenge in
behavioral economics. Our proposed approach is to maintain the revealed preference
assumption unless an apparent framing effect is observed. In that case, we relax the
revealed preference assumption as much as is required to accommodate the observed
framing effect, but no further. We show that this transforms the original preference
recovery problem into one of accounting for potentially endogenous selection into the
sub-population of consistent decision-makers. Applying this approach can lead to
novel insights even in well-studied settings like automatic enrollment into pension
plans, as illustrated in the empirical application.
More generally, our approach offers two main advantages to empirical researchers
when framing effects are present. First, it offers simple and practical tools to recover
preference information without having to commit to a specific behavioral model or set
of functional form assumptions. In the many settings in which our core assumptions
32

are plausible, Propositions 1 and 2 allow the researcher to estimate the preferences
of consistent decision-makers and to bound the preferences of the population. Pointidentifying population preferences raises additional challenges, and, depending on the
application, the empirical tools we developed might offer a path forward. But even
when our tools are unlikely to apply, understanding the preference recovery challenge
as a selection problem may still provide insight. For example, a researcher’s knowledge of an application may suggest that preferences and consistency are positively
correlated, which, in conjunction with Equation (2), would narrow the range of values
in which population preferences might fall.
The second benefit to our framework is that it makes model-based approaches to
preference identification more transparent. As long as the model satisfies our core
assumptions, our results shed light on which features of the model are driving the
identification, namely the behavioral and distributional assumptions that pin down
the relationship between preferences and consistency. Highlighting these features can
help researchers choose between models and assess the credibility of their results.
At the same time, our approach is subject to at least two important limitations.
First, the reduced form nature of our proposed tools might lure researchers into using
them in settings in which their identifying assumptions are not met. We have tried
to alleviate this concern by highlighting the types of conditions in which each tool is
valid in the context of specific behavioral models.
Second, we have assumed throughout that the presence of the framing effect is the
only reason that decision-makers’ choices fail to reflect their preferences. When other
biases cause choices to diverge from preferences, choices will not reveal preferences
even once the framing effect has been removed. In such cases, applying our approach
still yields the (counterfactual) choices decision-makers would make if the framing
effect had not been present, but the preferences inferred from those (counter-factual)
choices must be further adjusted before preferences can be recovered.

References
Abadie, Alberto. 2003. “Semiparametric Instrumental Variable Estimation of Treatment
Response Models.” Journal of Econometrics, 113(2): 231–263.
Allcott, Hunt, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2015. “Evaluating Behaviorally-Motivated Policy: Experimental Evidence from the Lightbulb Market.” American Economic Review,
105(8): 2501–2538.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Ivan Fernandez-Val. 2013. “ExtrapoLATE-ing: External

33

Validity and Overidentification in the LATE Framework.” In Advances in Economics and
Econometrics: Tenth World Congress. Vol. 3, , ed. Daron Acemoglu, Manuel Arellano
and Eddie Dekel, 401–434. Cambridge University Press.
Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin. 1996. “Identification of Causal Effects Using Instrumental Variables.” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 91(434): 444–455.
Benkert, Jean-Michel, and Nick Netzer. Forthcoming. “Informational Requirements
of Nudging.” Journal of Political Economy.
Bernheim, B. Douglas. 2009. “Behavioral Welfare Economics.” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 7(2-3): 267–319.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. 2009. “Beyond Revealed Preference:
Choice-Theoretic Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics.” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 124(1): 51–104.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Dmitry Taubinsky. Forthcoming. “Behavioral Public
Economics.” In Handbook of Behavioral Economics. Vol. 1, , ed. B. Douglas Bernheim,
Stefano DellaVigna and David Laibson, 401–434. Elsevier.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrey Fradkin, and Igor Popov. 2015. “The Welfare Economics of Default Options in 401(k) Plans.” American Economic Review, 105(9): 2798–
2837.
Bronnenberg, Bart, Jean-Pierre Dube, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse Shapiro.
2015. “Do Pharmacists Buy Bayer? Sophisticated Shoppers and the Brand Premium.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4): 1669–1726.
Brown, Jeffrey, Arie Kapteyn, Erzo Luttmer, and Olivia Mitchell. 2017. “Cognitive Constraints on Valuing Annuities.” Journal of the European Economic Association,
15(2): 429–462.
Bubb, Ryan, and Patrick L. Warren. 2017. “An Equilibrium Theory of Retirement
Plan Design.” NYU Law and Economics Research Paper No. 16-28.
Carroll, Gabriel, James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew
Metrick. 2009. “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1639–1674.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory
and Evidence.” The American Economic Review, 99(4): 1145–1177.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Søren Leth-Petersen, Torben H. Nielsen, and
Tore Olsen. 2014. “Active vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings
Accounts: Evidence from Denmark.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3): 1141–
1219.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2006.
“Saving for Retirement on the Path of Least Resistance.” In Behavioral Public Finance:
Toward a New Agenda. , ed. Edward McCaffery and Joel Slemrod, 304–353. Russell Sage
Foundation.
Conlisk, John. 1996. “Why Bounded Rationality?” Journal of Economic Literature,
34(2): 669–700.
Fischhoff, Baruch. 1991. “Value Elicitation: Is There Anything in There?” American
Psychologist, 46(8): 835–847.
Goldin, Jacob, and Daniel Reck. 2018. “Optimal Defaults with Normative Ambiguity.”

34

Working Paper.
Handel, Benjamin R., and Jonathan Kolstad. 2015. “Health Insurance for ”Humans”:
Information Frictions, Plan Choice, and Consumer Welfare.” American Economic Review,
105(8): 2249–2500.
Heckman, James J. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error.” Econometrica,
47(1): 153–161.
Heckman, James J., and Edward Vytlacil. 2007. “Econometric Evaluation of Social
Programs, Part II: Using the Marginal Treatment Effect to Organize Alternative Econometric Estimators to Evaluate Social Programs, and to Forecast Their Effects in New
Environments.” Handbook of Econometrics, 6: 4875–5143.
Heckman, James J., Hidehiko Ichimura, Jeffrey Smith, and Petra Todd. 1996.
“Sources of Selection Bias in Evaluating Social Programs: An Interpretation of Conventional Measures and Evidence on the Effectiveness of Matching as a Program Evaluation
Method.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93(23): 13416–13420.
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist. 1994. “Identification and Estimation of
Local Average Treatment Effects.” Econometrica, 62(2): 467–475.
Johnson, Eric J., Steven Bellman, and Gerald L. Lohse. 2002. “Defaults, Framing
and Privacy: Why Opting In-Opting Out.” Marketing Letters, 13(1): 5–15.
Johnson, Erin, and M. Marit Rehavi. 2016. “Physicians Treating Physicians: Information and Incentives in Childbirth.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
8(1).
Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 112(2): 443–477.
LeBoeuf, Robyn A., and Eldar Shafir. 2003. “Deep Thoughts and Shallow Frames: On
the Susceptibility to Framing Effects.” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 16(2): 77–
92.
Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia
in 401(k) Participation and Savings Behavior.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
116(4): 1149–1187.
Manski, Charles F. 1989. “Anatomy of the Selection Problem.” The Journal of Human
Resources, 24(3): 343–360.
Masatlioglu, Yusufcan, Daisuke Nakajima, and Erkut Y. Ozbay. 2012. “Revealed
Attention.” The American Economic Review, 102(5): 2183–2205.
Pocheptsova, Anastasiya, On Amir, Ravi Dhar, and Roy F. Baumeister. 2009.
“Deciding Without Resources: Resource Depletion and Choice in Context.” Journal of
Marketing Research, 46(3): 344–355.
Rubinstein, Ariel, and Yuval Salant. 2012. “Eliciting Welfare Preferences from Behavioural Data Sets.” The Review of Economic Studies, 79(1): 375–387.
Salant, Yuval, and Ariel Rubinstein. 2008. “(A, f): Choice with Frames.” The Review
of Economic Studies, 75(4): 1287–1296.

35

A

Derivations and Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1
To prove 1.1, note that by frame exogeneity, Y (0) ≡ E [Yi (0)|Di = 0] = E [Yi (0)].
By frame monotonicity, Yi (0) = 1 =⇒ Yi (1) = 1, so that Ci = 1. In addition,
Yi (0) = Yi (1) = 1 implies Yi∗ = 1 by the consistency principle. Therefore, Yi (0) =
1 =⇒ Ci Yi∗ = 1. Similarly, the consistency principle and the definition of Ci imply
that Ci Yi∗ = 1 =⇒ Yi (0) = 1. Therefore, we have Ci Yi∗ = 1 ⇐⇒ Yi (0) = 1, so we
can write
Y (0) = E[Ci Yi∗ ]
(6)
Following the same reasoning, it is straightforward to show
Y (1) = 1 − E [Ci (1 − Yi∗ )]

(7)
E[C Y ∗ ]

Substituting these expressions into the definition of Y c yields Y c = E[Ci ii] = E[Yi∗ |Ci =
1], where the second equality follows from the definition of a conditional expectation.
To prove 1.2, let α = p(Yi (0) = 1; Yi (1) = 0) denote the fraction of frame defiers
and note that p(Ci = 0) = p(Yi (1) = 1; Yi (0) = 0) + α. Note that α ≥ 0. It is
straightforward to show that under A1-A3,
E[Yi (0)] = p(Ci = 1)E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] + α

(8)

E[Yi (1)] = p(Ci = 1)E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] + p(Ci = 0) − α

(9)

Substituting these into the definition of Y C , we have
YC =
Subtract

1
2

p(Ci = 1)E[y ∗ |Ci = 1] + α
p(Ci = 1) + 2α

(10)

from both sides of (10) to obtain
YC −

p(Ci = 1)(E[y ∗ |Ci = 1] − 12 )
1
=
2
p(Ci = 1) + 2α

(11)

In addition, subtracting E[y ∗ |Ci = 1] from both sides of (10) yields
Y C − E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] =

α(1 − 2E[y ∗ |Ci = 1]))
2α + p(Ci = 1)

(12)

This expression gives the bias in Y C when frame monotonicity fails. To complete
the proof, note that by (11), Y C > 12 =⇒ E[y ∗ |Ci = 1] > 21 , and then by (12),
E[y ∗ |Ci = 1] > 12 =⇒ E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] ≥ Y C . This proves Y C > 12 =⇒ E[Yi∗ | Ci =
36

1] ≥ Y C . Repeating these two steps with the inequalities reversed proves Y C <
1
=⇒ E[Yi∗ | Ci = 1] ≤ Y C . The proof follows from noting 11 implies Y C = 12 =⇒
2
E[Yi∗ | Ci = 1] = Y C .

Proof of Proposition 2
By the law of iterated expectations:
E[Yi∗ ] = E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1]p(Ci = 1) + E[Yi∗ |Ci = 0]p(Ci = 0)

(13)

We first assume frame monotonicity to prove 2.1. From (6), we have Y (0) = E[Yi∗ Ci ] =
E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1]p(Ci = 1). Also, from (6) and (7), we have Y (1) − Y (0) = p(Ci = 0).
Substituting these into (13) yields
E[Yi∗ ] = Y (0) + E[Yi∗ |Ci = 0](Y (1) − Y (0))

(14)

Proposition 2.1 follows from the fact that (14) is strictly increasing in E[Yi∗ |Ci = 0]
and E[Yi∗ |Ci = 0] ∈ [0, 1].
To prove 2.2, note that by (8) and (9),
p(Ci = 1) = Y (0) + 1 − Y (1) − 2α
E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] =

Y (0) − α
Y (0) + 1 − Y (1) − 2α

(15)
(16)

Note that (16) implies that consistent preferences are point-identified when the prevalence of frame defiers, α, is known. Substituting (15) and (16) into (13) yields
E[Yi∗ ] = Y (0) − α + E[Yi∗ |Ci = 0](Y (1) − Y (0) + 2α)

(17)

Because Y (1) − Y (0) + 2α = p(Ci = 0) ≥ 0, this expression is strictly increasing in
E[Yi∗ |Ci = 0].
For the lower bound, set E[Yi∗ |Ci = 0] = 0, which yields E[Yi∗ ] ≥ Y (0) − α.
This expression is decreasing in α, so we obtain a lower bound with the maximum
possible α. By (16), E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] ≤ 1 implies α ≤ 1 − Y (1). It follows that E[Yi∗ ] ≥
Y (0) − (1 − Y (1)), which is only binding when Y (0) − (1 − Y (1)) ≥ 0.
For the upper bound, set E[Yi∗ |Ci = 0] = 1 in (17): E[Yi∗ ] ≥ Y (1) + α. This
expression is increasing in α, so we obtain an upper bound by setting the maximum
possible α. By (16), E[Yi∗ |Ci = 1] ≥ 0 implies α ≤ Y (0).26 It follows that E[Yi∗ ] ≤
26

Combining insights from these two cases, it follows that α ≤ min{Y (0), 1 − Y (1)}. Which of
these two constraints is binding determines whether we obtain an upper or a lower bound for E[Yi∗ ].

37

Y (0) + Y (1), and this upper bound is binding whenever Y (0) + Y (1) ≤ 1.

Proof of Lemma 1
Throughout the proofs of Lemma 1 and Proposition 3 we suppress the notation for
conditioning on Xi = X, so that, for example, E[Yi∗ |X] ≡ E[Yi∗ |Xi = X].
To prove L1.1, note that Bayes Rule implies
p(Ci = 1|X)
p(Xi = X|Ci = 1) =
p(Xi = X)
(18)
p(Ci = 1)
In the proof of Proposition 1.1, we showed that p(Ci = 1) = Y (0)+1−Y (1) under
unconditional frame exogeneity (A2). Repeating the proof of Proposition 1 while
conditioning on X under conditional frame exogeneity (A3’) yields p(Ci = 1|X) =
Y (0, X) + 1 − Y (1, X). By the law of total probability, p(Ci = 1) = EX [Y (0, X) +
1 − Y (1, X)]. Substituting these two expressions into (18) yields p(Xi = X|Ci = 1) =
q(X)p(Xi = X).
The proof that p(Xi = X|Ci = 0) = s(X)p(Xi = X) is analogous.

Proof of Proposition 3
To prove 3.1, note that by the law of iterated expectations
E[Yi∗ ] = EX [E[Yi∗ |X]]

(19)

Repeating the proof of Proposition 1.1 while conditioning on X yields E[Yi∗ |Ci =
1, X] = Y C (X). Conditional consistency independence (A5) implies E[Yi∗ |X] =
Y C (X). Substituting this into (19) yields the desired result.
To prove 3.2, we begin by observing that
p(Yi∗ = 1; Ci = 0)
E[Yi∗ |Ci = 0] =
p(Ci = 0)
Applying the law of iterated expectations to the numerator yields
EX [p(Yi∗ = 1; Ci = 0|X)]
∗
E[Yi |Ci = 0] =
p(Ci = 0)

(20)

By the definition of conditional probability, we know that for any X
p(Yi∗ = 1; Ci = 0|X) = E[Yi∗ |Ci = 0, X] p(Ci = 0|X)
As above, conditional consistency independence (A5) implies E[Yi∗ |Ci = 0, X] =

38

E[Yi∗ |X] = Y C (X). Equation (20) then implies that
"

[Yi∗ |Ci = 0] = EX

#

p(Ci = 0|X)
Y C (X)
p(Ci = 0)

i =0|X)
= p(Xi = X|Ci = 0) = s(X) yields
Substituting the result from L1.2 that p(C
p(Ci =0)
the desired result.

Proof of Proposition 4
From A2”, we can write Y (D, Z) ≡ E [Y (D, Z) | Di = D, Zi = Z] = E[Y (D, Z)]. For
each fixed Z, the conditions are identical to those in Proposition 1.1. We thus obtain
E[Yi (0, Z)] = p(Yi∗ = Ci (Z) = 1) = E[Yi∗ | Ci (Z) = 1] p (Ci (Z) = 1).
By decision quality monotonicity (A7), we can divide the population into three
groups based on (Ci (1), Ci (0)): the always consistent (A) with Ci (1) = Ci (0) = 1;
the sometimes consistent (S) with Ci (1) = 1; Ci (0) = 0; and the never consistent (N)
with Ci (1) = Ci (0) = 0. Let πj denote the share of the population in each group for
j = A, S, N , and let E[Yi∗ |j] denote the fraction of each group preferring option 1.
Using the definitions of these groups, we can write:

Y (0, 0) = E[Yi∗ |A]πA
Y (0, 1) = E[Yi∗ |A]πA + E[Yi∗ |S]πS
so that

Y (0, 1) − Y (0, 0) = E[Yi∗ |S]πS

(21)

Following the same logic as in the proof of Proposition 1.1, it is easy to show that
p (Ci (Z) = 1) = Y (0, Z) + 1 − Y (1, Z). It follows that
p(Ci (0) = 1) = πA = Y (0, 0) + 1 − Y (1, 0)
p(Ci (1) = 1) = πA + πS = Y (0, 1) + 1 − Y (1, 1)
πS = Y (1, 0) − Y (0, 0) − (Y (1, 1) − Y (0, 1))

(22)

Dividing (21) by (22) yields the desired result.

∗
Proposition 5 First note that (A8) and (A9) ensure that a given level of Y (p, 0), Y (p, 1), Y (p)
corresponds to the reservation prices pi (0), pi (1) and p∗i for the same individual i, respectively. Second, note that normalizing ui (0) to 0, we have p∗i = ui (1), the welfare
of a given individual can be represented by Ui = (p − p∗i )Yi (p, D). Integrating this
quantity over two different prices at D = 0 and taking the difference gives (5.1), and
integrating at D = 1 and at D = 0 and taking the difference gives (5.2).


39

