NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFORMATION AND BARGAINING THROUGH AGENTS:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM MEXICO’S LABOR COURTS
Joyce Sadka
Enrique Seira
Christopher Woodruff
Working Paper 25137
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25137

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018, Revised October 2020

We would like to thank Sebastian Garcia, Andrea Fernandez, Sergio Lopez-Araiza, Enrique
Miranda, Isaac Meza, Diana Roman, and Monica Zamudio for superhuman re-search assistance,
Vince Crawford, Jonas Hjort and Bentley MacLeod for helpful discussions, and seminar and
conference participants at Cambridge, Columbia, Toulouse, ITAM, Monash, NYU - Abu Dhabi,
Oxford, Tinbergen, MIT/Harvard, George Mason, Maryland the Latin American Workshop on
Law and Economics, and the American Law and Economics Association for comments. All
errors are ours. We acknowledge financial support from the Government Partnership Initiative of
the Abdul-Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (JPAL) at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
the Economic Development and Institutions program funded by the UK government through UK
Aid, and the Asociacion Mexicana de Cultura. We also acknowledge crucial institutional,
operational, and human resource support from the Mexico City Labor Court and its president,
Darlene Rojas Olvera. The research reported in the paper was carried out with the approval of the
ITAM Institutional Review Board. The trial registration number is AEARCTR-0002339. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Joyce Sadka, Enrique Seira, and Christopher Woodruff. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Information and Bargaining through Agents: Experimental Evidence from Mexico’s Labor
Courts
Joyce Sadka, Enrique Seira, and Christopher Woodruff
NBER Working Paper No. 25137
October 2018, Revised October 2020
JEL No. K31,K41,O43
ABSTRACT
Well-functioning courts are essential for the health of both financial and real economies. Courts
function poorly in most lower-income countries, but the root causes of poor performance are not
well understood. We use a field experiment with ongoing cases to analyze sources of dysfunction
in Mexico’s largest labor court. Providing the parties with personalized outcome predictions
doubles settlement rates and reduces average case duration, but only when the worker is present
to receive the information. An intervention before plaintiffs contact a lawyer increases pre-suit
settlement. The experiment illuminates agency issues among plaintiffs with private lawyers. For
most workers, the treatment appears to improve welfare, as measured by discounted payouts and
ability to pay bills.
Joyce Sadka
Economics and Law Departments
Instituto Tecnologico Autonomo de Mexico
Mexico City
MX
jsadka@itam.mx

Christopher Woodruff
Queen Elizabeth House
University of Oxford
OX1 3TB
UK
and NBER
christopher.woodruff@qeh.ox.ac.uk

Enrique Seira
Centro de Investigación Económica
ITAM
Ave. Santa Teresa # 930
Mexico
enrique.seira@gmail.com

A data-appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25137

1

Introduction

Well-functioning courts underpin markets and constrain private power in developed economies,
but courts function poorly in most developing countries. Outcomes are unpredictable, parties are misinformed, and inefficient processes lead to slow decisions and large case backlogs
(Djankov et al. (2003)). In addition to raising concerns for justice, poorly functioning courts
undermine both the financial (Ponticelli and Alencar (2016)) and real (Boehm and Oberfield
(2020); Chemin (2020)) economies. The e↵ects of poorly functioning courts are increasingly
well documented, most convincingly through studies analyzing changes following the creation
of new institutions providing legal services for specific activities (Visaria (2009); Lichand and
Soares (2014)). However, as Boehm and Oberfield (2020) note, even “Newly created courts
tend to...accumulate backlogs over time” (p. 2009). Thus, while the existing literature provides
evidence on the importance of well-functioning legal institutions, it is much less informative on
how to improve the performance of existing institutions, or how to ensure the continued high
performance of the new institutions. This is due in part to a lack of rigorous empirical work
aimed at understanding the micro-analytics of court proceedings, and a particular paucity of
randomized experiments in courts (Greiner and Matthews (2016)).
To illuminate the causes of dysfunction in courts, we conduct a randomized experiment with
active cases in the Mexico City Labor Court (MCLC). The MCLC is responsible for enforcing
labor law for all private employers located in Mexico City. Most cases involve workers who
claim to have been involuntarily separated from their jobs by employers who then failed to make
severance payments to the workers as required under the labor law. Each year the court receives
more than 35,000 filings, but resolves less than 30,000 cases. The MCLCs growing case backlog
stems in part from its settlement rates, which are low in comparison to those of similar courts in
other countries. Taking a cue from the literature on bargaining under asymmetric information,
our experimental treatment provides parties with case-specific predictive outcomes, generated
from machine-learning models using data from 5,000 concluded cases. We use the experiment
to understand how the relationship between plainti↵s and their lawyers a↵ects the settlement
and progression of their cases through the court.
Mexico’s job-insurance system is based on severance payments made directly by firms to
dismissed workers. On paper, the law is straightforward and very favorable for Mexican workers. Dismissed workers are entitled to a minimum severance payments of 90 days’ wages and,

2

depending on circumstances, substantially more. Payments must be made even if the dismissal
is due to loss of business by the firm. However, while the law itself is generous, the framework for
enforcing the law disadvantages workers for at least three reasons. First, workers and firms are
often informal (Kumler, Verhoogen and Frias (2020)). Wages are paid in part or entirely in cash
and there is no formal written contract. In these circumstances, dismissed workers may find it
difficult to prove wage levels or even the existence of the labor relationship itself. Second, at the
time of hiring, firms often take actions that undermine the workers subsequent claim of unfair
dismissal. For example, firms may require the worker to sign an undated letter of resignation
as a condition of hiring. Third, while the payments from the unemployment insurance systems
used in most countries are made by the government, payments in Mexico are made directly
from the firm to the worker. Workers who win a judgment often face challenges in recovering payments ordered by the court from their former employers. The firms can avoid making
payments through a combination of transferring assets to other entities, firm bankruptcy, and
bribes. With the threat of avoiding payment, firms often negotiate much lower payments even
after the court rules against them. Indeed, administrative records show that that, more than
half of the time, workers winning a court judgment are unable to recover anything.
We demonstrate the relevance of these disadvantages by using the historical case files to
document a set of stylized facts about the functioning of the court. First, the historical data
show that plainti↵s receive, on average, only around half of the minimum 90-day compensation
called for in the law. Second, although the law stipulates that suits should be adjudicated within
three months, more than a third of the cases filed in the court between 2009 and 2012 remained
unresolved in early 2016. The backlog of cases is driven in part by low settlement rates: around
55 percent of cases are settled in Mexico, compared with 80 to 90 percent in higher-income
countries. Third, parties are overconfident: the sum of the two parties’ probabilities of winning
far exceeds 100 percent, and both the probability of winning and the expected size of the award
are optimistic, particularly on the plainti↵’s side, relative to predictions based on historical
cases. Fourth, plainti↵s have little knowledge of their legal entitlements. Moreover, even those
represented by private lawyers are surprisingly uninformed about the contents of their own
lawsuits. Finally, we show that although private lawyers file much larger claims, they do not
recover more than public lawyers. After accounting for fees, private lawyers actually recover
less than public lawyers.
Working with the court, we conduct an experiment in three phases, which di↵er in the point
3

at which we intervene in the process. In phase 1, we intervene in ongoing cases at any point
in the life of the lawsuit. We find that the information treatment increases settlement on the
day of treatment by 75 percent, and that settlements are more frequent in cases that are early
in the process. In phase 2, given the potential of earlier interventions to be more e↵ective, we
intervene in the first hearing of each case. Although there are more settlements at the first
hearing, we find that the e↵ect of the information treatment is of very similar magnitude. In
both the first and second phases, we find that the treatment is e↵ective only when the employee
is present at the hearing, and only in cases where the employee is represented by a private
lawyer.1 Administrative data from 42 months after treatment indicate that an additional 38
percent of the cases in both the control and treatment groups are settled after the day of our
intervention; however, the treatment e↵ect and the relevance of the employee receiving the
treatment directly remain constant over that time. The importance of the employee’s presence
for even long-run outcomes suggests that lawyers do not convey the information to their clients.
The persistence in the treatment e↵ect indicates that the intervention led to settlement of cases
that would not have been settled otherwise. Perhaps most importantly, data on case outcomes
from phase 1 and 2 show that the increase in settlements improves the outcomes for the typical
plainti↵. These patterns suggest that case trajectories are a↵ected by lawyer-plainti↵ agency
issues. Given this, in phase 3, we work with a sample of recently dismissed workers who come
to the court seeking information about their rights before they contract with a lawyer and
file a case. The treatment providing predicted case outcomes is again e↵ective in increasing
settlement, this time before a case is filed.
The results of the three experiments suggest that informational asymmetries between the
worker and her lawyer are one underlying cause of malfunctioning courts. A majority of plainti↵s
earn below the median wage and have modest levels of schooling; more than 80 percent are using
the court for the first time. Survey responses indicate that 38 percent of plainti↵s found their
lawyer on the sidewalk outside the court building, where many lower-quality lawyers find clients.
The workers are wildly overconfident about their chances of winning their lawsuit. We show
analytically that the incentives of the lawyers, who have information advantages, do not always
align with those of their clients even though private lawyers in the MCLC cases almost always
receive a share of the award collected by their plainti↵s. Di↵erences in the ability to diversify
1

Both the choice of lawyer and the presence of the employee at the hearing may be endogenous to outcomes.
However, the treatment is orthogonal to either. We discuss this issue in more detail below.

4

risk and discount rates lead to very di↵erent preferences over settlement options between the
plainti↵s and their lawyers. Lawyers also charge an initial fee that is generous relative to the
time required to file a suit, giving them incentives to file cases even when they have little
prospect of winning.
By 2020, almost 90 percent of both treatment and control cases in the first two phases were
resolved. This allows us to examine how treatment a↵ects the welfare of plainti↵s. Relative to
the control group, those in the treatment group are 6.7 percent more likely to have settled, 7.3
percent less likely to have lost a judgment, and 0.4 percent less likely to have won a judgment.
The additional settlements come mainly from cases with modest recovery amounts. When we
compare the net present value of the amount collected by plainti↵s in the treatment and control
groups, we find that the treatments improved the outcomes for the typical plainti↵. Though
making a precise statement about plainti↵ welfare is difficult for reasons we discuss in Section
7, surveys two months after treatment show that treated workers in Phase 3 are 7 percent less
likely to report not having enough food to eat or being unable to pay for basic services; reported
happiness is insignificantly higher with treatment.
Experiments in courts are uncommon. Greiner and Matthews (2016) review the small
number of randomized evaluations in the US legal system, finding 50 studies conducted between
1963 and 2015. Most of these examine mediation and alternative dispute resolution, though
a handful evaluate programs that a↵ect the use of lawyers. There are likewise very few legal
experiments in low-income countries.2 As a result, there is little credible evidence on the source
of delays and the e↵ect of di↵erences in rules and organizational structure. Indeed, given
the scarcity of diagnostic information about courts in developing countries, the stylized facts we
derive from extensive administrative records contribute to the literature on courts as institutions
for development.
The paper also contributes to the literature on experts and moral hazard. The most closely
related paper in this literature is Anagol, Cole and Sarkar (2017), who conduct an audit experiment in the Indian life insurance market. They show that agents use their informational
2
Two notable exceptions are Aberra and Chemin (2019), who provide access to lawyers to randomly selected
plainti↵s in cases involving land disputes, showing that legal assistance leads to greater investment in land held by
the plainti↵s; and Sandefur and Siddiqi (2015), who provide access to paralegals that lower the cost of accessing
the formal legal system in Senegal. They find that access to the formal legal system is particularly valuable for
those most likely to be disadvantaged in the customary legal system – for example, women who are suing men.
Kondylis and Stein (2018) use an abrupt change in procedural rules rolled out across six civil courts in Senegal
to identify the e↵ect of the reforms; the authors find that the new regulation resulted in in faster pre-trial phases
of cases.

5

advantage to induce clients to make decisions that are favorable to the agents’ interest. There
is much more extensive observational evidence that agents take advantage of superior information in diverse settings: Schneider (2012) in Canadian auto repair shops; Emons (1997) among
doctors in Switzerland; and Levitt and Syverson (2008) among real estate agents in the US.3
A third related literature is that of bargaining in the field. Courts are a disciplining device
for a bargaining game between the parties to the case. The canonical Rubinstein (1982) bargaining framework shows that bargaining outcomes are immediate and efficient where information is
complete, delays are costly, and parties bargain by making alternating o↵ers. However, the efficiency result breaks down if parties have asymmetric information (Myerson and Satterthwaite
(1983)). Bargaining may also break down or be delayed if parties are overly optimistic.4 Our
data indicate that both misinformation and excessive optimism are characteristics in the MCLC
cases. Most of the relevant bargaining literature constructs a game between two parties, but
court cases typically involve four parties: the plainti↵, the defendant and the lawyers representing either side. This distinction is relevant if agency is important. Note that, theoretically, the
addition of lawyers may result in either more- or less-efficient outcomes. Gilson and Mnookin
(1994) model court cases as prisoners dilemmas in which the parties play once and the lawyers
play repeatedly. As such, the lawyers may cooperate when the players would not, generating
more-efficient outcomes. Ashenfelter and Dahl (2012) examine data from arbitration cases involving emergency services unions and municipalities in New Jersey. In a context in which the
parties sometimes represent themselves and sometimes are represented by lawyers, they show
that lawyer-agents provide positive benefits to the party they represent.
Finally, we contribute to the literature on the e↵ects of information provision and decision
making. Information has been shown to improve decision making in wide range of other contexts: in the functioning of private markets (Andrabi, Das and Khwaja (2017); Belot, Kircher
and Muller (2019)), in schooling decisions (Jensen (2010); Dizon-Ross (2019)), and in political
institutions (Chong et al. (2015); Reinikka and Svensson (2011)). Our results focus on courts
and suggest that it is important that the information be conveyed directly to the party a↵ected
by the decisions.
3

Hubbard (1998) and Hubbard (2000) suggest that reputation is e↵ective in controlling agency in the automobile emissions testing market in California. However, in labor courts, the development of reputations among
lawyers is limited both because plainti↵s typically use the court only once, and because the plainti↵s seldom
connect with one another.
4
See Yildiz (2011) for a review of the related theory. Overoptimism may also reflect self-serving bias (Babcock
and Loewenstein (1997)).

6

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: We begin by describing the context and the
Mexican labor law in Section 2. We then detail the data from both administrative records
and surveys of litigants and lawyers in Section 3. Section 4 uses those data to describe a set
of stylized facts that motivate our experiment. Section 5 describes the experimental protocol
and Section 6 the results. We discuss the welfare implications of the results in Section 7 and
conclude in Section 8.

2

The Context

Gerard and Naritomi (2019) shows that while unemployment insurance is the most common
job-displacement insurance system in higher-income countries, severance payment programs are
the norm in Africa, Asia and Latin America. Mexico’s system of severance payments fits this
pattern. Mexican workers dismissed from their job for almost any reason are entitled to 90
days’ wages and often substantially more, with payments made directly by firms to workers.
Severance payment provisions in the private sector are governed by federal labor law in Mexico,
with adjudication of disputes in most industries assigned to state-level labor courts.5 We work
with the Mexico City Labor Court, the state court serving Mexico City. Each year, the MCLC
receives more than 35,000 new cases and concludes fewer than 30,000 cases. Its portfolio of
100,000 active cases is therefore not only large but growing.
Lawsuits filed by dismissed workers claiming they have not received severance payments
owed to them account for over 95 percent of MCLC filings. These cases are assigned to one
of 20 “subcourts” according to the industry in which the plainti↵ was employed. In the first
phase of the project, we worked with Subcourt 7, which deals mainly with firms in the retail
automotive and transport services industries. In phase 2, we expanded to four additional subcourts specializing in industries such as private education, security, restaurants, retail banking,
large department stores, and medical services. In phase 3, we worked with dismissed workers
approaching the court who might ultimately file a case assigned to any of the 20 subcourts.
We describe the Mexican Labor Law and the court procedures in more detail in Appendix
A. Plainti↵s may be represented by either private or public lawyers. Private lawyers typically
charge around 2000 MXP (USD 100) to file a case, and then receive 30 percent of any amount
recovered by the worker. Lawyers from the Public Attorney’s office are paid a fixed wage and
5

Disputes in a few “strategic” industries named in the Mexican constitution - oil and gas, pharmaceuticals
and auto manufacturing, for example are handled by a federal-level labor court.

7

do not charge their clients for services. Employers most often respond to a suit in one of three
ways: denying the existence of a labor relationship, o↵ering reinstatement, or claiming the
worker resigned voluntarily and producing a letter of resignation signed by the employee.6 High
levels of informality make it more difficult for plainti↵s to prove employment relationships and
easier for employers to hide assets. These strategies decrease the likelihood that workers who
win a judgment or collect the compensation the court awards them.
The parties reach a settlement in around 55 percent of the cases. Cases that settle usually
do so within a year of filing. In the absence of settlement, cases typically involve at least
six to eight hearings spread over several years. The hearings are conducted by administrative
assistants to the judge, but the judge of the subcourt makes all rulings, based on the written
record prepared by the assistants. Judgments within three years of filing are rare. Even when
workers win their suit, a large proportion of firms do not pay the judgment voluntarily. The
plainti↵s must then pursue seizure of assets through officers of the court. Firms have many
ways of avoiding asset seizure, for example by declaring bankruptcy or transferring assets to
another entity. In more than half the historical cases we code, workers winning the suit are not
able to collect any payment.
The challenges for workers arise from informality on several levels. Even workers employed
formally and registered with the Mexican Social Security Administration are often paid part
of their wages o↵-books and in cash (Kumler, Verhoogen and Frias (2020)). Workers will
generally only be able to recover based on the formal part of their wages. Firm assets are also
unregistered. Hence, the court cannot place liens on assets at the time of its ruling. Finally, the
process of notification is hampered by corruption at all stages (Aldeco Leo, Kaplan and Sadka
(2014)). Corruption is likely to be a particular issue at the asset-seizure stage, when the gain
from avoiding notification is clearest for the firms.

3

Data

We use both administrative records and survey data. We describe these data briefly here,
and in more detail in Appendix A. Through an agreement with the court, we had access to
the experimental case files and all of the historical case files from the court. The case files
register all the legally relevant information in the lawsuit. Given the scarcity of evidence on the
6

In a large range of low to mid-level jobs, entering employees are obliged to sign a letter of resignation (or a
”blank letter”) in advance. After firing, the firm adds a date to the letter.

8

functioning of courts, we view the construction of this data itself as a contribution of the paper.
We conducted the first phase of the experiment in Subcourt 7 between March and May,
2016 and the second phase in Subcourts 2, 7, 9, 11, and 16 between October 2016 and February
2017. In Phases 1 and 2, we intervened in case hearings where both parties had been notified
and were therefore obligated to attend the hearing. We conducted Phase 3 between May 2017
and August 2018 with a sample of dismissed workers who had not yet filed a case. In all three
phases, we carried out very brief surveys of the plainti↵s and lawyers when they were present,
though in Phase 2 the survey was very limited for logistical reasons.

3.1

Administrative data

Historical cases: We began by digitizing the historical case file data with the goal of building
predictive models of case outcomes, as we describe below. Given the duration of the average
lawsuit, we chose to focus on cases filed in 2011, the earliest year for which the court had digital
(pdf) records of all initial case filings. For phase 1, we digitized 2,158 lawsuits filed in 2011 or
2012, assigned to Subcourt 7, and concluded by December 2015. Only 55 of those cases were
concluded by a decision of the judge. In order to increase the sample of cases concluded by the
judge’s decision, we reached back to lawsuits filed in Subcourt 7 in 2009 and 2010, identifying
241 additional case files concluded by a judge’s decision. Together with the 2011 and 2012 cases,
we use these to calibrate the likelihood of winning and amount collected at trial.
For the second phase of the experiment, we used data from 1,000 concluded cases in each
of the five participating subcourts. We again selected cases filed in 2011 and concluded by
December 2015. We used all such cases from Subcourt 7, and a random sample of approximately
1,000 cases in each of Subcourts 2, 9, 11, and 16. Thus, the calculator for Phase 2 was calibrated
with historical data covering 5005 cases, all filed in 2011 and concluded by December 2015.7
Because we often intervened in the first hearing, the predictive model could only use information included in the initial filing. From the case filing, we capture the amount claimed
by the plainti↵, the date of the lawsuit, whether the lawyer is public or private, the worker’s
gender, age, daily wage, tenure at the firm, and weekly hours worked. The variables are defined
in Table A.1 in Appendix A. The basic formula for severance payment in the law is in large
part a function of the wage, tenure and hours worked.
7

For phase 1, the calculator used the full set 2,158 cases filed in 2011 and 2012 in Subcourt 7. We also include
the 2012 cases from Subcourt 7 in the descriptive data we present in the paper.

9

We also record the outcome of the suit and the termination date. Cases end in one of five
ways: being dropped by the plainti↵, expiring due to lack of activity, a judge’s ruling with no
collection, a judge’s ruling with a positive collection, or settlement between the parties. We
record the amount recovered by the worker at the end of the proceedings. The majority of the
cases with positive recoveries end in settlement. These are essentially always recorded at the
court, in order to assure that the plainti↵ does not continue to pursue the case. For cases ending
in judgments in favor of the plainti↵, the details of the judge’s decision are sometimes complex
and somewhat opaque and hence difficult to code. Therefore, we did not capture the details of
the decision in the dataset. Note that the amount the plainti↵ recovers is often di↵erent from
the amount awarded by the judge for three reasons: first, the law provides that if the judgment
is not enforced immediately, additional lost wages may be added to the award; second, the
parties may reach a post-judgment settlement, with the worker accepting a lower payment to
avoid the high costs of enforcing payment; and third, the worker may be unable to collect the
judgment found by the court, for example because the firm may have no assets that can be
seized by the time the judgment is enforced. We show below that in the experimental cases
where the plainti↵ won a judgment and collected a positive amount, the plainti↵ collected only
52 percent of the estimated reward.
In addition to providing the raw material for the prediction calculator, the historical data
allow us to construct a set of stylized facts about the functioning of the court. We discuss
what the data show with regard to trial length, frequency of settlement, amount collected, the
fraction of plainti↵s collecting awards, and so forth, in the next section.
Administrative data for ongoing cases: We code the initial case file data from all of the ongoing lawsuits involved in Phases 1 and 2 of the experiment. We use these data, combined with
the predictive model developed with the historical data, to predict the outcome of the lawsuit.
We also use the administrative records to determine who attended the hearing on the day of
the experiment, whether the lawsuit ended on that day through a settlement, and the amount
of money recorded for the settlement. We then repeat the data collection in 2020 around 42
months after the start of each phase of the experiment. Administrative records from late 2019
also allow us to see which of the Phase 3 workers sued or settled. As we noted, settlements are
generally registered in court files even for cases that settle out of court, because this is the only
way the firm can ensure that the employee does not continue to pursue the case.

10

3.2

Survey Data

We conducted surveys with parties involved in the experiment in all three phases. In Phases 1
and 2, these were short surveys at the hearing on the day of the experiment. We interviewed
the defendant’s lawyer and either the plainti↵, if she was present at the hearing, or her attorney
if she was not.8 The survey was conducted before parties were aware of their treatment status.
We asked about knowledge of the case file and the relevant law, expected case outcomes, and,
where the plainti↵ was present, demographic characteristics of the plainti↵.
In Phase 3, our sample is dismissed workers approaching the court in search of information.
Our survey in this phase collected demographic data similar to Phases 1 and 2, but we also
collected enough information about the worker’s employment to be able to use the calculator
to make predictions on the worker’s own case outcomes. In the first two phases, the relevant
employment data came from the case file itself, but in Phase 3, the workers had not yet filed a
case. In Phase 3, we also conducted telephone follow-up surveys two weeks and two months after
the initial contact. The follow-up surveys recorded actions taken after our initial interaction, and
elicited updated beliefs about case outcomes. For example, we asked workers if they had talked
to a lawyer, and if so, how they had found the lawyer(s). We also asked whether they had filed
a suit, settled, or decided not to pursue any claim, and collected a measure of life satisfaction
and difficulty in paying bills. We conducted at least one of the two telephone surveys with 89
percent of the sample. Survey questions and response rates from all three phases are discussed
in more detail in Appendix A.
Table 2 shows summary statistics of the cases for each of the three phases of the experiment.
We use the administrative data for the first two phases and the survey data from Phase 3. Table
A.2 in Appendix A summarizes data from the plainti↵ surveys. We find that 58 percent of
plainti↵s had at most lower secondary schooling. Plainti↵s with public lawyers were more likely
to attend the hearing: 29 percent of workers present at Phase 1 and 2 hearings had a public
lawyer, while only 10 percent of the case files in the experiment had a public lawyer. Of those
workers who showed up and had a private lawyer, most (nearly 82 percent) said their agreement
called for paying their lawyer a fraction of any award (30 percent, on average). Only 7.6 percent
were currently employed, and for those not currently working who were searching for a job, the
8

Lawyers for the plainti↵ and defendant were almost always present, but the plainti↵ was present only 18
percent of the time, and the defendant only 1.4 percent of the time. In the interest of time, we surveyed only
one individual from each side of the case. At least one party completed the baseline survey in 71 percent of the
cases. Survey compliance rates are detailed in Table A.3 in Appendix A.

11

average reported likelihood of finding a job in the next three months was 58 percent.

3.3

Construction of the calculator

In the experiment, we provide personalized predictions on important case outcomes to a subset
of plainti↵s and defendants. We developed simple, parsimonious, predictive models using the
historical case records. We considered several machine learning models, including boosting,
random forest, and regularization methods (e.g., ridge), along with OLS and logit. The construction of the calculator is described in detail in Appendix A, but we summarize the main
points here. As we noted, the calculator in Phase 1 was developed using 2,158 cases from Subcourt 7 and the calculator used in Phases 2 and 3 used 5,005 cases from the five participating
subcourts. The information we provided to the parties also changes somewhat in each phase,
as we describe below.
Our goal was to provide predictions on the expected amount collected by the plainti↵, the
duration of the case, and the probability the case ends by being dropped, expiring, judgment
with zero recovery, judgment with positive recovery, or settlement. The main explanatory
variables were all taken from the initial case filing: daily salary, hours worked per week, tenure
at the firm, gender of the plainti↵, type of lawyer, whether or not the worker was registered
with Social Security, if s/he was employed in a position of high trust (an ‘at-will’ worker), the
specific claims in the case (reinstatement, overtime, back pay, vacation pay, Christmas bonus,
statutory profit sharing, severance pay) and the industry of the firm. We used 70 percent of
the data to fit the models and the remaining 30 percent for testing. For each outcome, we
used cross-validation to choose the model and variables with the best fit on the testing sample,
measured by the correlation between predicted and actual values. Tables A.5 & A.6 in Appendix
A present goodness of fit measures for all the models and highlight those we selected.
The models allow us to produce individualized predictions that we shared with parties
present at the hearing in cases randomized into the calculator treatment. Figure 4 displays the
template we used in Phase 1. The template shows the minimum legal entitlement based on the
law if the plainti↵ were to win on the issue of unfair dismissal and the probability the case ends
in each of the five possible endings. For each of these five endings, we showed the expected
amount recovered by the plainti↵. We also show the expected payout across all endings and
the percentage of cases that were still unresolved after three years. In Phase 1, we provided
the same information sheet to both sides of the case. For Phase 2 we adjusted the format, first
12

to simplify the information so that it could be explained to parties more quickly, and second
to address concerns raised by court officials. In particular, conciliators working for the court
suggested that we provide the expected settlement amount, conditional on characteristics, and
then provide each side with data indicating the contingency they faced if they did not settle.
We developed separate templates for the plainti↵s and defendants which are shown in Figure
C.2. For the worker, the no-settlement contingency was the percentage of cases where workers
collected nothing, and for firms it was the average amount collected by plainti↵s that won
judgments. For the firms, we also showed the recovery amount implied by the law. In addition
to using the calculator as a treatment in the experiment, we use it to build a proxy of average
overconfidence, as we describe below.
There are several potential sources of bias in the predictions based on the historical data.
One is that our sample is composed of cases that were concluded when the models were estimated
in early 2016, and 29 percent of cases filed in 2011 and 2012 were still ongoing at that time. If
concluded and ongoing cases have di↵erent potential outcomes, then although our predictions
are unbiased for the concluded cases, they may be biased for a random sample of ongoing cases.
Note that if cases end in settlement, they almost always do so within the first 24 months after
filing. Since the historical data used in the calculator models cover more than 24 months after
filing, very few of the 29 percent of historical cases that were unresolved are likely to end in
settlement. Therefore, the projected average payment for cases ending in settlement - the most
important variable in the calculator information - is not a↵ected by this censoring issue.
For cases ending in other outcomes - being dropped, expiring, or ending in judgment, the
censoring is a larger concern. This potential bias was communicated to the parties when the
calculator information was provided. We perform two exercises to estimate how large any
bias might be. First, we compare characteristics of ongoing cases with those of the historical
cases used in the models. In Figure A.1 we show that the two sets of cases are similar on
observables.9 Second, we compare the characteristics of completed and continuing lawsuits
within the historical data. To do this we drew a random sample of 956 cases filed in 2011 that
were not finished by 2015. Figure A.2 shows that these 956 unresolved cases are very similar to
the completed cases used to develop the models.10
9
An exception is that the experimental cases have a higher rate of claiming reinstatement. This is likely
because cases demanding reinstatement typically have longer duration, so that they are less likely to be found in
a database of concluded lawsuits.
10
Recall that the sample used to estimate the model also included cases filed in 2008 and 2009 in Subcourt 7.

13

A second issue is that even if our predictions are unbiased on average, they are not unbiased
for any specific case. Parties may have information about the strength of their case that is
unobservable to us. Again, we made clear to the parties that the predictions were based on
average outcomes, and outcomes of individual cases will vary depending on the circumstances
of the case.
Finally, the calculator predictions will build in any biases contained in previous court decisions. For example, if workers collect less because they are unable to prove wage payments
made in cash or because firms avoid making payments ordered by the court, then the calculator will implicitly assume these conditions will continue to apply in the future. Although
reforming the institutions so that payments more faithfully reflect the law is a goal of current
judicial reforms, we believe the calculator faithfully reflected conditions that the parties in our
experiment faced. We view the situation as analogous to providing parents and children with
accurate information on returns to public schooling. This allows them to make better schooling
decisions given the actual quality of education, but may not directly lead to improvements in
the quality of schooling. In our case, the goal of the experiment is to uncover the sources of
inefficiencies in the courts to allow reformers to focus on the most critical issues while also
providing information with which plainti↵s can make more informed decisions given the way
the court actually functions.

4

Outcomes and Expectations: Stylized facts

We use the administrative and survey data from phase 1 to document a set of stylized facts about
the court. These serve as a motivation for the experiment we implement, but also provide some
insight on the functioning of the court. We note whether the source of data for each stylized
fact is the historical administrative data or survey data.
Fact 1. Plainti↵s receive little (Historical Data): The amount collected is only 20
percent of the amount claimed on average, and 50 percent of what the law mandates.
Figure 1 uses the sample of concluded cases to show the amounts claimed and recovered for
the 4 main outcomes: settlement, drop, judgment, and expiry. Both the historical data and
the Phase 2 case files suggest that around 55 percent of cases end by settlement, 20 percent
are dropped or expire and 25 percent end with a judge’s decision.11 For each outcome, the first
11

The percentages show on Figure 1 reflect the outcomes of the cases that were settled by 2015. As we note

14

bar shows the average amount of money claimed by the plainti↵. The second bar shows the
estimated minimum compensation by law based on the details of the cases. We include items
stipulated by current law: severance pay of 90 days at the stated wage, one year of end-of-year
bonus and vacation pay, and a tenure bonus mandated for unfair dismissal of up to twice the
minimum wage for 12 days per year worked. The third bar shows the amount of money collected,
on average, including zeros where the plainti↵ did not collect anything. The final bar shows the
average amount collected conditional on collecting a positive amount. The amount collected
is zero in the cases where the lawsuit is dropped, the time expires, the lawsuit is lost, or the
lawsuit is won but the plainti↵ is unable to collect anything from the defendant. In cases ending
with a judgment the worker recovers a positive amount only 24 percent of the time. For either
settlements or judgments, the amount received is a small percentage of the amount claimed.
In the 24 percent of court judgments where the worker recovers a positive payment, she
receives on average 170 percent of the minimum legal compensation for her case and 37.5
percent of her claim. Figure 1 shows that in expected value, plainti↵s recover less than the
minimum compensation according to the law and only 8 percent of their claim in a court
judgment. As a result of low recoveries, in a significant percentage of cases with private lawyers,
the plainti↵’s receives negative (discounted) payo↵s. Private lawyers typically charge a fee of
around MXN$2000 (USD 100) to file a case and receive 30 percent of any amount collected
by the plainti↵. Figure C.4 shows realized recoveries from our 5,005 historical casefiles. After
subtracting filing and contingency fees, around 40 percent of cases filed by private lawyers have
a negative realized return. The majority of the filings with negative net recovery are cases that
are either judgments without collection or cases dropped or expired. However, around 7 percent
of the settlements are also for amounts that imply a negative net present value for the plainti↵.
Fact 2. Long suit duration (Historical Data): 30 percent of trials started in 2011 had
not finished by December 2015. Even conditional on reaching a settlement, the average duration
is almost 1 year.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of case length for concluded cases by type of case ending.
Even conditional on being concluded in December 2015, cases ending in judgment take 2.4 years
on average. Given that many of the 30 percent of cases filed in 2011 and still open in 2016 are
later, 30 percent of the cases filed in 2011 or 2012 were unresolved at the end of 2015. These unresolved cases
are very likely to end either in judgment or by being dropped / expired. The percentages in the text account for
this censoring.

15

likely to end in a judgment, the unconditional average is much higher. Settlements occur, on
average, 10 months after filing. Moreover, settlement rates are low by international comparison.
Only around 55 percent of MCLC cases are settled. By way of comparison firing disputes are
settled after filing in 79 percent of the cases in Australia, in 80 percent of the cases in the United
States, and in 90 percent of the cases in Sweden (Ebisui, Cooney and Fenwick (2016)).
The long delays and low settlement rates help to explain the large backlog of cases in the
court. Delay has direct costs in the form of court sta↵ time, lawyer fees and the opportunity
cost of litigants’ time. But delay also harms the parties if, as is likely the case, the plainti↵s
discount the future at a higher rate than the defendants. Because awards result in payments
from the party with a lower discount rate (the firm) to the party with the higher discount rate
(the plainti↵), delay results in a collective welfare loss to the two parties. These delays represent
pure efficiency losses.
Fact 3. Inflated expectations (Survey data): The subjective probabilities of winning for
plainti↵s and defendants (in the same case) sum to 1.4712 , indicating aggregate overconfidence.
There is average overconfidence relative to the calculator’s prediction as well.
Excessive optimism of the parties may result in there being no settlement that is acceptable
to both parties, even in cases where settlement would be possible with more realistic expectations.13 We asked parties present at the hearing the likelihood they would win the case. We
also asked, conditional on the plainti↵ winning, what amount would be paid. In Phases 1 and 2,
the average expected probability of winning reported by plainti↵s is 0.79 and 0.80, respectively,
while for firm lawyers it is 0.68 in phase 1 and 0.40 in Phase 2. These probabilities sum to 1.47
and 1.20 in the two phases, respectively. Data from the Phase 3 surveys of workers approaching
the court suggests that the overoptimism at least initially comes from workers themselves: prior
to beginning the process, workers’ stated probability of winning was 89 percent.
By comparison, the probability of the worker winning predicted by our calculator in the
same cases is 41 percent in phase 1 and 33 percent in Phase 2. In Phases 1 and 2, there are also
large di↵erences in the expected amount of the award conditional on winning. Both the worker
and her lawyer estimate average amounts more than twice those of defendants. We can build a
12
This is the measure of overconfidence used by Yildiz (2003) to explain delay or conciliation in a theoretical
bargaining model.
13
Yildiz (2011) shows that optimism alone is not enough to explain bargaining delays in a static model.
However, excessive optimism can lead to an empty contracting zone so that, in the absence of learning, settlement
does not occur even when it be efficient in the absence of optimism.

16

proxy of overconfidence as the di↵erence between the subjective expectation and the calculator
prediction. Figure C.5 in Appendix C plots the distribution of overconfidence for di↵erent
parties for peso amounts conditional on winning and probabilities of winning, and Table C.5
in Appendix C shows that, in Phase 1, plainti↵s and plainti↵ lawyers are equally overconfident
both with regard to the probability of winning and the expected amount recovered.
Fact 4. Misinformation (Survey data): Only one-third of plainti↵s understand their
main legal entitlement. Only half know what they are asking for in their own suit.
The main legal entitlement for unfair dismissal is 90 days severance pay, a right so fundamental that it is enshrined in the Mexican Constitution and taught in elementary schools.
However, Panel (b) of Figure 3 indicates that only 27 percent of plainti↵s responding to the
survey know the number of days covered by this entitlement. Even more strikingly, the plainti↵s often do not know what they are asking for in their own suit. In the survey, we asked
plainti↵s to: “... mark the items you are asking for in your suit among the following...”, listing:
Constitutional payment, reinstatement, overtime, holiday bonus, Sunday bonus, and insurance.
We assess accuracy by comparing the responses to the case file. Panels (c) to (f) of Figure 3
show the proportion of time the plainti↵s responded correctly to questions regarding elements
of their claim. We see that between 20 and 50 percent of respondents answered each element
incorrectly. Knowledge of both the law and the case increases in the level of education. Figure
3 also shows that plainti↵s represented by private lawyers are significantly less knowledgeable
about the content of their cases than those represented by public lawyers.
Fact 5. Private lawyers file higher claims, but do not recover more (HD): Controlling for observables, private lawyers ask for 86 percent more than public lawyers, but win no
more. After paying lawyer fees, the average plainti↵ therefore recovers much less with a private
lawyer compared with a public lawyer.
The 100 USD fee private lawyers charge upfront far exceeds the marginal cost of filing a
standard case. This gives private lawyers an incentive to inflate claims in order to convince
workers to file a suit. With regard to case outcomes we find that, conditioning on five basic
variables coded from the initial filing14 , private lawyers ask for 86 percent more, on average. But
the ratio of the amount their clients recover to the amount demanded is 5.7 percent lower for
14

The variables are: gender, at-will worker, tenure, daily wage, weekly hours

17

private lawyers. The result is that the average recovery is insignificantly lower (by 0.5 percent)
for private lawyers. We verify that this is the case in Table C.1.
While the amount recovered is the same for public and private lawyers, plainti↵s receive
all of the recovered amount with a public lawyer, and only about 70 percent of the recovered
amount with a private lawyer. Hence, plainti↵s with public lawyers receive much larger payouts
than plainti↵s with private lawyers, conditioning on characteristics. Of course, these data are
only descriptive, and we make no attempt to adjust for the endogenous selection of lawyers
beyond the five control variables described above.

5

Experimental Intervention

The stylized facts presented above show an environment in which workers are uninformed about
their legal entitlements and their own lawsuit, and parties to the case are overconfident on
average. Our experiment is designed to address a fundamental question: Given these conditions,
does the provision of personalized statistical predictions increase settlement rates?

5.1

The treatment

Each phase of the experiment compares the e↵ects the provision of statistical predictions of case
outcomes against a control group. During the experimental window in Phases 1 and 2, hearings
for which both parties were formally notified were assigned to either the treatment arm or the
control group. In the third phase, individuals were assigned to treatment or control based on the
day they approached the court. We describe the treatments here, and also a describe a placebo
treatment that was implemented in Subcourt 7 during a later period and that was designed to
show that experimenter e↵ects are not driving outcomes.
The Calculator: Subjects in the treatment arm received a personalized prediction of their
case’s expected outcomes based on the statistical model described above and the covariates of
their own case. The predictions were presented in a single sheet of paper like the one shown
in Figure 4, which was used for Phase 1.15 . We extracted the data needed to customize the
calculator predictions from the initial filing (Phases 1 and 2) or from a survey (Phase 3). The
data were typed into a user interface. This was done in the presence of the parties in Phase
15
The format and content change somewhat in Phases 2 and 3. Examples of those information sheets are shown
in Appendix C, Figures C.2 and C.3

18

1, but for logistical reasons, away from the parties in Phases 2 and 3. The predictions were
then printed and given to all of the parties present at the hearings in phases 1 and 2, and to
the worker in Phase 3. A highly trained enumerator working for the research team spent about
5 minutes explaining to the parties the meaning of the numbers. The enumerators explained
that these were only statistical approximations and that they were based on concluded cases
from historical records. Enumerators gave no additional legal advice. Where the treatment was
administered at a hearing, after explaining the calculator information, the enumerators asked
the parties if they wanted to delay the start of their hearing for a few minutes to negotiate with
the assistance of a court conciliator.
Placebo: 13 months after the end of the treatments in Phase 1 of the project, we implemented
an additional treatment arm in Subcourt 7. We were concerned that simply making parties
aware of the court’s conciliation services, or that the presence of research assistants and the
carrying out of surveys, might change the behavior of the parties. With this in mind, we
implemented a “placebo” treatment in which we provided a leaflet (see Appendix C Figure
C.9) describing the role of conciliators in the court process. The leaflet was provided in format
similar to the calculator information, but rather than quantitative predictions it simply said:
“Do you know that you could resolve this conflict today? Conciliation is fast, free, confidential
and impartial. Subcourt 7 has conciliators. Ask for help!”. If a party receiving the placebo
treatment asked to talk with the conciliators, our enumerators showed them where they were
situated.

5.2

Implementation

The first phase of the experiment started in Subcourt 7 on March 2, 2016 and continued daily
for 12 weeks. The “subcourt” is not a single courtroom, but rather a room with a waiting area
and eight counters conducting simultaneous hearings. Subcourt 7 manages about 55 hearings
per day. Each night the court gave us a list of hearings scheduled for the following day, along
with their notification status. We worked with the subset of hearings for which both parties
were duly notified and therefore required to be present. Among the 20 case files meeting this
criterion on a typical day, we excluded hearings scheduled to start at the court’s opening hour
of 9 AM because the court did not want to delay the start time of the first hearings of the day

19

for fear of causing cascading delays through the day.16 Note that cases are assigned to hearing
times randomly, so our agreement not to consider 9 AM hearings does not compromise the
validity of the experiment. On a typical day, this reduced our sample by around 1.5 cases. In
what follows we focus on the remaining sample of roughly 18.5 cases per day. In the first phase,
the sample cases were at di↵erent stages of the process - that is, not all were new suits.17
After receiving the list of cases for the following day, we randomized the eligible cases in
equal proportions to the treatment and control group.18 Control cases followed business as
usual, except for the surveys we administered. Each morning we set up a survey table and a
calculator module in the waiting area just outside the hearings counters. The hearings were
displayed on a screen and parties were called up by the subcourt judge’s assistants. Except
for the 9 AM hearing slot, the start time of hearings is typically delayed, and we carried out
surveys and treatments during parties’ waiting time.
Table 1 shows details of the treatments. We began by administering the baseline survey.
The survey was conducted blind to the experimental assignment for both the parties and our
enumerators. We were able to isolate the survey area from the calculator treatment area, and
so avoid contamination, because our sample was only about 18 cases per day. All the parties
present were asked to complete the survey, but compliance was optional and in about 70 percent
of the hearings, at least one party completed the survey.19 Treatment status was revealed after
the baseline survey, and parties were channeled to their assigned experimental condition and
given the appropriate treatment protocol described above.
The implementation of the experiment di↵ered slightly in Phase 2. First, randomization
was at the case level in Phase 1 and at the day level in Phase 2. This change was made for
logistical reasons, given that during the Phase 2 we were working with a larger number of the
subcourts. The second is we intervened in cases at all stages of the process during Phase 1, but
16

On occasion, there were in excess of eight cases arriving for 9 AM hearings. In these instances, we were able
to include some hearings scheduled at 9 AM in our sample.
17
The experiment in phase 1 also included a second treatment arm, in which parties were referred to the court
conciliator. We focus here exclusively on the calculator treatments, leaving the conciliator treatment to future
work.
18
34 of the 705 phase 1 cases had more than one hearing during the experimental window. We were not able
to determine that a case was coming into the experimental sample for a second time, and hence the case was
again randomized into treatment or control. For the analysis, we delete the data from the second occurrence of
any case, and define the treatment status as the assignment the first time we interacted with the case.
19
In Phase 1, those completing the survey were told that they would be asked to complete a followup survey
after their hearing and were informed they would receive a prize if they did. However, compliance with the posthearing survey was much lower, as parties did not want to stay after their hearing ended. We do not use these
post-hearing survey data for any of the main analysis, though it is included in some of the additional analysis
shown in the appendix.

20

focused on cases holding their first hearing in Phase 2. All first hearings are held on Fridays.
Otherwise, the protocol was changed only slightly from Phase 1.
We randomize across Fridays in each of the 5 subcourts during the experimental window.
To save time, we shortened the survey and we pre-filled and pre-printed the calculator. The
subcourts did not agree to allow us to delay the hearings, so if after receiving the calculator
the parties wanted to negotiate with one another, they themselves had to request a delay in the
hearing to sit with the court conciliator.
The placebo treatment was implemented in ongoing cases, with hearings Monday through
Thursday, in Subcourt 7 during the phase 2 experimental window. For convenience, we randomized the placebo at the bi-weekly level with cases during two weeks given the placebo treatment
daily and cases in two adjacent weeks serving as a control group without any intervention. For
both groups we coded the variables in the case file and recorded whether there was a settlement
on the day of the hearing.

5.3

Integrity of the experiment

Table A.3 in Appendix A shows treatment and survey compliance rates for the first two phases
of the experiment. We define compliance as the parties being present and willing to receive the
treatment. The table shows compliance for each party and at the case level. At least one party
received the treatment in 80 percent of cases in phase 1 and 87 percent in Phase 2. We estimate
the intention to treat (ITT) in all reported results. Table A.4 in the Appendix C shows that
the variables are well balanced across the experimental groups in both phases: only 6 out of 23
tests are significant, 2 at the 5 percent level and 4 at the 10 percent level.

6

Results

The historical data and survey responses show that plainti↵s are overconfident and uninformed
about the law and even their own case. Settlement rates are low and case durations are long.
Our intervention aims to understand if there is a connection between these two sets of facts:
If we increase information and reduce overconfidence, do we observe an increase in settlement
rates?

21

6.1

E↵ects on settlement

Given that treatment is randomized, we estimate the causal e↵ect of treatment by estimating
the following equation by OLS:

yit = ↵t +

tj Tij

+ Xi + ✏it

(1)

The constant ↵t estimates the mean for the control group, while Tj indicates assignment to
the calculator treatment arm. Thus,

t

estimates the ITT e↵ect at a given point in time t. We

estimate separate regressions for each t, with t indicating the day of the hearing or 42 months
after treatment (the latter measured in January 2020 for Phase 1 and July 2020 for Phase 2),
or two months after treatment in Phase 3. Xi is a vector of controls for case characteristics,
including subcourt dummies. Finally, since the e↵ect may di↵er according to which parties
received the treatment, we also interact the two treatment arms with an indicator for whether
the employee was present (EP) when we delivered the treatment, while controlling for EP itself.
In Phase 2, we add subcourt fixed e↵ects.
The first six columns of Table 3 focus the short-term outcome of same-day settlement.
The dependent variable is a dummy for whether there was a settlement on the day of the
intervention.20 The first two columns of Table 3 use data from Phase 1 of the experiment;
columns 3 and 4 use data from the second phase of the experiment; and column 5 combines data
from the first two phases. Column 1 shows that 6 percent of the control cases in Phase 1 settle
on the day of the hearing, while the settlement rate of the treatment group is approximately 5
percentage points higher. The treatment e↵ect is significant at the five percent level.
Column 3 shows that in the second phase of the project, 16 percent of the cases settled on
the day of the hearing. Recall that the second phase was conducted with cases holding their
first hearing, and the higher settlement rate likely reflects this fact.21 However, the e↵ect of the
calculator treatment is similar in magnitude to that in the first phase: settlement rates on the
day increase by 3.9 percentage points in the treatment group compared with control, an e↵ect
that falls just below the .10 significance level.
Columns 2 and 4 show our second main result: the treatment e↵ect occurs only when the
20
We use a linear probability model throughout, but the results are robust to other specifications. Column 1
of Table C.6 reports the results of column 5 using a probit specification to show robustness.
21
Indeed, regressing a dummy variable indicating settlement on treatment using the combined Phase 1 and
Phase 2 data shows that there is no di↵erence in settlement rates in the two phases once we control for the age
of the case at the time of treatment.

22

employee is present. In these regressions, we interact treatment with a variable indicating the
plainti↵ herself was present, while also including a variable indicating that the plainti↵ was
present. First, note that in both Phase 1 (column 2) and Phase 2 (column 4), settlement on
the day is much more likely when the employee is present. In the control group, 19 percent of
the Phase 1 cases and 27 percent of the Phase 2 cases are settled on the day of the intervention
when the employee is present. But treatment increases settlement rates by 15.5 percentage
points in Phase 1 (0.026 + 0.129) and 14.1 percentage points in Phase 2 when the employee is
present. The joint e↵ect of the treatment and the treatment / employee present variables are
significant at just below the 5 percent level in Phase 1, but not quite at the .10 level in Phase
2. Moreover, the calculator treatment in either phase when the employee is not present is close
to zero and highly insignificant particularly in the second phase (row 1 in columns 2 and 4).22
The e↵ect of the treatment when the employee is present increases settlement rates by enough
to significantly close the gap with those of developed countries referenced above.
The Phase 2 results provide a replication within the experiment, and the similarity of results
in Phases 1 and 2 is reassuring. Combining the samples increases statistical power. We do that
in Column 5 using the specification from columns 2 and 4. Not surprisingly, we find very similar
treatment e↵ects, with the treatment - employee present interaction e↵ect now itself significant
at the 5 percent level, and the e↵ect of the calculator when the employee is not present remaining
very close to zero.
The regressions in the first five columns measure the e↵ect of treatment on immediate
settlement. The results suggest that lawyers do not act on the calculator information in the
absence of their client. But might they share the information with their client after the hearing,
producing a delayed e↵ect on settlement? The court’s administrative records allow us to track
cases over time. Column 7 shows the e↵ect of treatment around 42 months after treatment in
December 2019/January 2020 for Phase 1 and July 2020 for Phase 2. The 42-month window
allows for several additional hearings in the case, and, indeed, is after almost 90 percent of cases
are resolved.
Our third main result is that the e↵ect of treatment does not change materially at any
point up to 42 months after the intervention, even though the number of cases settled overall
22
Table C.3 in Appendix C examines balance in key variables in the subsample of cases where the employee is
present. Table C.4 in the Appendix C tries to predict EP using case characteristics with mild success. Employees
are more likely to attend in cases with public lawyers and when they had a long tenure at the firm, and less likely
to attend when they worked longer hours at the firm.

23

increases substantially. Focusing first on cases where the employee was not present at the
hearing, comparing column 5 with column 7, we see that in the control group, the settlement
rate increases from 11 percent to 44 percent. Meanwhile, the e↵ect of the calculator when the
employee was not present (row 2) remains a fairly precisely estimated zero (and, indeed, if not
slightly negative). Where the employee was present to receive the treatment, the treatment
e↵ect also remains almost unchanged over time. The 13 percentage point e↵ect on the day of
the hearing drops (insignificantly) to 11 percentage points after 42 months.
Treatment is random conditional on the presence of the employee at the hearing, but we
might be concerned with the endogeneity of employee presence itself. While this is fundamentally an external validity issue (since treatment is random conditional on the plainti↵’s
presence), it is relevant for how we interpret the null treatment e↵ect when the employee is
not present. Linking this finding to plainti↵-lawyer agency issues implies that settlement rates
would have been higher had the employee been present in the subset of cases where she was
not present. We might be concerned that plainti↵s are present when there is potential for the
case to be settled, and not present when there is little potential for settlement. However, the
long-run follow-up data suggest that the plainti↵’s presence on the day is not determinant of
settlement in the control group. First, among cases in the control group where the employee
was present on the day, the e↵ect of the employee’s presence dissipates over time; 42 months
after treatment, the e↵ect in the control group is no longer significant (row 2, column 7 of Table
3). Second, among the control group cases where the employee was not present on the day, an
additional 33 percent of the cases settled over the following 42 months. Taken together, the
results imply that neither the presence nor absence of the plainti↵ on the day of the intervention
determined settlement in the longer run among the control group cases. On the other hand,
settlement in the treatment group was a↵ected by the presence of the employee, both on the
day of treatment and in the longer run.
To address any residual concerns with the endoegeneity of the plainti↵’s presence, in column
6 we use a control function approach (Wooldridge (2015)), using settlements on the day of
treatment as the outcome.23 Employees are more likely to be present when their hearings are
scheduled for one of the first two hearing times (9:00 or 9:30) or the last hearing times (12:00
or 12:30). Hearing times are assigned to cases randomly, and we find that a dummy variable
23

Wooldridge (2015) shows that the control function approach is equivalent to instrumental variables when
all specifications are linear, but has advantages when the first stage is non-linear and the second stage includes
interaction terms. Both of these hold in our case.

24

indicating the two early / two late hearing times is highly significant in predicting employee
presence.24 The results indicate that the control function variable itself is significant at the 5
percent level, but the control function has little e↵ect on the magnitude and significance of the
interaction between employee presence and treatment.
In Phase 3 of the experiment, we provide the calculator to all of the dismissed workers in
the treatment group. Recall that our sample for Phase 3 is dismissed workers approaching the
court seeking information. Column 8 shows the treatment on settlement in this sample prior to
filing a case. Note that almost two in five (39 percent) of the control group in Phase 3 settle
their case by two months after they come to the court. The calculator nevertheless significantly
increases settlement: an additional 6.4 percent of workers assigned to receive the calculator
treatment settle before filing. This represents 10.4 percent of the 61 percent of workers who
would not have settled without treatment, an e↵ect size only slightly smaller than the e↵ect
when the plainti↵ was present in Phases 1 and 2.
Collectively, the results from Phases 1 and 2 suggest that the lawyers do not share the
calculator information with clients. The historical and survey data give us reason to suspect
that agency issues might be particularly relevant in cases with private lawyers. In Table 4, we
separate plainti↵s according to whether they are represented by a private or public lawyer. We
repeat the regressions in columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 for each type of lawyer. The results show
that the calculator has an e↵ect only when the plainti↵ is represented by a private lawyer.25 In
cases where the plainti↵ is represented by a private lawyer, the calculator treatment increases
settlement by 19 percentage points when the plainti↵ is present, and not at all when the plainti↵
is not present. Both of these outcomes change only slightly 42 months later. Moreover, for the
control-group cases represented by private lawyers, the e↵ect of employee presence drops from
14 percent to 5 percent over the 42 months, suggesting again that the presence of the employee
on the day of the experiment is not in itself determinant of longer-run outcomes in the case.
Meanwhile, the treatment has no significant e↵ect on settlement in the much smaller sample of
plainti↵s represented by public lawyers. That agency underlies this pattern is also suggested
by the data on Figure 3, which shows that plainti↵s using private lawyers are significantly less
24

The first stage regression is shown on Table C.6. We might worry that the time of the hearing a↵ects
settlement for reasons other than the plainti↵’s presence. We can not rule this out, though we note that in the
control group, the time-of-hearing dummy does not significantly predict settlement when the employee is not
present (p=0.65).
25
As with the employee being present, the choice of lawyer is endogeneous, but the treatment is orthogonal to
the type of lawyer.

25

informed about the contents of their case than are plainti↵s using public lawyers.
One concern is that the parties may believe the calculator information is provided by experts,
and so simply agree to settle for the amount presented to them. Figure C.6 in Appendix C shows
the ratio of the agreed settlement to the calculator predicted settlement for all cases ending in
settlement. We find that only 29 percent of settlements in the treatment group are within
25 percent of the calculator prediction. This is indeed higher than the 24 percent of controlgroup settlements that fall within this band, but nevertheless suggests that the calculator served
only as a guide for initial bargaining. Figure 5 shows the distribution of calculator predictions
among cases that settle in the treatment and control groups. The figure shows that the increased
settlements come disproportionately from cases with modest predicted settlement amounts.
We read the collective results as indicating that plainti↵-lawyer agency issues are important
in this context. Private lawyers appear not to transmit evidence to plainti↵s who are not present
to receive the information directly. Of course, it is possible that lawyers do not explain the
calculator to their clients because they are unable to recall the meaning of the data provided
on the sheet. Given the simplicity with which the data are presented, we find this unlikely.
However, even if the failure to pass on the information to their clients simply reflects the difficulty
lawyers have in explaining the calculator, the lack of a treatment e↵ect when the plainti↵ is
not present indicates that the plainti↵ does not fully trust her lawyer to make decisions on her
behalf.26
A final result, shown in Appendix C Table C.8 is that the placebo has no e↵ect on settlement.
The placebo makes parties aware of the availability of the court conciliation process, but provides
no information on their own case. We interpret the lack of any e↵ect of the placebo treatment
as evidence that the content of the calculator information matters.

6.2

Case outcomes

What is the counterfactual outcome for the cases induced to settle by treatment? We examine
this first in Table 6 by looking at the pattern of case outcomes in the control and treatment
groups for the first two phases of the experiment. We accessed administrative records for the
Phase 1 cases in December 2019 and January 2020 and the Phase 2 cases in July 2020. By those
dates, only 12 percent of the cases remained unresolved. The outcomes on Table 6 suggest that,
26

The possibility that, when the calculator is explained to both the plainti↵ and her lawyer in person, the lawyer
does not understand the calculator while the plainti↵ does seems highly implausible given that the lawyers have
both more education and more experience in labor cases.

26

in aggregate, the treatment shifts cases from court rulings without collection to settlements.
Compared with the control group, settlement rates are 6.5 percentage points higher and court
judgments without collection 7.3 percent lower in the treatment group. For the purpose of Table
6, we have classified plainti↵s as winning if the judge rules in their favor, regardless of whether
or not they are able to collect the award from the defendants. As we have noted, collection
of the award is far from automatic. Indeed, as of the last date we accessed the records, there
were 50 cases where plainti↵s had won but not yet collected anything from the defendants.
Moreover, in 17 cases where the plainti↵s had won judgment and collected a positive amount,
they recovered only 52 percent of the judgment, on average.

6.3

E↵ects on overconfidence

The calculator treatment provides information on likely outcomes of the case. One channel
through which the treatment may be e↵ective is by reducing excessive optimism of the parties.
Ideally, we would measure beliefs both before and after treatment in both the treatment and
control group. We faced operational challenges in constructing this measure in all three phases
of the experiment. In Phase 1, the baseline survey data indicate initial overconfidence, but
compliance rates with the follow-up survey conducted after the hearing were low, as parties were
anxious to leave immediately after the hearing. Nevertheless, the data available from Phase 1,
analyzed in Table C.9 in Appendix C, indicate that the treatment lowered the expectations of
overconfident plainti↵s. The data from the Phase 3 provide stronger evidence that the treatment
tempered optimism, albeit somewhat modestly. As we noted above, in the Phase 3 baseline
survey indicates the average worker believed they had an 89 percent chance of winning their
case. After presenting them with the calculator information, we elicited expectations a second
time. Table 5 shows the di↵erence between the initial and subsequent expectations among
the treated sample. After reviewing the calculator information, respondents decreased their
probability of winning by 6 percentage points, with 30 percent reporting a lower probability of
winning, and 26 percent reducing the amount they expect to recover. However, on average they
remain optimistic relative to the historical outcomes, with the probability of winning falling
only six percentage points. Note that the regressions on Table 5 use only the treated sample
from Phase 3. We initially asked the control group for updated expectations at the end of
the baseline survey, but the most common response was agitation that we were asking them
the same question again almost immediately, with no reason for their answer to change. As a
27

result, we stopped asking for expectations a second time from the control group, However, the
small sample from the initial control group surveys suggest that no change in expectations is
the appropriate counterfactual for the calculator treatment group.

6.4

E↵ects on Case Duration

We should expect that the increase the number of settlements on the day of the treatment
will result in shorter average case duration. Table C.10 in Appendix C shows the results of
regressing the duration of cases with a private lawyer against the treatment, employee present
and the interaction of the two. We define duration as the number of days from the date of the
case filing to the final resolution of the case. For cases still unresolved on the date the records
were last checked, we use the date we last checked administrative records as the final date. We
begin in the first column of C.10 with an OLS regression of case duration. Consistent with the
results from Tables 3 and 4, we find that the treatment has no e↵ect on case duration when
the plainti↵ is not present, but reduces duration by almost four months when the plainti↵ is
present, and e↵ect significant at the .10 level. The OLS specification ignores the censuring of
duration. The percentage of cases unresolved as of the last check is both modest (12 percent)
and balanced between treatment and control. In Column 2, we use a Cox proportional hazard
model, finding very results very consistent with the OLS results in column 1. Finally, in column
3 we exclude from the sample cases that were settled to test whether the treatment had any
e↵ect on the trajectory of cases through a channel other than settlement. The small and highly
insignificant e↵ect of the treatment, regardless of the presence of the plainti↵, suggest that
treatment a↵ected duration only through the increase in the settlement rate.
Faster resolution of cases is a benefit to the court, helping to reduce congestion. It also
plausibly increases the welfare of the parties in a situation where the party paying the judgment
likely discounts the future at a lower rate than the party receiving the treatment.

7

Is the Increased Settlement Rate Beneficial?

The increased settlement rate generated by treatment helps the court meet its goal of reducing
the case backlog. There is evidence that reducing backlogs leads to more efficient outcomes in
the economy (Ponticelli and Alencar (2016)). But are the settlements induced by treatment
directly beneficial to the parties who receive the treatment? A necessary condition for the

28

increase in settlements to be beneficial is that the untreated settlement rate is inefficiently low.
In this section, we first discuss a simple framework that shows why settlement rates might be
inefficiently low. We then analyze the data on the actual outcomes of cases in Phases 1 and 2,
and surveys of well-being from Phase 3. Because almost 90 percent of cases in Phases 1 and 2
were resolved by 2020, we are able to measure outcomes for plainti↵s directly, with few cases
requiring projected outcomes.
The discussion highlights reasons that the plainti↵’s incentives may be misaligned with
those of her lawyer, underlining analytical reasons that settlement rates may be inefficiently
low. While contingency contracts help to align incentives, they do not eliminate agency issues,
particularly with regard to settlement decisions. The empirical analysis shows that the plainti↵s
are made better o↵, on average, by the increase in settlement rates, a finding that is robust to
a variety of assumptions on outcomes for the continuing case files.

7.1

Risk, Discounting and Settlement Incentives

Treatment increases the probability of settlement, but only when the employee is present. We
also find that plainti↵s and the parties collectively are excessively optimistic about their chances
of winning their case. While there are four parties involved in the case, for this discussion we
focus on cleavages between the plainti↵ and her lawyer, which appear to play a central role in
the results shown on Tables 3 and 4.
The bargaining literature defines the “settlement range” as the range of outcomes that both
parties prefer to continued bargaining. The settlement range will be empty if the parties to
the dispute are risk-neutral, have identical discount rates and have identical expectations over
outcomes. However, if, for example, future outcomes are uncertain and parties are risk-averse,
then both parties may prefer to settle for the (certain) expected outcome to remove the risk
associated with the uncertain future outcome. Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) shows that
bargaining can break down even when there is a non-empty settlement range, that is, even
when both parties prefer settlement over continued bargaining. This classical explanation for
sub-optimal settlement rates may be a factor in the generating inefficiently low settlement rates
at the MCLC, but the experimental results suggest this is not the only factor. Given the
apparent divergence between the plainti↵ and her lawyer, we focus on factors that drive wedges
in settlement preferences between plainti↵s and their lawyers. Are there primitive factors that
lead to plainti↵s preferring to accept a given settlement o↵er while their lawyers prefer to pursue
29

the case? We write down a simple framework in Appendix B that highlights two factors: the
ability to diversify risk and di↵erences in discount rates.
The framework formalizes what we view as fairly intuitive points. The plainti↵ and her
lawyer di↵er in their ability to diversify risks and, given income di↵erences, likely in their
discount rates as well. The framework in Appendix B shows why di↵erences in these two
dimensions lead to di↵erences in preferences over taking a certain payo↵ now (i.e., a settlement)
or an uncertain payo↵ later (i.e., a court judgment).
In deciding between an o↵er of settlement now and an expected outcome from continuing
to pursue the case, each party will account for the di↵erence in timing of the two potential
payments, and the uncertainty of the payo↵ from continuing the case. Taking uncertainty
first, lawyers typically handle many cases simultaneously. For example, the median number
of ongoing cases among lawyers surveyed in Phase 1 reported was more than 30. Because the
outcomes of each of a given lawyer’s cases are largely independent of one another, the lawyers
are able to diversify the payo↵ risk inherent in pursuing any single case. Plainti↵s, on the
other hand, are a party to only a single case, and therefore cannot diversify that risk. As both
intuition and the formal model show, the di↵erence in the ability to diversify risk leads plainti↵s
sometimes to prefer the certainty of settlement when their lawyer would prefer the uncertain
outcome inherent in pursuing the case: the settlement range between the firm and the plainti↵’s
lawyer is a subset of the settlement range between the firm and the plainti↵.
The parties may also di↵er in the rate at which they discount the future. Because plainti↵s
will have recently lost a job and will generally have lower incomes even when working, we
expect them to be more impatient than their lawyer. For any expected future payout following
a judge’s decision several years later, the higher discount rate would lead the plainti↵ to accept
a lower settlement today than her lawyer would be willing to accept. The di↵erences in either
the ability to diversify risk or the rate of discount drive a wedge between preferences of the
plainti↵ and her lawyer, with the plainti↵ having a larger settlement range than her lawyer.27
Again, our objective here is not to be exhaustive in the modeling, but to show that there are
plausible reasons that the incentives of the plainti↵ and her lawyer are misaligned, and that the
misalignment results in too few settlements from the perspective of the plainti↵.
The divergence in preferences of the plainti↵ and her lawyer provides an incentive for the
27

This could be o↵set by di↵erences in the opportunity cost of time of the lawyer. However, lawyers typically
manage many cases in the same court building, reducing the opportunity cost of time spent on a given case.

30

lawyer not to de-bias the expectations of the plainti↵s - for example, by showing the calculator
information to the plainti↵. Hence, it provides a rationale for the calculator treatment being
e↵ective only when the plainti↵ is present to receive the information directly. Finally, the
divergence is also sufficient to produce a settlement rate which is sub-optimally low from the
perspective of both the plainti↵ and the firm.

7.2

Empirical Evidence on the Induced Settlements and Plainti↵ Welfare

The framework motivates why the plainti↵s might be better o↵ with more settlement. But
what do the data say about whether they are made better o↵ by the additional settlements
our treatments induce? We examine those data here to provide evidence on the welfare of the
plainti↵s induced to settle through the treatments.
Table 6 showed that, on average, the primary e↵ect of treatment was to shift outcomes for
the plainti↵ from a losing court judgment to a settlement. However, these average outcomes
may mask more nuanced underlying patterns. Here we instead analyze the e↵ect of treatment
on the amount awarded to the plainti↵s. Table 7 reports the results of regressing the net present
value of the amount collected against treatment. For cases with a private lawyer, we reflect
legal fees by multiplying the recovery by 70 percent to reflect the plainti↵’s share and then
subtracting the 2000 MXN up-front fee. We use the amount awarded for both settlements and
court judgments. While settlements are collected in all but a very few cases, judgments are not.
So for judgments, this will overstate the amount recovered. For the 12 percent of cases that
were continuing at the time of the latest update, we assume either that the cases recover the
amount that the calculator predicts when their case goes to judgment28 (columns 1 through 3),
or that they recover nothing (columns 4 and 5). We discount all payments to the date of filing
using the discount rate reported reported by the median plainti↵ in the Phase 1 survey, which
is 50 percent per year.29 We revisit the assumption on the discount rate below.
In Table 7, we regress the net present value of the amount awarded against treatment,
controlling for subcourt fixed e↵ects, year of filing, number of plainti↵s in the case, and use of
a public lawyer. In all the regressions, we interact treatment with the presence of the plainti↵
on the day of treatment. The outcomes have a very long right-hand tail, and so we have to
28

That is, the recovery conditional on winning the case times the probability they win the case, conditional on
the case ending by a court ruling.
29
Figure C.10 in Appendix C shows the discount rate data elicited from surveys, along with comparable data
from the Mexican Family Life Survey for 2009. Microcredit interest rates in Mexico are closer to 100% per year.

31

decide how best to handle these. On the one hand, there is no reason to believe they do not
represent real outcomes, though in fact many of the largest awards are reduced through posttrial bargaining, or are not collected by plainti↵s. In columns 1 and 4, we measure the NPV in
levels, but winsorize the data at the 95th percentile to reduce the influence of the upper tail of
the data. In levels, we find no significant e↵ects of treatment on the NPV of outcomes, either
when we use the calculator to impute values for unresolved cases (column 1) or when we impute
0’s for those cases (column 4). The measured e↵ect of the treatment when the plainti↵ is not
present is negative, and the measured e↵ect when the plainti↵ is present is positive. However,
both e↵ects are highly insignificant. Column 2 instead uses the inverse hyperbolic sine of the
outcomes. In the IHS specification, we find that treatment when the plainti↵ is not present
has no e↵ect, while treatment when the plainti↵ is present has a significant positive e↵ect.
The pattern in column 2 is similar to the e↵ects of treatment on settlement, showing that the
treatment left plainti↵s better o↵ only when the plainti↵ was present to receive the treatment
directly. The IHS results put increased weight on the left-hand part of the distribution of
outcomes. Table 6 shows that the treatment shifts some losing cases to settlement; these are
likely to be settlements of modest value. In Figure C.7 in Appendix C, we show the distribution
of the amount awarded when the plainti↵ was present at the hearing, by treatment round.
The distribution of awards in the treated sample has less mass in both tails, the left-hand tail
reflecting the results from Table 6, and the right-hand tail perhaps reflecting settlements of
cases that would have yielded a higher award if they had proceeded to judgment. Because the
IHS specification raises the weight of observations in the left-hand tail and lowers the weight of
those in the right-hand tail, the results are more favorable for treatment.
Columns 3 though 5 of Table 7 show that the estimated e↵ects are robust to changes in two
key assumptions. First, in column 3, we discount all payments at an annual rate of 30 percent
- lower than a typical credit card rate in Mexico during this period. Comparing columns 2
and 3, we see that the discount rate has almost no e↵ect on the estimated treatment e↵ect.
Second, although almost 90 percent of the cases were resolved by 2020, the analysis of the
e↵ects of treatment on plainti↵ outcomes still depends on assumptions about the remaining
unresolved cases. In the first three columns, we assumed that the unresolved cases would all
result in plainti↵ being awarded the amount predicted by the calculator, conditional on the case
proceeding to judgment. In Columns 4 and 5, we instead assume that the plainti↵ loses the
case and collects nothing. Consistent with this, columns 4 (levels) and 5 (IHS) show that the
32

assumption on recovery from the unresolved cases has little e↵ect on the estimated treatment
e↵ects, though the e↵ect of treatment when the plainti↵ is not present is now marginally significantly negative in the IHS specification. The general robustness to how we impute values
for the unresolved cases is perhaps not surprising given that, as we noted earlier, treatment has
less e↵ect on settlement among plainti↵s with the highest-value cases (see Figure 5). Further,
figure 6 shows that, among the unresolved cases, the calculator predicts much larger recoveries
for the treatment cases than for the control cases, conditional on winning a court judgment.
The cases of the workers involved in Phase 3 of the experiment are not far enough along to
carry out a similar analysis. However, in the survey conducted two months after the treatment
in Phase 3, we asked workers about well being more directly. In particular, we asked them a
standard question about general happiness and two questions about difficulties in paying bills.
We examine the e↵ect of treatment on responses to these questions on Table 8. We find no e↵ect
on happiness, though the measured e↵ect is positive. However, we do find that the calculator
treatment reduced the likelihood they report having had trouble paying bills or not having
money for food. These are, of course, short-term impacts, but they are consistent with the
higher settlement rates for Phase 3 treatment we observed on Table 3, and also consistent with
the importance of cash from settlement while the dismissed workers search for a new job.
In sum, the data provide evidence that the treatments left the plainti↵s are better o↵ when
they were present to receive the treatment directly. The gains come both from receiving payment
earlier and from receiving payments in cases that would otherwise have been lost. Factoring
in risk and the likelihood that the additional settlements come from cases with relatively weak
unobservable characteristics, we believe the data show that the typical plainti↵ is benefited by
the treatment.

8

Conclusion

There is substantial evidence that delays in court proceedings are detrimental to the economy.
The Mexico City Labor Court is emblematic of dysfunctional courts in lower- and middle-income
countries. The MCLC su↵ers from large backlogs and parties to cases face uncertain outcomes.
We show that a straightforward information intervention increases settlement rates both on the
day of treatment and in the longer run. The induced settlements remove cases from the court
docket more quickly. This contributes to reducing case backlogs – though of course it is possible

33

that, at scale, this e↵ect would be partially o↵set by an increase in the use of the courts by
dismissed workers.
Comparing the treatment- and control-group outcomes of the ongoing cases involved in the
experiment, we find that the increase in settlements comes almost entirely from cases that would
have been lost by the plainti↵. Given the counterfactual of obtaining nothing in these cases,
the plainti↵s are clearly better o↵. There are three reasons to believe that the intervention also
improves overall welfare. First, the increase in settlements contributes to reducing the court
backlog. We should expect this to have a positive e↵ect on the speed of other cases in process.
Evidence from other settings shows positive e↵ect on financial (Ponticelli and Alencar (2016))
and other markets (Boehm and Oberfield (2020); Chemin (2020)) from more rapid resolution
of cases. Second, the worker-dismissal cases filed in the MCLC involve a payment from one
party (the firm) to other parties (the plainti↵ and her lawyer). These payments themselves
are zero sum. In this setting, it is very likely that the discount rates of firms are lower than
those of plainti↵s; in those circumstances, earlier payment will improve the collective welfare of
the parties. Finally, reaching and enforcing agreements consume resources of the court; faster
settlement reduces these administrative costs. Intervening before cases are filed would appear
to maximize these administrative benefits.
The experiment also illuminates several underlying causes of the delays. First, parties to
the case, and plainti↵s, in particular, show excessive levels of optimism and limited knowledge
of the law. Second, lawyers take advantage of the naivete of the plainti↵s, extending cases when
workers would prefer settlement. There are undoubtedly other issues, particularly those related
to enforcement of court rulings and delivery of summons leading to longer lags between hearings.
Indeed, the results suggest the need for further work to better understand the functioning of
the market for lawyers in this context.
More broadly, the results of the experiment suggest the need to merge the insights of the
bargaining literature with those from the literature on expert agents. The literature on bargaining and settlements has focused on the relationship between the plainti↵ and defendant,
and de-emphasized the importance of agency issues between a party and her lawyer. Given the
importance of the employee being present to receive the information directly, we should view
the bargaining game as one that involves more than two parties. In our case, for example, this
is most apparent on the plainti↵’s side, where lawyers are informed experts, and plainti↵s are
mostly first-time users of the court. The results suggest the need to explore ways to create and
34

disseminate information on the quality of lawyers, allowing higher-quality lawyers to develop a
reputation.
Finally, the experiment provides a window on the functioning of the court as an institution.
In conducting the experiments, we worked closely with the court, and provided officials there
with evidence about e↵ective and easily scalable policies; thus, the research has contributed to
the policy dialogue on general policies at the court. Indeed, as part of a major constitutional
reform of labor law, the court proposed that federal labor law include both statistical information
customized to the case, and pre-filing conciliation hearings proposals that were grounded in
the evidence from the experiment.30
Joyce Sadka, ITAM
Enrique Seira, ITAM
Christopher Woodru↵, University of Oxford

References
Aberra, Adam, and Matthieu Chemin. 2019. “Does Access to the Legal System Increase
Investment? Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya.” McGill University Working Paper.
Aldeco Leo, Lorenzo, David S. Kaplan, and Joyce Sadka. 2014. “Delay and Corruption:
A Simple Model with Empirical Tests.” IADB Working Paper.
Anagol, Santosh, Shawn Cole, and Shayak Sarkar. 2017. “Understanding the Advice
of Commissions-Motivated Agents: Evidence from the Indian Life Insurance Market.” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(1): 1–15.
Andrabi, Tahir, Jishnu Das, and Asim Ijaz Khwaja. 2017. “Report Cards: The Impact
of Providing School and Child Test Scores on Educational Markets.” American Economic
Review, 107(6): 1535–63.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and Gordon B. Dahl. 2012. “Bargaining and the Role of Expert Agents:
An Empirical Study of Final-O↵er Arbitration.” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
94(1): 116–132.
30

These proposals were passed by the Federal Senate in mid-2019. See text at: https://goo.gl/9AZ6H7.

35

Babcock, Linda, and George Loewenstein. 1997. “Explaining Bargaining Impasse: The
Role of Self-Serving Biases.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(1): 109–126.
Belot, Michle, Philipp Kircher, and Paul Muller. 2019. “Providing Advice to Jobseekers
at Low Cost: An Experimental Study on Online Advice.” The Review of Economic Studies,
86(4): 1411–1447.
Boehm, Johannes, and Ezra Oberfield. 2020. “Misallocation in the Market for Inputs:
Enforcement and the Organization of Production.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
135(4): 2007–2058.
Chemin, Matthieu. 2020. “Judicial Efficiency and Firm Productivity: Evidence from a World
Database of Judicial Reforms.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 102(1): 49–64.
Chong, Alberto, Ana L. De La O, Dean Karlan, and Leonard Wantchekon. 2015.
“Does Corruption Information Inspire the Fight or Quash the Hope? A Field Experiment
in Mexico on Voter Turnout, Choice, and Party Identification.” The Journal of Politics,
77(1): 55–71.
Dizon-Ross, Rebecca. 2019. “Parents’ Beliefs About Their Children’s Academic Ability:
Implications for Educational Investments.” American Economic Review.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
2003. “Courts.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2): 453–517.
Ebisui, Minawa, Sean Cooney, and Colin (editors) Fenwick. 2016. Resolving individual
labour disputes: A comparative overview. ILO.
Emons, Winand. 1997. “Credence Goods and Fraudulent Experts.” The RAND Journal of
Economics, 28(1): 107–119.
Gerard, Francois, and Joana Naritomi. 2019. “Job Displacement Insurance and (the Lack
of) Consumption-Smoothing.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25749.
Gilson, Ronald J., and Robert H. Mnookin. 1994. “Disputing through Agents: Cooperation and Conflict between Lawyers in Litigation.” Columbia Law Review, 94(2): 509–566.
Greiner, D. James, and Andrea Matthews. 2016. “Randomized Control Trials in the
United States Legal Profession.” Annual Review of Law and Social Science, 12: 293–312.
36

Hubbard, Thomas N. 1998. “An Empirical Examination of Moral Hazard in the Vehicle
Inspection Market.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 29(2): 406–426.
Hubbard, Thomas N. 2000. “The Demand for Monitoring Technologies: The Case of Trucking.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(2): 533–560.
Jensen, Robert. 2010. “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2): 515–548.
Kondylis, Florence, and Mattea Stein. 2018. “Reforming the Speed of Justice: Evidence
from an Event Study in Senegal.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 8372.
Kumler, Todd, Eric Verhoogen, and Judith A Frias. 2020. “Enlisting Employees in Improving Payroll-Tax Compliance: Evidence from Mexico.” Review of Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.
Levitt, Steven D., and Chad Syverson. 2008. “Market Distortions When Agents Are Better
Informed: The Value of Information in Real Estate Transactions.” The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 90(4): 599–611.
Lichand, Guilherme, and Ridrigo R. Soares. 2014. “Access to Justice and Entrepreneurship: Evidence from Brazil’s Special Civil Tribunals.” Journal of Law and Economics, 57: 459–
499.
Myerson, Roger, and Mark A. Satterthwaite. 1983. “Efficient mechanisms for bilateral
trading.” Journal of Economic Theory, 29(2): 265–281.
Ponticelli, Jacopo, and Leonardo S. Alencar. 2016. “Court Enforcement, Bank Loans and
Firm Investment: Evidence from a Bankruptcy Reform in Brazil.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics.
Reinikka, Ritva, and Jakob Svensson. 2011. “The power of information in public services:
Evidence from education in Uganda.” Journal of Public Economics, 95(7-8): 956–966.
Rubinstein, Ariel. 1982. “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model.” Econometrica,
50(1): 97–109.
Sandefur, Justin, and Bilal Siddiqi. 2015. “Delivering Justice to the Poor: Theory and
Experimental Evidence from Liberia.” World Bank Working Paper.
37

Schneider, Henry S. 2012. “Agency Problems and Reputation in Expert Services: Evidence
from Auto Repair.” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 60(3): 406–433.
Visaria, Sujata. 2009. “Legal Reform and Loan Repayment: The Microeconomic Impact
of Debt Recovery Tribunals in India.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
1(3): 59–81.
Wooldridge, Je↵rey M. 2015. “Control Function Methods in Applied Econometrics.” Journal
of Human Resources, 50(2): 420–445.
Yildiz, Muhamet. 2003. “Bargaining without a Common Prior:An Immediate Agreement
Theorem.” Econometrica, 71(3): 793–811.
Yildiz, Muhamet. 2011. “Bargaining with Optimism.” Annual Review of Economics,
3(1): 451–478.

38

39

Phase 3

Phase 2

Phase 1

Tables & Figures

Dismissed
workers
before
finding a
lawyer

1st hearings

All hearings

Types of cases

All workers approaching
the information
booth.

5
subcourts

Subcourt
7

Court

1929

1096

636

# cases

925

768

315

# treated cases
Point
estimates
on the probability,
time, and monetary
returns
of
case
outcomes.
Point estimate on
settlement amount,
conditional on settling. Point estimate
of not receiving any
compensation, conditional on court ruling.
95% confidence intervals regarding expected returns and
duration of the lawsuit.

Treatment

Table 1: Description of Treatment Arms

Notes: This table presents the main characteristics of the three treatment arms.

9

Baseline,
2w and 2m
followups,
admin
data for 30
months

Baseline
survey and
admin data
42 month
followup
Baseline
survey and
admin data
42 month
followup

Meassurements

15/05/2017
to
17/08/2018

14/10/2016
to
10/02/2017

02/03/2016
to
27/05/2016

Dates

Table 2: Summary Statistics

Variable

HD

HD Subcourt 7

Phase 1

Phase 2

Phase 3

Panel A: Outcomes
Win
Amount won
Total asked
Conciliation
Losing court ruling
Winning court ruling
Duration (years)

0.65
(.48)
23917
(56302.54)
343060
(655168.15)
0.63
(.48)
0.07
(.25)
0.02
(.14)
1.02
(.96)

0.69
(.46)
20358
(47488.41)
301566
(551154.03)
0.67
(.47)
0.01
(.1)
0.02
(.12)
0.98
(.71)

598315
(1438490.59)
0.22
(.41)

644064
(3860993.2)
0.2
(.4)

Panel B: Basic variables
Public Lawyer
Female
At will worker
Tenure (years)
Daily wage
Weekly hours

0.1
(.3)
0.48
(.5)
0.07
(.25)
4.17
(4.99)
470
(1100.8)
57.33
(15.47)

0.15
(.36)
0.35
(.48)
0.06
(.23)
3.72
(4.72)
455
(656.22)
57.36
(15.57)

0.11
(.32)
0.41
(.49)
0.18
(.39)
153.44
(725.65)
740
(1360.94)
57.37
(16.87)

0.06
(.24)
0.46
(.5)
0.08
(.27)
4.33
(5.74)
605
(1007.75)
56.15
(13.38)

0.45
(.5)

3.71
(4.74)
323
(634.99)
52.88
(15.52)

Notes: The table presents summary statistics of di↵erent samples in columns. Column 1 uses the complete sample of cases
that started 2011 and were finished by December 2015, for 5 subcourts chosen to represent the majority of the industries
at the Mexico City labor court. Column 2 limits these cases to only Subcourt 7, where we ran the phase 1 experiment.
Column 3 uses Subcourt 7 casefiles that were subjects of the phase 1 experiment. Column 4 does the same for phase 2.
Panel A shows outcomes: the fraction win for workers, the amount won (includes zeros, actually recovered which may not
coincide with what the judge ordered), the total amount asked by the worker in the initial filing, the fraction that settled
over the lifetime of the lawsuit, the fraction that reached a court ruling with positive recovery for the worker, the fraction
that reached a court ruling with zero recovery, and the duration of the lawsuit in years (a case can have one of 4 types of
endings: court ruling, settlement, expiry, and case dropped). Panel B shows some of the main characteristics of the case
from the initial filing. These include the fraction that are represented by a public lawyer, the fraction of women, fraction of
at will worker (who cannot be reinstated but receive higher severance pay under the law), worker tenure at the firm, daily
wage and total hours per week. We include these variables since they are essential for calculating the amount of money
that the worker is owed under the law for unfair dismissal.

40

41
636
0.057

0.0623

(1)
0.052**
(0.022)

636
0.145
0.0539

0.0623
0.194

(2)
0.026
(0.020)
0.144**
(0.054)
0.129
(0.084)

1,096
0.056

0.165

(3)
0.039
(0.025)

OLS

1,096
0.117
0.120

0.165
0.275

(4)
0.006
(0.023)
0.148*
(0.069)
0.135
(0.088)

Phase 2

1,732
0.139
0.0101

0.114
0.230

(5)
0.016
(0.015)
0.147***
(0.043)
0.134**
(0.059)

1,732
0.144
0.0255

0.114
0.230

(6)
0.002
(0.015)
0.698***
(0.198)
0.122**
(0.058)
-0.312***
(0.105)

CF OLS

Phase 1/2

1,732
0.112
0.156

0.444
0.496

(7)
-0.022
(0.023)
0.055
(0.053)
0.109*
(0.064)

1,927
0.007

0.387

(8)
0.064**
(0.027)

OLS

Phase 3

Long run

Notes: This table estimates the main treatment e↵ects for both experimental phases. Columns 1 through 5 measure settlement on the same day as the treatment, with the sample in columns
1 and 2 limited to phase 1, the sample in columns 3 and 4 limited to phase 2, and the sample in column 5 combining data from the two phases. Column 6 shows the e↵ect of treatment
on settlement around 42 months after the treatment, using the combined sample from the first two phases. Column 7 uses treatment-day settlements but adds a control for potential
endogeneity of the presence of the employee, as described in the text and shown in Table C.6. Column 8 shows the e↵ect on settlement two months after treatment in phase 3, using data
from the follow-up phone surveys. Note that in phase 1, treatment is at the casefile level, while in phase 2 it is at the day level. “Calculator” is a dummy indicating that the casefile or day
was randomly assigned to receive the calculator. “Emp present” is an indicator for the employee being present on the treatment day, and “Calculator#EP” is the interaction between the
employee present and treatment dummies. Columns including Phase 2 observations include subcourt dummies.

Observations
R-squared
Calculator p-value

Control group mean
Interaction control group mean

Control Function

Calculator#EP

Emp present (EP)

Calculator

Phase 1

Same day settlement

Months after treatment

Table 3: E↵ect of Treatment on Settlement

Table 4: Treatment E↵ects conditional on type of lawyer

Private
Same day

Public

Long run

Same day

Long run

Phase 1/2
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.020
(0.017)
0.143***
(0.044)
0.192***
(0.066)

-0.000
(0.027)
0.052
(0.065)
0.154*
(0.089)

0.014
(0.049)
0.251**
(0.111)
-0.056
(0.125)

0.023
(0.134)
0.274**
(0.135)
-0.048
(0.181)

Control group mean
Control group interaction mean

0.115
0.229

0.419
0.446

0.160
0.269

0.420
0.538

Observations
R-Squared
Calculator p value

1,554
0.143
0.002

1,554
0.086
0.07

132
0.085
0.709

132
0.079
0.825

Calculator
Emp present (EP)
Calculator#EP

Notes: The table reproduces the regressions in columns 5 through 5 of 3. Columns 1 and 2 use the sample of cases in
which the plainti↵ uses a private lawyer and the columns 3 and 4 the sample of cases where the plainti↵ uses a public
lawyer. We are unable to determine whether the lawyer is public or private in 60 of the cases. The dependent variable is
a dummy indicating the case was settled by the time indicated on the column heading. All regressions include sub-court
dummy variables as controls. See the notes to 3 for further details.

Table 5: Immediate expectation updating

Information Experiment: Immediate updating
Probability

Calculator
Constant
Source
Observations
Obs per group
Days per group
R-squared

Amount

Dummy (lowered)

Continous

Dummy (lowered)

Continous (log di↵erence)

(1)
0.30***
(0.021)
-0.000044
(0.0098)

(2)
-0.061***
(0.0077)
-0.0056
(0.0041)

(3)
0.26***
(0.028)
0.0023
(0.014)

(4)
-0.0027
(0.035)
-0.0032
(0.014)

2m
1274
663/611
90/103
0.19

2m
1274
663/611
90/103
0.058

2m
578
315/263
82/90
0.16

2m
578
315/263
82/90
0.0060

Notes: The table uses the Calculator treatment to estimate its e↵ect on immediate expectation updating. Column (1)
regresses an indicator for “decreased expectations” (a variable a dummy = 1 if the the subjective belief of the probability
of winning measured in the immediate follow up survey is lower than in the baseline survey) on treatment arms dummies
and basic variable controls. On the other hand, Column (2) regresses the amount by which expectations changed with the
same regressors. Recall that the immediate follow up survey was implemented less than 3 minutes after the treatment was
given. Using the immediate survey instead of the 2w or 2m survey avoids attrition, however since it was implemented only
in the Information Experiment, this table does not have a Panel B. Column (3) is the same as Column (1) except that
the dummy refers to amount to be won conditional on winning instead of probability of winning, while column (4) mimics
column (2) referring to the quantitative di↵erence of the amount the subject thought she might win.

42

Table 6: Case outcomes by treatment arm

Control

Calculator

Di↵erence

Resolved with recovery:
Settled
Court ruling with payment

41.33%
6.19%

47.82%
5.76%

6.49%
-0.44%

Resolved with no recovery:
Court ruling without payment
Expired / Dropped

26.93%
13.62%

19.59%
13.74%

-7.34%
0.12%

Unresolved:
Continues

11.92%

13.09%

1.17%

646

1077

1723

N

Notes: The table shows the status of the experimental cases in Phases 1 and 2 as of January 2020 (for Phase 1) or July
2020 (for Phase 2). These outcomes are taken from the administrative records of the court. “Court ruling with payment”
indicates the plainti↵ was awarded a judgment by the court. However, XX% of those awards were uncollected as of January
/ July 2020 and it is likely that some will never be collected.

Table 7: Recovery after 42 months, Phase 1/2 samples

Net Present Vaue of Amount Awarded
Calculator imputed

0s imputed

(1)
NPV

(2)
IHS NPV

(3)
IHS NPV

(4)
NPV

(5)
IHS NPV

-404.6
(670.4)
3,023**
(1,461)
511.1
(1,685)

-0.447
(0.508)
-0.175
(0.965)
2.632**
(1.040)

-0.423
(0.513)
-0.215
(0.992)
2.679**
(1.070)

-952.0
(598.0)
2,940**
(1,347)
1,313
(1,533)

-0.825*
(0.431)
0.245
(0.922)
2.818**
(1.109)

Control group mean
Control group interaction mean

5382
7818

0.193
1.149

7123
9803

2.205
2.716

2.477
2.945

Observations
R-squared
Calculator p-value

1,698
0.067
0.817

1,698
0.116
0.0664

1,698
0.110
0.950

1,698
0.071
0.0277

1,698
0.123
0.0253

Calculator
Employee Present (EP)
Calc#EP

Notes: We measure the net present value of the amount awarded to plainti↵s. The dependent variable in columns 1 and
4 is the NPV, winsorized at the 95th percentile, and in columns 2, 3, and 5 is the inverse hyperbolic sine of the NPV. For
cases not yet resolved, columns 1 through 3 impute the calculator predicted value for a court judgment, while columns
4 and 5 impute zeros to unresolved cases. In columns 1, 2, 4 and 5 we discount payments to the date of filing using a
discount rate of 3.43 percent per months (50 percent per year). In column 3, we use a discount rate of 2.22 percent per
months (30 percent per year). Standard errors are clustered on the day of treatment. All regressions include dummies for
the phase, the subcourt, the year the case was filed, the number of plainti↵s in the case and an indicator some information
was missing from the case file data.

43

Table 8: Phase 3: E↵ects on welfare

Happiness

Stopped paying serv.

Lack of money

Works

Calculator

(1)
0.13
(0.12)

(2)
-0.070***
(0.024)

(3)
-0.067***
(0.025)

(4)
0.019
(0.025)

Source
Observations
R-squared

2m
1459
0.0079

2m
1474
0.0073

2m
1476
0.0095

2m
1476
0.021

Notes: The 2 month survey for Phase 3 included questions measuring proxies for welfare. We asked (Happiness) On a
scale of 1 t 10, where 1 means “not happy at all” and 10 means “totally happy”, in general, how happy do you feel about
your life lately? (Stopped paying serv.) In the past three months have you had to stop paying for a basic service such as
electric power, water, or rent due to lack of money? (Lack of money for food) In the past three months, have you lacked
money to spend on food one or more days? (Works) Are you currently working?

44

Figure 1: Di↵erences in Claims and Compensation by case file outcome - Historical Data

Notes: The figure shows the average amount asked for in the filing, the minimum legal compensation based on the case
characteristics, and the amount actually received at the end of the process (overall and conditional on recovering a positive
amount). Data are displayed in thousands of pesos by type of case ending, using the 5,005 historical case files. The amounts
are discounted at the rate of 50 percent per year (3.43 per month). Cases end in any one of four ways: settlement; being
dropped by the plainti↵; court ruling; or expiring from lack of activity. The share of completed cases in the historical case
files by type of ending is shown at the bottom. Note that these do not match the share of all cases by type of ending
because these data exclude cases that were unresolved at the end of 2015. Workers recover nothing when cases are dropped
or expire. We define settlements as an agreement followed by payment, so settlements always imply a positive recovery for
the worker. Workers recover a positive amount only 24 percent of the time when the case goes to judgment. These data
do not distinguish between the judge ruling against the worker and the judge ruling in favor but the worker being unable
to collect anything from the firm.

45

Figure 2: Time Duration

The figure uses the historical data (5005 casefiles) to plot the cumulative distribution of the duration of the case in months,
by type of ending, for the 70 percent of cases concluded by the end of 2015.

Figure 3: Knowledge about Law and their Own Claims in Lawsuit

Notes: Data are from baseline survey of Phase 1. The figure shows averages of correct answers for several questions,
grouped into: knowledge of the law (panel 1) and knowledge of the content of their own lawsuit (panels 2 to 4). The
question for panel (1) is ”In the case of unjustified dismissal, law gives you a constitutional indemnification: Do you know
how many days of salary this represents?”. Panels (2) to (4) correspond to the question: “Mark the benefits that you
claimed in this suit: 1.Constitutional indemnification, 2.Medical insurance, 3.Reinstatement, 4.Overtime, 5.Premium for
working Saturdays, 6. Aguinaldo (bonus), 7.Don’t know”. The figure indicates whether the respondent correctly answered
items 2, 3 and 4.

46

Figure 4: Calculator Treatment Format (example) - Phase 1

C LC LO DE COMPENSACI N TRABAJADOR
MAR O 2016

D

T
G

:H

S

be

E ca de de
e ac e

d

C
e

-c

aa

- Pa e
ca e da

4.-

da

f cad , a Le Fede a de T aba

A

3.- A

$350.00

e

A

aa

- 12 d a
:

e e e 90 d a de a a
a

ab ad a a

c a de 15 d a
ab ad :

- Pa e
c
a a ba e:

a

a de acac

de

,a a

e de

da

aa

de

aa

e

d

SU COMPENSACI N DE LE :

IMPORTANTE! D

3

a

6.23

e 4500 e

,

$31,500.00

e ad :
e de 2 ece

ba e, de

$9,687.39

a

ab ad , a a

$1,861.80

de

$1,060.50

$44,109.68

48%

ed e e de 2009, 2010, 2011

NO

.

C
0.86
0.65
2.94
2.39
1.01

b dade de a a

e

ce

e

.E

ed e e / A

e d
:

e

da

9999/2013

e ad

c

e
F

$26,052.29
$0.00
$0.00
$50,925.21
$0.00

a
a
a
a
a
de e ec c

SU COMPENSACI N ESPERADA:

N .E

.

2012.

T

%
65.11%
25.62%
3.40%
3.41%
2.46%

a d e c e a a

Rec b

a

e e

SIMILARES
ba a

C
D
C
L
L
T

aba ad

ba e c

A
N

:

a :

1.- I
2.- P

:

,

da

e ad

c

d ca :

$18,699.32

f

e e

ce

afec a

de ec

.

a:

Notes:The figure shows an example of the calculator use in phase 1 treatments. The top half described the entitlement by
law if the judge rules in favor of the plainti↵, based on data in the case filing. The second half shows what fraction of cases
end which way, the average duration and amount for each ending, and the expected value ex-ante saliently in red in the
bottom box. The worker and firm name are removed from the example shown here. Parties were told that this information
comes from a statistical exercise based on completed historical cases, and that it gives average prediction based on variables
of the initial lawsuit described in the calculator treatment.

47

Figure 5: Calculator predictions for Settled Cases

Notes: This figure shows the distribution of settlement amounts predicted by the calculator for treatment and control cases
ending in settlement. Data are truncated at the 99th percentile to compress the scale.

Figure 6: Unresolved Cases: Calculator Prediction Conditional on Court Win

Notes: This figure presents the distribution of recovery amounts predicted by the calculator, conditional on winning a
judgment, for treatment and control cases that were unresolved at the time of last data access. Data are truncated at
the 99th percentile to compress the scale. Note that the di↵erences between predicted outcomes in treatment and control
reflect in part the fact that more of the unresolved cases in the treatment group are from phase 2, and hence higher-value
cases. Figure C.8 in Appendix C shows the distributions by phase. The patters are similar though somewhat more muted.

48

