NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LIMITS AND CONSEQUENCES OF POPULATION POLICY:
EVIDENCE FROM CHINA’S WAN XI SHAO CAMPAIGN
Kimberly Singer Babiarz
Paul Ma
Grant Miller
Shige Song
Working Paper 25130
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25130

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018, Revised October 2020

This paper was previously circulated under the titles “Limits (and Human Costs) of Population
Policy: Fertility Decline and Sex Selection Under Mao”, and “Early Fertility Decline and Sex
Imbalance in Rural China.” We thank Jay Bhattacharya, David Canning, Daniel Goodkind,
Giovanna Merli, Nancy Qian, Christine Valente, and Jennifer Van Hook for helpful comments
and suggestions. We also thank seminar participants at Columbia, Duke, Hitotsubashi, Penn, UC
Berkeley, UC San Diego, University of Michigan, USC, UT Austin, and SIEPR. All errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Kimberly Singer Babiarz, Paul Ma, Grant Miller, and Shige Song. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Limits and Consequences of Population Policy: Evidence from China’s Wan Xi Shao
Campaign
Kimberly Singer Babiarz, Paul Ma, Grant Miller, and Shige Song
NBER Working Paper No. 25130
October 2018, Revised October 2020
JEL No. J1,J12,J13,J18
ABSTRACT
Prior to the famous One Child Policy, China’s total fertility rate declined by more than 50%
during the 1970s - one of the most rapid sustained fertility declines documented in modern
history. Coinciding with this transition was China’s ﬁrst national population policy, Wan Xi
Shao, also known as the Longer, Later Fewer (LLF) campaign. Studying LLF’s contribution to
fertility and fertility strategies favoring sons, we ﬁnd that the campaign i) reduced China’s total
fertility rate by 0.88 births per woman (explaining 27% of China’s modern fertility decline), ii)
doubled the use of male-biased fertility stopping rules, and iii) promoted postnatal selection
(implying 200,000 previously unrecognized missing girls). Considering Chinese population
policy to be extreme in global experience, our paper demonstrates the limits of population policy
in explaining demographic transitions— and its potential human costs.
Kimberly Singer Babiarz
CHP/PCOR
117 Encina Commons
Stanford, CA 94305
babiarz@stanford.edu
Paul Ma
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Ave S.
Minneapolis, MN 55455
paulma@umn.edu

Grant Miller
Center for Health Policy/
Center for Primary Care & Outcomes Research
Stanford University
615 Crothers Way
Stanford, CA 94305-6006
and NBER
ngmiller@stanford.edu
Shige Song
Queens College of the City
University of New York
Department of Sociology
65-30 Kissena Blvd
Queens, NY 11367
Shige.Song@qc.cuny.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25130

1

Introduction
Historically, many governments have used fertility policies to achieve social, political,

and economic goals. Policies to reduce or even forcefully restrict fertility rates have their
roots in classical macroeconomic growth theory (Keynes and Volcker, 1920; Coale and Hoover,
1958) and a more recent economics literature establishing that larger households reduce living
standards and exacerbate income inequality (Chu and Koo, 1990; Galor and Weil, 2000; Hazan
and Berdugo, 2002; Kremer and Chen, 2002; Moav, 2005). Alternatively, countries facing
below replacement-level fertility rates have introduced pronatalist policies in an attempt
to address the macroeconomic consequences of population ’graying’ (Milligan, 2005; Bloom
et al., 2011; Raute, 2019).
However, the extent to which population policy is ultimately able to influence fertility
behavior, particularly in lower-income countries, has been fiercely debated (Pritchett, 1994;
Schultz, 1994; Lee, 2003). These debates span several broad areas, including i) the credibility
of population policy and family planning program e↵ect estimates (Miller and Babiarz, 2016)
and ii) the efficacy of such policies relative to demand-based determinants of ferility (e.g.,
rising levels of education among women (Barro and Lee, 1993) or increases in the opportunity
cost of time (Becker, 1960; Schultz, 1973). Moreover, a parallel concern has been the negative
unintended consequences of such policies (e.g., Ebenstein (2010); Howden and Zhou (2014);
Jayachandran (2017)). In no country have these concerns been more salient than in China,
whose population policies are the most restrictive - and strictly enforced - in global experience.
In this paper, we shed new light on these issues by examining the consequences of
China’s first national population policy, Wan Xi Shao, which coincided with a demographic
transition in China that ranks as one of the fastest in global history (Figure 1, Panel A)
(Banister, 1987; Chen, 1984; Feeney and Wang, 1993). Literally meaning “Later, Longer,
Fewer,” this policy (henceforth “LLF”) aimed to limit fertility by promoting marriage at
older ages (“Later”), longer birth intervals (“Longer”), and fewer lifetime births (“Fewer”).

1

Strikingly, particularly given that China accounted for one-quarter of the world’s population
when the policy was implemented, China’s total fertility rate (TFR) fell by more than 50%,
from approximately 6 births per women to 2.75 as the LLF policy was scaled-up (Figure 1,
Panel B).1 Relying on the time-series evidence, many demographers and policymakers have
attributed the majority of this decline to LLF (Bongaarts and Greenhalgh, 1985; Lavely and
Freedman, 1990; Feeney and Wang, 1993; Bhrolcháin and Dyson, 2007; Goodkind, 2017).2
By contrast, the more famous One Child Policy was enacted when fertility rates were already
approaching replacement level (Cai, 2010). Given its stringent population policies along with
its rapid demographic transition and economic development, China’s Wan Xi Shao policy
likely represents an upper bound on the size of feasible family planning program e↵ects.3
To the best of our knowledge, this paper provides the first direct evidence on the
LLF policy’s contribution to fertility decline in China - and its potentially unintended
consequences.4 Digitizing archival records of LLF implementation and matching them to
individual-level survey data measuring fertility behavior over several decades, we study
behavioral responses along each targeted behavioral margin (age at marriage, birth intervals,
number of births). We first establish the logic and validity of an event study framework
exploiting the program’s staggered implementation across provinces (as early as 1970 and as
late as 1979), and importantly, we show that its implementation appears unrelated to either
pre-existing trends in fertility or changes in the underlying demand for children (Preston
et al., 1978; Rosenzweig and Schultz, 1983; Becker, 1991). We then combine econometric and
1

The Total Fertility Rate (TFR) is a summary index of age-specific fertility rates for a given period of time
(a given year, for example). It is, therefore, a ‘period’ rate, measuring the expected number of lifetime births
that a woman experiencing each age-specific fertility rate in that period would have.
2
Notably, many of the demand-side determinants of global fertility decline (wage growth, changes in the
opportunity cost of time, etc.) were not changing rapidly in China during these years.
3
While family planning programs in most countries are voluntary, focusing on reducing the costs of fertility
control to minimize unwanted births (Glasier et al., 2006), China imposed explicit fertility limits which were
strictly enforced for decades (Greenhalgh and Li, 1993; Scharping, 2013; Greenhalgh and Winckler, 2005;
Mosher, 2008; White, 2006).
4
We note that Goodkind (2017) makes cross-national comparisons between China and other countries, drawing
inferences about the combined consequences of the LLF policy and the One Child Policy. Since writing our
initial draft, two recently released working papers study the role of the Family Planning Leading Groups in
China’s 1970s fertility decline (Chen and Huang, 2018) and subsequent intergenerational e↵ects (Chen and
Fang, 2018).
2

demographic methods in a novel way to estimate the policy’s overall contribution to China’s
demographic transition.
On fertility behavior, we find that overall, the program reduced China’s TFR by about
0.88 births per woman, accounting for about 27% of China’s fertility decline prior to 1980
(implying 15.8 million averted births). To investigate the extent to which this TFR decline
simply reflects delayed childbearing (e.g., Bassi and Rasul (2017)) rather than reductions
in lifetime fertility, we decompose TFR changes into ‘quantum’ (number of births) and
‘tempo’ (birth timing) e↵ects (Bongaarts and Feeney, 1998). Doing so, we find that although
women’s average age at marriage increased by nearly a year, quantum e↵ects account for over
95% of the TFR decline associated with the LLF policy — meaning that TFR changes are
overwhelmingly the result of fewer lifetime births.5 These results suggest that even China is
not a marked outlier in global experience with family planning programs (Miller and Babiarz,
2016).
We then turn to the possibility of unintended consequences of the LLF policy - in
particular, its potential contribution to fertility strategies reflecting son preference (hereafter
’sex composition strategies’), including sex selection. Son preference is a well-established
phenomenon in China, and theory predicts that when there is son preference, fertility decline
should promote sex composition strategies favoring male births (Das Gupta and Mari Bhat,
1997; Li et al., 2000; Jayachandran, 2017; Anukriti, 2018).6 Before prenatal ultrasound
technology was commonly available in China, as in our case,7 there were two sex composition
strategies that couples could use: (1) male-biased fertility stopping rules (the practice of
having children until reaching the desired number of sons - hereafter “stopping rules”), or
5

Examining birth intervals directly, we also find little evidence that LLF influenced birth spacing.
Son preference may be rooted cultural practices such as patrilineal marriage (married couples live with the
husband’s family, making sons critical for economic security in old age) and also be reinforced by economic
incentives embedded in village life (in China’s communal system, fewer work points were awarded for women
than men, etc.) (Arnold and Zhaoxiang, 1986; Coale and Banister, 1994; Ebenstein and Leung, 2010;
Ebenstein, 2014; Greenhalgh and Li, 1993; White, 2006).
7
The introduction and rapid spread of ultrasound technology during the early 1980s was largely coincident
with the One Child Policy circa 1980 (Chen et al., 2013). Numerous studies of the One Child Policy find
that sex ratios at birth rose rapidly during the 1980s, largely through prenatal ultrasound screening and
sex-selective abortion (Almond et al., 2017; Banister, 1987; Chen et al., 2013; Ebenstein, 2011).
6

3

(2) postnatal sex selection (hereafter “postnatal selection”) through relative underinvestment
in girls — and in the extreme, female infanticide.8 There is aggregate time-series evidence
that the LLF policy coincided with increasing use of sex composition strategies in China —
both through greater use of stopping rules (Arnold and Zhaoxiang, 1986), which do not alter
population sex ratios, and through postnatal sex selection (at third and higher parity births
among couples without a son — see Figure 2), producing male-biased sex ratios (Coale and
Banister, 1994; Babiarz et al., 2019).9 If the LLF policy did in fact contribute to population
sex imbalance, this would represent an important unintended consequence of population
policy.
We develop a novel empirical approach for distinguishing between the use of stopping
rules and postnatal selection when prenatal selection is not technologically feasible. Our
approach relies on two key facts. The first is that both stopping rule use and postnatal
selection increase the probability that couples discontinue childbearing after the birth of a boy
(Yamaguchi, 1989), enabling us to estimate the prevalence of any sex composition strategies.
The second is that only postnatal selection leads to male-biased sex ratios (when prenatal
selection is not feasible). Using these facts, we find that the LLF policy increased the use of
both strategies, but about 91% of incremental new use of these strategies due to the policy
was the use of stopping rules. Specifically, the share of couples using fertility stopping rules
rose from 3.25% to 6.8%, while the share of couples practicing postnatal sex selection rose
from nil prior to the LLF policy to 0.29% (implying that 0.3% of all births involved postnatal
selection by the late 1970s). Although small in relative terms, this prevalence of postnatal
selection implies about 200,000 additional “missing girls” in China directly attributable to the
LLF policy, explaining about 21% of all girls missing from Chinese birth cohorts during the
1970s. Moreover, because postnatal selection overwhelmingly occurred during the first year
8

Infanticide was a practice well-documented historically (King, 2014; Lu and Mungello, 2010; Wolf and Huang,
1980) and a concern raised by governmental officials in policy deliberations (Greenhalgh and Winckler, 2005)
9
Throughout this paper, we define the sex ratio at birth in the conventional way: the number of male live
births for each 100 female live births. Research suggests that the biologically ‘expected’ ratio of male to
female births is approximately 105-106 males for every 100 females (Johansson and Nygren, 1991).

4

of life (and is not generally explained by misreporting — a concern we consider at length in
Section 3 and in the Online Appendix), infanticide in particular may have been an important
unintended consequence of the LLF policy.
Our paper makes contributions to several broad literatures. First, in contrast to some
of the prevailing wisdom in the demography literature, it demonstrates that even one of
the most intensive family planning programs in global history (LLF) explains a relatively
small share of China’s rapid demographic transition (Pritchett, 1994; Miller and Babiarz,
2016; Wang et al., 2016) - and by extension, suggests that the repeal of One Child Policy
may do little to increase long-run fertility in China (Wang et al., 2016). In doing so, it also
contributes to a better understanding of one of the most rapid demographic transitions on
record (Banister, 1987). Second, our estimation strategy is the first to combine a credible
observational study design with classical demographic methods (Van Hook and Altman, 2013)
- specifically, generating econometric event-study inputs required by the canonical life table
population accounting framework - a contribution that we believe has wide applicability in
future research on economic demography. Third, although a number of studies have shown
that fertility policies have induced prenatal sex selection, to the best of our knowledge, ours
is the first to demonstrate that such policies can also lead to postnatal selection - a dramatic
and perverse unintended consequence, even in the ”missing women” literature [citations].

10

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on population policy in
China, and Section 3 describes our data. Section 4 then presents methods and results for
fertility behavior, and Section 5 presents our model, empirical methods, and results for sex
composition strategies. Section 6 concludes.
10

In a recent paper studying fertility and sex selection, Almond et al. (2017) show that the staggered roll-out
of land reform in 1979 induced sex selection behavior at second parity among households with a first-born
daughter independent of the contemporaneous rollout of the One Child Policy (but under the constraints
imposed by it).

5

2
2.1

Background and Context
Fertility Decline during the Mao Era and the Wan Xi Shao
(“Later, Longer, Fewer”) Policy
At the time of the communist revolution, China’s TFR was high, hovering around

6 births per woman in rural areas.11 Figure 1 shows that it remained stable at this level
throughout the 1950s until the Great Leap Famine (1959-1961), when it dropped precipitously
to about 3, then rebounded rapidly to pre-famine levels, and again remained relatively
constant at about 6 through the end of the 1960s. After the famine, the Chinese government
began considering ‘management’ of population growth to be a critical part of economic
planning (Greenhalgh and Winckler, 2005; White, 2006).12 This perspective was formalized
in LLF policy beginning in 1970, and the central government officially codified formal birth
planning targets in its Third Five Year Plan (1971-1975).13
The LLF policy was a set of broad central government regulations to be designed in
detail and implemented by China’s provincial and local governments (Greenhalgh, 2008).
In practice, provinces implemented the policy between 1970 and 1979 (as Figure 3 shows).
Although the historical record does not o↵er an account of this variation in implementation
timing, the degree to which it was related to underlying changes in the demand for children
is an important issue that we explore in detail in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. Overall, LLF sought
to reduce crude birth rates in rural areas to 15 per 1,000 population through three primary
11

During the years we study, approximately 85% of China’s population lived in rural areas.
Limiting population growth was considered integral to China’s economic development and the prosperity of
its planned economy. During the LLF and One Child Policy periods, technocrats set birth planning targets
in coordination with economic development goals — for example, population growth models were used
together with grain production forecasts to set long term birth planning goals (Song et al., 1985). Savings
to the state were calculated according to the provisions required for each averted birth avoided (3 million
averted births in Anhui province were calculated to save 900,000 tons of grain and 1.6 million meters of
cotton cloth, for example) (Zheng et al., 1981). For a detailed account of the political evolution of birth
planning in China, see Greenhalgh (2008); Greenhalgh and Winckler (2005); White (2006).
13
There were two earlier birth planning campaigns (1954-1958 and 1961-1966) that were small and focused
on urban areas, featuring fewer restrictions and weaker enforcement (Wang, 2012; Scharping, 2013).
12

6

mechanisms: (1) Later marriage — delaying marriage to ages 23 and 25 (for rural women
and men, respectively); (2) Longer birth intervals — increasing birth intervals to a minimum
of four years; and (3) Fewer lifetime births — limiting couples to 2-3 children in total
(Greenhalgh, 2008; White, 2006).14
To implement the LLF policy, provincial leaders established birth planning offices
and mid-level coordinating committees, which translated central government guidelines into
provincial- and local-level targets and managed the daily activities of local birth planning
cadres. At the grass-roots level, barefoot doctors, birth attendants, and maternal health
aids served as birth planning officers charged with ensuring that births in their localities
did not exceed quotas.15 Specific responsibilities included deciding which couples would
receive permission to have a child, delivering free oral contraceptives to couples’ homes,
tracking which couples had intrauterine devices (IUDs), and persuading couples to undergo
sterilization.16 The birth planning workforce recruited to enforce LLF was vast: in Sichuan
province, for example, historians suggest that there was a birth planning officer for every 100
persons — or approximately one million birth planners in total.
Although LLF was technically a voluntary program, birth quotas were taken very
seriously (Whyte et al., 2015). On the supply-side, local-level cadres had strong career
incentives to meet their targets, leading to political commendation, which was critical
for career advancement. On the demand-side, cadres were also allowed to create strong
incentives for compliance among households. Compliant households received paid rest periods,
higher wages, better housing, and larger staple allocations, for example (Greenhalgh and
14

The most common forms of birth control during this period were intrauterine devices (50%), sterilizations
(25%), and oral contraceptives (8.5%). However, abortions were also common methods of avoiding unplanned
births, with an estimated 5 million abortions performed per year during the 1970s (Jowett, 1986).
15
Commune- and brigade-level birth allowances were determined using a ‘top-down-bottom-up’ process of
negotiation in which targets proposed at higher levels were adjusted according to feedback from grassroots
birth planning cadres with knowledge of local fertility demand (Greenhalgh, 2008; Freedman et al., 1988).
16
According to some accounts, health workers so closely managed fertility in their jurisdictions that they
monitored the menstrual cycles of all fertile-age women, posting menstrual cycle status in public forums,
and may have even performed monthly exams of women to verify birth control compliance (White, 2006).
Other reports suggest that when the number of eligible couples was substantially greater than the number
of births permitted under a quota, birth planning cadres would force couples to negotiate among themselves
which would be allowed conceive in a given year (Chen and Kols, 1982).
7

Winckler, 2005). Alternatively, birth officers could increase work assignments, administer
public condemnation, or restrict food rations, medical care, and other public services as
punishment for failure to comply (Greenhalgh and Li, 1993).17 Couples were subjected to
intense pressure to comply, and historians document many reports of coercion and abuse,
including reports of threats and multi-day sessions in which couples were berated until they
agreed to abortions (White, 2006; Whyte et al., 2015).

2.2

Population Sex Imbalance
Rooted in patrilineal traditions, a large body of research documents a strong preference

for sons in China — and male-biased population sex ratios throughout China’s history
(Das Gupta and Shuzhuo, 1999; Ebenstein, 2014; Ebenstein and Leung, 2010; Greenhalgh
and Li, 1993; Jayachandran, 2015). Historical accounts of China’s Imperial Period report the
practice of female infanticide as early as the third century BC (Lee, 1981).18 By the end of
the Imperial era, in the late 19th century, some scholars suggest that 10-25% of all newborn
girls across all social strata were victims of infanticide (King, 2014; Lee and Wang, 1999).
In more recent history, sex ratios were abnormally high during years of famine and political
turmoil early in the 20th century due to infant abandonment, infanticide, and di↵erential
neglect of girls during childhood (Banister, 1987; Greene and Merrick, 2005; King, 2014;
Langer, 1974; Lee and Wang, 1999; Lu and Mungello, 2010; Wolf and Huang, 1980).19
The vast majority of research on population sex imbalance in modern China focuses
on the One Child Policy, land reform, and the coincident di↵usion of ultrasound technology
17

Anecdotal reports also describe public meetings to publicly criticize and shame non-compliant individuals —
a powerful political tactic used throughout the Cultural Revolution (White, 2006). Other reports describe
couples being forced to attend day-long meetings where they were subjected to intense pressure to have
abortions (including late-term abortions) or to undergo sterilization.
18
Philosophers writing in the third century B.C. and historical legal texts provide describe female infanticide
early in China’s history (Lee, 1981; Jimmerson, 1990). There are also accounts of infanticide being practiced
as a form of ‘birth control’ in the 11th century (Ebrey, 1993) and 17th century (Mungello, 2008).
19
The ratio of men to women born during the 1920s and 1930s appears to have ranged between 107.3 and
113.6, peaking during the 1940s at 112.7-117.7. Although it is not possible to discern if these imbalanced
sex ratios emerged at birth or reflect di↵erential mortality throughout childhood and early adulthood,
qualitative records suggest that much of this imbalance began at birth (Song, 2012).

8

across the country during the 1980s and later. These changes led directly to the phenomenon
of sex-selective abortion, which became widespread, resulting in a dramatic rise in sex ratios
at birth among cohorts born in the 1980s and more recently (Banister, 1987; Chen et al.,
2013; Gupta, 2005; Ebenstein, 2010, 2014; Ebenstein and Leung, 2010; Almond et al., 2017;
Hull, 1990; Yi et al., 1993). However, because theory predicts that fertility decline should lead
to sex selection in a population preferring sons (Das Gupta and Mari Bhat, 1997; Das Gupta
and Shuzhuo, 1999; Jayachandran, 2017; Jayachandran and Kuziemko, 2011), there is reason
to suspect that sex selection and population sex imbalance may have emerged during China’s
rapid fertility decline throughout the 1970s - prior to the One Child Policy.
Figure 2 shows that sex selection behavior may in fact have risen during the 1970s
(earlier than generally recognized). Among couples presumably having the greatest demand
for sons (those having children at third or higher parity — and not yet having a boy), sex
ratios at birth actually rose as high as 115-121 by the end of the 1970s (Babiarz et al.,
2019). Because this increase in sex ratios at birth occurred before ultrasound technology was
generally available, it could also suggest a resurgence of infant abandonment or infanticide.
Scaling the sex ratios at birth in Figure 2 by the size of China’s population during the 1970s,
these ratios imply over 950,000 additional missing girls in China (Babiarz et al., 2019).20

3

Data and Measurement
For our empirical analyses of fertility decline and sex composition strategies, we use

data from three major types of sources: (1) Archival public health records (Weishengzhi) and
provincial annals from 28 Chinese provinces; (2) Individual-level fertility history records from
China’s 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” National Survey of Fertility and Contraception; and (3)
Province-year economic and demographic data from both China’s official provincial yearbooks
20

See Babiarz et al. (2019), and the Online Appendix for detailed calculations.

9

and the China Family Panel Survey.21 We describe each data source below (Table 1 shows
descriptive statistics).

3.1

Data Sources
First, we obtained provincial LLF policy implementation dates from provincial public

health archives (Weishengzhi) and historical provincial annals. These records document
public health campaigns and other provincial government activities in each province and year
from the 1950s through the 1990s. Official provincial committees published these records and
statistics using data from epidemiological surveillance stations, provincial health department
archives, local government registers, and other administrative sources (Babiarz et al., 2015).
We interpret the first mention of birth planning regulation in each province (specifically,
age at marriage, birth spacing, and overall fertility) in these archival records to signify
implementation of the LLF policy.22 Figure 3 shows LLF policy implementation years in each
Chinese provinces, and details are provided in Appendix Table A1.
Second, we use retrospective fertility history records from China’s 1988 “Two-PerThousand” National Survey of Fertility and Contraception. This nationally representative
survey of married women ages 15 and older includes 400,000 married women living in rural
areas.23 A key feature of this survey is that it collected complete fertility histories from each
woman interviewed (akin to the World Fertility Survey and its successor, the Demographic
21

These 28 provinces are Anhui, Beijing, Fujian, Gansu, Guangdong, Guangxi, Guizhou, Hainan, Hebei,
Heilongjiang, Henan, Hubei, Hunan, Inner Mongolia, Jiangsu, Jiangxi, Jilin, Liaoning, Ningxia, Qinghai,
Shaanxi, Shandong, Shanghai, Shanxi, Sichuan, Tianjin, Xinjiang, and Yunnan.
22
In cases in which exact birth planning regulation dates were not explicitly reported, we generally use the
date on which provincial Birth Planning Leadership Committees were established (see Appendix Table A1
for details). Our approach is conservative in adopting the earliest possible date that birth planning program
activities may have begun (birth planning committees may have taken several years to fully scale-up policy
implementation). To explore the quality of our policy timing measurement, we conduct a placebo test,
randomly re-assigning province-level implementation years across our sample in each of 1,000 iterations.
Appendix A8 plots both the resulting empirical distributions and our program e↵ect estimates. In general,
our estimates lie outside of the traditional confidence intervals of these empirical distribution.
23
Because the LLF policy was implemented di↵erently in rural and urban areas (marriage age targets and
the number of children allowed varied across rural and urban settings, for example) (White, 2006; Lavely
and Freedman, 1990), and because the overwhelming majority of births (87%) in our sample occurred in
rural areas, we restrict our analysis to rural households. Appendix Figure A6 shows that our results are
robust to the inclusion of urban residents.
10

and Health Surveys), recording the timing and location of all births and deaths of respondents’
children back to the 1960s — yielding a sample of more than 1.2 million births during our
study period between 1964 and 1979. Although this sample is not strictly representative back
in time, it nonetheless permits internally valid estimation.24 In contrast to most research
on population history in China, which uses population census data, we also highlight that
the “Two-Per-Thousand” survey enables us to study fertility decline and sex composition
strategies among population subgroups expected to have greater demand for sons (higher
parity couples not yet having a boy, for example).25
Third, we use province-year information from a variety of sources to account for
other factors that may have influenced fertility and sex-selection during our study period.
These include measures of economic development, the child mortality environment, and
social instability associated with China’s Cultural Revolution (1966-1976). Specifically, we
obtain data on provincial Gross Domestic Product (GDP), total grain output, primary school
enrollment rates, and rural population share from China’s official provincial yearbooks, which
are produced by the National Bureau of Statistics of China (and supplemented by the China
Statistical Data Compilation (China Statistical Bureau, 2000)).26 We calculate child mortality
rates for a given province and year as the rate at which children under age 5 die as reported
in our survey, averaged over the preceding 5 years.27 To capture the influence of other major
programs likely to influence child survival (programs providing vaccinations, mosquito and
other vector control services, sanitation, and basic nutrition), we also digitize records from
China’s provincial public health archives (Weishengzhi). Finally, using the China Family
Panel Survey, we measure the intensity of the Cultural Revolution (and associated social
24

Because the survey is representative of married women in 1988, selective mortality among women presumably
means that it is not strictly representative of women/births in earlier years (Gakidou and King, 2006).
25
Although our data do not contain complete migration history information, migration in China was restricted
and highly controlled under China’s household registration system during our study period. Only 11% of
mothers in our survey lived in a province other than their province of birth, and the vast majority of those
women migrated prior to marriage.
26
Some of this data is available from the University of Michigan’s China Data Center:
http://chinadataonline.org
27
Although no reliable source of child mortality data is available, we test the sensitivity of our results to
using alternative sources of mortality data — for example, vital statistics records of overall mortality.
11

instability) by calculating the share of people in each birth cohort and province who were
‘sent-down’ — a practice of sending college-age youth away from their homes to work on
collective farms during the Cultural Revolution (Institute of Social Science, 2014).
Table 1 shows summary statistics for variables used in our analysis.

3.2

Measurement of “Missing Girls”
Because we consider deviations from the naturally occurring sex ratio at birth (prior

to the introduction of ultrasound technology) to reflect unreported girls that died early in life
(i.e., postnatal selection), a note about data quality is warranted.28 Under-reporting of births
and under-enumeration of living children (and living girls in particular) during the 1980s and
1990s is well documented in the demography literature (Cai and Lavely, 2003; Goodkind,
2011; Merli and Raftery, 2000; Yi, 1996; Zhang and Zhao, 2006). However, existing literature
suggests that the degree of such under-reporting during the 1970s was substantially less
(Coale, 1984; Coale and Banister, 1994; Yi, 1996).
To the best of our knowledge, however, no previous work has directly assessed the degree
of under-reporting during the 1970s in the 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” survey — including
under-reporting by birth order and under-reporting of girls relative to boys. Given the
importance of this concern for the interpretation of our empirical results, we use three methods
to investigate the extent to which unreported girls lived beyond infancy as unregistered children
in our sample.
3.2.1

Comparing Sex Ratios using the 1982 and 1990 Population Censuses
First, following Coale and Banister (1994), we directly investigate the extent to which

possibly unreported female births in the 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” survey ‘re-appear’ as
adult women in China’s population censuses, focusing on those births most likely to be
28

While under-reporting may also have been possible through the adoption of girls, the design of the 1988
survey explicitly di↵erentiates between adopted and non-adopted children. Enumerators were instructed
to ensure that pregnancy histories only reflected own children (including those subsequently given up for
adoption) and excluding children who are adopted (Babiarz et al., 2019).
12

underreported. We use one percent microsamples of the 1982 and 1990 Chinese population
censuses to compare sex ratios at birth (number of male births for each 100 female births)
for each birth cohort reported in the 1988 fertility survey with sex ratios for the same birth
cohorts as reflected in the 1982 and 1990 censuses, adjusting for di↵erential mortality using
reverse survival methods. We make these comparisons among all births, and births by parity
and sibship sex composition to rule out the possibility that higher parity births may be more
likely to be underreported.29
3.2.2

Comparing Implied Population Counts to Population Census Data
Second, following Coale (1991) we use the “Two-Per-Thousand” survey to calculate the

age-specific rate at which women deliver male and female babies in each year. We then apply
these fertility rates by maternal age and child sex (simultaneously) to age-specific population
counts of women reported in population census microsamples (interpolated between the 1964
and 1982 censuses), yielding an estimate of the total number of boys and girls born in each
calendar year. We then compare the estimated number of male and female births implied by
these calculations to the actual number of individuals in each birth cohort reflected in the
1982 and 1990 censuses to estimate the degree of underreporting for boys and girls by birth
cohort in the fertility survey.30
3.2.3

Comparisons with the 1982 “One-Per-Thousand” Fertility Survey
Third, we compare the 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” national fertility survey directly to

the 1982 “One-Per-Thousand” survey (which is generally considered good quality — but that
has important limitations) (Banister, 2004; Bhrolcháin and Dyson, 2007; Coale and Banister,
1994). For every woman surveyed in the “One-Per-Thousand” survey, we identify woman
surveyed in the “Two-Per-Thousand” with exactly the same characteristics. Pooling these
matched observations we then investigate whether the year in which a woman was surveyed
29
30

See the Online Appendix, Appendix Figures A1-A3, and Appendix Tables A2-A3 for details.
See Online Appendix, and Appendix Figure A4 for details.
13

predicts her total number of births reported, the sex ratio of her children, or the number of
sons/daughters reported.31
Overall, all three approaches suggest little systematic di↵erential underreporting of
girls (and importantly, little under-reporting by parity and sex composition of previous births)
in the 1988 survey. The Online Appendix presents each of these methods and corresponding
results in detail.

4

Fertility Behavior
We begin by studying how couples’ fertility behavior changed in response to the LLF

policy, focusing on each behavioral margin targeted by the policy: age at marriage (Wan, or
“Later”), birth intervals (Xi, or “Longer”), and completed lifetime fertility (Shao, or “Fewer”).
Before doing so, however, we first assess the identifying assumptions underlying many of
the econometric and demographic methods that we subsequently use. In assessing these
assumptions, we also establish whether or not there is any prima facie evidence of a fertility
response to the implementation of the LLF policy.
A brief note about the methods we use throughout the paper is also warranted. To
the extent possible, we use an event study framework to analyze how distinct dimensions of
fertility and behavior reflecting son-preference change in response to the LLF fertility control
policy. In some cases, however, other frameworks (or modifications) are appropriate — for
example, when modeling the duration of some outcomes for which policy rules vary by age
(in the case of marriage and birth timing) or when cell sizes otherwise become prohibitively
small (for sex selection behavior among population subgroups). We note and explain these
cases as they arise.
31

See Online Appendix for details.

14

4.1

Identifying Assumptions
Given that the introduction of the LLF policy across provinces was not randomly

assigned, a concern is that provinces may have implemented the policy in response to
underlying changes or trends in the demand for children in each province (a concern about
which historical accounts are largely silent). However, we highlight that Chinese government
planners generally lacked incentives to respond to the preferences of provincial residents, and
Figure 4 provides prima facie evidence consistent with this view (White, 2006). Controlling
for province and year fixed e↵ects, it plots important determinants of the demand for children
by event year (normalizing the year of LLF implementation in each province to be event
year zero).32 Specifically, trends in provincial GDP, the child mortality rate (under age
5), population share working in agriculture, and total provincial grain production are flat,
hovering around zero (with reasonable precision) prior to LLF implementation — suggesting
that the introduction of LLF in each province was not correlated with changes in these key
determinants of demand.
We next evaluate this concern further by directly examining the relationship between
policy timing and pre-existing trends in a key basic measure of fertility — the annual risk of
parity progression (or probability of birth).

4.2

Parity Progression Estimation
We use an event study framework to estimate the relationship between the introduc-

tion of the LLF policy and the annual risk of parity progression, exploiting the staggered
introduction of the LLF policy across provinces and over time. We focus on fertility responses
among sub-groups expected to have di↵erential behavioral responses to the policy, enabling
us to consider our underlying identifying assumptions more extensively.
32

For research on the importance of these factors for the demand for children, see Preston et al. (1978);
Rosenzweig and Schultz (1983); Schultz (1985); Becker (1991).

15

Specifically, we estimate variants of the following equation using woman-year observations among those under age 40:

Birthijy = ↵
+

Son

+

P arity

+ ⇢EventY ear

+ µSon⇥P arity + ⌘Son⇥EventY ear + ⇠P arity⇥EventY ear
+

Son⇥P arity⇥EventY ear

+ Xi + Zjy ✓ +

j

+

y

+ ✏ijy

(1)

where Birthijy is an indicator for whether or not mother i in province j delivered a child
in year y. We use a linear probability model to regress this outcome on a set of indicator
variables for whether or not mother i already has at least one surviving son, indicators for
maternal parity (0, 1, 2, 3, and 4+), time in years between year y, and the year of LLF
implementation in province j (‘event year,’ ranging from -8 to +8) along with all two- and
three-way interactions.33 We also control for maternal and household characteristics Xi (a
mother’s highest level of education, her age at marriage, and the ethnicity of her household
head) as well as province-year characteristics Zjy (provincial GDP, a five-year moving average
of the under-5 mortality rate, gross agricultural output, grain production, and the proportion
of the population classified as rural). Finally, Equation 1 also includes provincial fixed e↵ects
( j ) and calendar year fixed e↵ects ( y ), absorbing unobserved time-invariant provincial
attributes and changes over time common across China, respectively. Because our number of
clusters is relatively small, we construct confidence intervals by wild cluster bootstrap with
1,000 replications (Cameron et al., 2008).34
33

We define indicators for the birth parity at which a mother is at risk, from 1st birth through 4th and higher
parity births (grouping higher parity births together). Because we focus on how behavioral responses change
over time and across parity, we use linear probability models for ease of interaction term interpretation (Ai
and Norton, 2003), but logit models yield similar predicted birth hazards for each parity and event year
group (results available upon request).
34
Throughout the paper, wherever possible, we assess statistical significance using the wild cluster bootstrap
method. However, this approach is not well-suited for several analyses, including life table calculations, and

16

Figure 5 shows estimates from Equation 1, with results for each parity shown in
separate panels (and separate plots for couples with and without a son at second and higher
parity within each panel). Consistent with our identifying assumptions (and Figure 4), at all
parities there is no clear pattern of pre-existing fertility trends systematically related to the
timing of LLF implementation, suggesting that the introduction of the policy across provinces
was also unrelated to past fertility behavior (as well as underlying trends in the demand for
children).35
However, we find abrupt changes in parity progression following the implementation of
the LLF policy. At first parity, the probability of a birth actually rises in the later years of the
LLF policy — a result that may suggest shorter birth intervals following postponed marriages
in the late LLF period (because we consider only married women to be at risk for a first
birth), as shown in Section 4.4.36 The probability of a second birth then declines modestly for
parents both with and without a son following the implementation of policy, with a somewhat
steeper decline (although not significantly so) among couples with a son. Consistent with a
true program e↵ect, this decline then becomes more pronounced at third and at fourth and
higher parities. Moreover, at third parity (the general fertility limit imposed by the policy —
and therefore the parity at which the policy has the most ‘bite’), the gradient is significantly
steeper among couples with a son — among whom the demand for more children should be
weaker. Overall, the pattern of reductions by parity and whether or not a couple already has
a son is consistent with a true e↵ect of the LLF policy on fertility behavior.37
Finally, to explore the sensitivity/robustness of our results to alternative specifications,
we re-estimate variants of Equation 1 1) using provincial time trends, 2) excluding groups of
cross-specification prevalence rate calculations. As an alternative, we instead use a pairs-cluster bootstrap
method for Figures 6 and 7 as noted.
35
No point estimates for parity 1-2 births are statistically significant prior to the introduction of LLF. Some
pre-LLF point estimates among 3rd parity and 4th and higher parity births are statistically di↵erent from
zero, but we do not find any discernible trends preceding the introduction of LLF.
36
Section 4.3 shows that age at marriage rises under LLF, and Section 4.4 shows that the interval between
marriage and first birth declines.
37
At fourth parity, the decline is again steeper among couples with a son, but not significantly so — presumably
because the penalties for violating the policy were already imposed after third parity births. Detailed
results in tabular form available upon request
17

control variables, 3) adding urban couples to the sample, and 4) excluding each province oneby-one. Appendix Figures A5-A7 show that our estimates are robust in all cases. Additionally,
to assess the quality of our data on program implementation dates, we conduct a placebo test,
drawing 1,000 sets of randomly re-assigned provincial implementation dates and plotting the
resulting empirical distributions for each parity and sibship sex composition group. Appendix
Figure A8 shows these results. In general, the estimates using our program implementation
dates fall outside of the 0.05% tail of these empirical distributions (with estimates for second
and third parity couples without previous sons having the largest p-values, 0.055 and 0.059,
respectively).

4.3

Age at Marriage (Wan)
We next study changes along the first behavioral margin targeted by LLF — age at

marriage (Wan). To model duration until marriage, we use a woman-year sample including
each woman from age 15 until marriage to estimate discrete-time hazard models of the
following general form:38

M arriageijy = ↵
+

LLF

+

age

+ ⇢age⇥LLF

+ Xi + Zjy ✓ +

j

+

y

+ ✏ijy

(2)

where M arriage is a dummy variable for whether or not woman i in province j marries in
year y,

is an indicator for whether or not LLF was active in province j and year y,

is a

vector of dummy variables for women’s ages a, ⇢ is a vector of interactions between the LLF
policy indicator and each age dummy, and all other variables as defined before.39 Note that
38

Because divorce rates were very low in China during this period (the crude divorce rate, or the number
of divorces per 1000 population in a given year, was approximately 0.3 in 1978 (Dommaraju and Jones,
2011)), we simplify our analysis by studying only the age at first marriage.
39
A discrete-time hazard model is more appropriate than other duration models such as a Cox proportional
hazard model because it does not require an assumption about constant proportional hazards over time. A
commonly-cited advantage of Cox proportional hazard models is that they address censoring of duration
18

because we estimate interactions between the LLF policy and dummy variables for single
years of age, sample sizes in event year by age cells become too small to use an event study
framework. Instead, we use a single policy indicator variable, capturing the average program
e↵ect.
Using a logit specification, the estimated odds ratio exp(

LLF )

captures the e↵ect of

LLF on the probability of marriage at the reference age (age 23 — the marriage age generally
mandated by LLF) among those not yet married. For each age a, the coefficients ⇢a⇥LLF then
reflect changes in this program e↵ect at all other ages 15-40 relative to age 23. Because Ai
and Norton (2003) show that the standard marginal e↵ect calculation for nonlinear models is
incorrect for interaction terms, we instead adopt a prediction-based approach for obtaining
age-specific marginal e↵ects of the LLF policy. Specifically, we first use estimates from
Equation 2 to predict the likelihood of marriage at each age, both with and without LLF,
holding all control variables constant at observed pre-LLF values. We then interpret the
di↵erence between these predicted marriage hazards at each age as the marginal e↵ect of the
LLF policy on age-specific probabilities of marriage among those not yet married (Buis et al.,
2010). We compute confidence intervals using the pairs-cluster bootstrap method.

40

Figure 6 Panel A shows the marginal e↵ect of the LLF policy on age-specific probabilities of marriage among women. We find that the probability of marriage falls at ages
below age 23, with age-specific estimates that are statistically di↵erent from 0 between ages
17 and 21.41 Alternatively, at ages 23 and higher, the probability of marriage rises and is
statistically significant (becoming less precise at the oldest ages, where there is little mass in
the distribution of marriage ages). This pattern of results reflects fewer marriages before age
variables, but we note that by construction, our sample does not contain censored observations (only
married individuals were surveyed). We also note that because we use a sample of ever-married women, we
are only able to study realized age at marriage.
40
Because our approach to estimating age-specific marginal e↵ects relies on post-estimation predicted marriage
probabilities, we bootstrap the distribution of coefficients using a cluster bootstrap rather than bootstrapping
individual Wald statistics (the wild bootstrap).
41
Prior to the introduction of LLF, the minimum age of marriage for women was 18 years old under the 1950
Marriage Law (Kane, 1987). However, our data show that the mean age at marriage prior to the LLF
policy was 19-20 years of age.

19

23, the mandated minimum marriage age under the LLF policy, and more marriages at older
ages.
To measure the implied change in age at marriage due to the policy, we use a single
decrement life table approach to map estimated changes in age-specific marriage hazards qx
to predicted changes in the distribution of age at marriage (Van Hook and Altman, 2013).
Specifically, we predict survival curves lx describing the share of women remaining unmarried
at each age 15  x  40 both with and without the LLF policy. Beginning at age 15, at
which all women enter the risk set, we calculate the share of women remaining at risk at each
age after 15 using estimated age-specific marriage hazards lx = lx

1

(lx

1

⇥ qx 1 ). Figure 6

Panel B plots the inverse of these survival curves (i.e., cumulative density functions (CDFs)).
Consistent with Panel A, there is a statistically significant shift to the right in the distribution
of age at marriage under LLF, implying an increase in the median age at marriage of 8.2
months [95% CI: 4.3-11.2 months]. Appendix Table A4 provides full life table results.

4.4

Birth Intervals (Xi )
We next estimate how birth intervals changed under the LLF policy (Xi, the second

targeted behavioral margin). Following the same approach for estimating changes in age at
marriage, we first study changes in age at first birth, re-estimating Equation 2 — but with
woman-year observations from age 15 to first birth and using a dummy variable for whether
or not woman i in province j has her first birth in year y as the dependent variable.
Figure 7 Panel A plots marginal e↵ects of the LLF policy on the likelihood of a first
birth at each age. The age pattern of changes in first births closely tracks that of marriage,
with reductions in risk of first birth before age 23 and increases at older ages. Figure 7 Panel
B shows corresponding cumulative density functions with and without LLF (predicted in the
same way as age at marriage), with a statistically significant increase in the median age at

20

first birth of 5.2 months under LLF [95% CI: 3.5-6.8 months]. Overall, these results suggest
that first births generally followed closely after marriage, both before and after LLF.42
We then also estimate how subsequent birth intervals (marriage to first birth and
intervals at higher parities) changed with LLF. Restructuring our sample as woman-quarter
observations beginning three quarters after either marriage or a previous birth (the approximate gestational period) and ending at the next birth, we otherwise use a similar approach.43
Specifically, stratifying by parity, we estimate discrete hazard models of the following general
form for parities 1-4:

Birthijq = ↵
+

LLF

+

Quarter

+ Xi + Zjy ✓ +

j

+ ⇢Quarter⇥LLF
+

y

+ ✏ijq

(3)

where Birth is an indicator variable for whether mother i in province j advances in parity q
quarters after her previous birth and all other variables are defined as before.
Figure 8 shows cumulative density functions implied by these results for births at
each parity (constructed in the same way as the CDFs for age at marriage). Although the
results are potentially suggestive of small changes in birth intervals, they are not statistically
significant for any interval.44
42

Appendix Table A4 shows these results.
To isolate the policy e↵ects on the timing of births from the e↵ects on lifetime fertility, the sample is
restricted to mothers who eventually advance in parity at some point prior to the survey enumeration.
44
Our results imply that on average, the interval between marriage and first birth increases by 1.6 months,
and subsequent birth intervals increase by 2.4, 1.4, and 1.1 months (none statistically distinguishable from
zero). However, comparing later years of the LLF policy (5 or more years after implementation) to pre-LLF
years, we find that the median interval between marriage and first birth declined by 2.7 months. This result
is roughly equivalent to the decline implied by changes in age at marriage and age at first birth — and
consistent with the pattern of first parity progression estimates shown in figure 5, panel A. Results available
upon request.
43

21

4.5

Fertility (Shao)
A natural approach to estimating completed fertility e↵ects of LLF would be to

compare the lifetime births of women at all fertile ages when LLF was implemented with
the lifetime births of women who were menopausal when LLF was introduced. In practice,
however, two problems prevent us from adopting this approach. First, we do not observe
completed fertility among all women in our sample (some of whom were still fertile at the
time of the 1988 survey). Second, because the One Child Policy was introduced in 1980,
births between 1980 and 1988 reflect the influence of the One Child Policy (and not just
LLF).
We therefore develop an alternative approach, building on methods developed by
Van Hook and Altman (2013) and used in Section 4.3. First, we use a discrete-time hazard
model to estimate the inputs needed to build sequential multi-decrement life tables for each
LLF event year. These life tables then yield corresponding total fertility rates (TFRs) that
are conditional on the same covariates that we use to study other dimensions of fertility
behavior, isolating variation in the TFR driven by the LLF policy.45 However, TFRs are
period measures that summarize Age-Specific Fertility Rates (ASFRs) at a given point in time,
and TFR changes under LLF reflect both ‘quantum’ (number) and ‘tempo’ (timing) fertility
e↵ects. Because our interest is completed fertility (quantum e↵ects), we then decompose
the TFR change due to the LLF policy into its separate quantum and tempo components
following Bongaarts and Feeney (1998). Isolating the quantum e↵ect of the LLF policy
e↵ectively enables us to recover estimates of changes in completed lifetime fertility.46
45

This approach implicitly assumes that households believed that the LLF birth planning policy would be
permanent. If households believed that LLF was temporary and would reverse within their fertility window,
compliance may have been higher than it would have been under the belief that the policy would be
permanent, causing us to over estimate the policy e↵ect. On the other hand, if households believed that
the policy would become even more strict (e.g., One Child Policy), compliance might have been lower than
it would have been under the belief that the policy would be permanent, leading to an underestimation of
lifetime fertility e↵ects. While we are not aware of any data on household expectations from the period,
the tightening trend in each successive fertility control campaign, combined with increasing birth planning
budgets (Scharping, 2013) suggest that the latter scenario is more likely.
46
Another approach would be to restrict our sample to women who were at least age 40 by the time of the
One Child Policy (and thus could reasonably be assumed to be una↵ected by it). However, this approach
22

4.5.1

Total Fertility Rate (TFR) Estimation
Using a discrete-time hazard framework similar to Equation 1, we use logit models to

estimate:

Birthijy = ↵
+

EventY ear

+

AgeGroup

+ ⇢EventY ear⇥AgeGroup
+ Xi + Zjy ✓ +

where

j

+

y

+ ✏ijy

(4)

is a vector of maternal age group indicators (age 15-19, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39,

40-45), and all other variables are defined as before. To ensure that mothers’ parity is unique
within each five-year age interval, we stratify by parity, estimating separate models for women
at risk of parity 1-7 births. Women enter each parity-specific sub-sample either at age 15 or
after a birth at the previous parity, and they exit the sub-sample (progressing to the next)
either at the time of their next birth or at age 45.
Following Van Hook and Altman (2013), we then use estimates from Equation 4
to predict conditional birth hazards by maternal age and parity for each LLF event year.
Because we allow event year indicators (

EventY ear )

and their interactions with maternal age

groups (⇢EventY ear⇥AgeGroup ) to vary, holding all other covariates constant at values observed
in the year prior to the LLF policy, the discrete change in predicted birth hazards can be
interpreted as the marginal e↵ect of LLF on age- and parity-specific fertility.
As Appendix Table A5 shows, these birth hazards (qx ) form the first part of each event
year life table, and we then use them to calculate both corresponding survivor functions (lx )
and age- and parity-specific birth rates (dx ) (Appendix Table A5 describes these calculations
in detail). Summation across the dx tables’ rows yields ASFRs, and summation down the
would not allow for the e↵ect of LLF on fertility at younger ages because the sample would be restricted to
women 30 years old and above in 1970, around the time of the first LLF program initiation. Furthermore,
our data show that only a small proportion of births occur between ages 30 and 40.
23

columns yields parity-specific fertility rates. Summation again across either of the ASFRs
or the parity progression ratios yields the TFR for a given event year (at bottom-right, as
shown in Appendix Table A5).47
Table 2 shows the resulting regression-adjusted ASFRs and TFRs by event year.
Relative to the year of LLF implementation, the TFR decline due to the policy was about
0.9 births, explaining about 27% of China’s overall TFR decline during these years.48 To
see more clearly the age- and parity-specific fertility changes underlying this TFR e↵ect,
Figure 9 graphically depicts these changes by age and parity during the 8 years following
implementation of the LLF policy. The greatest reductions occurred at third parity among
women in their late 20s as well as at higher parities among women in their 30s. Figure 10
then summarizes the overall e↵ect of the program on China’s TFR over time, showing the
unadjusted Total Fertility Rate observed in each event year and the counterfactual TFR
without the LLF policy implied by our estimates.
4.5.2

Fertility Quantum and Tempo Decomposition
To then decompose this change in TFR into its quantum (number) and tempo (timing)

components, we compute tempo-adjusted Total Fertility Rates (T F R0 ) for each event year
(Bongaarts and Feeney, 1998).49 This is simply the sum of parity-specific fertility rates in
each event year, adjusted for the mean change in age at childbirth at each parity:
T F R0 =

X T F Rp
p

47

1

rp

(5)

Our focus is estimating changes in TFRs due to the LLF policy (rather than recreating observed fertility
rates). It is important to note that our TFRs should di↵er from observed TFRs for three reasons. First,
we estimate life tables for event years rather than calendar years. Second, our life tables hold all control
variables constant at our sample means, which are averages across both pre- and post-LLF years. Third,
because births above parity 7 were very rare, we estimate age- and parity-specific fertility rates up to parity
7 (but omit higher parity births).
48
From the earliest year of the LLF policy (1970) to the start of the One Child Policy in 1979, China’s TFR
fell by 6-2.75=3.25 births (Wilmoth et al., 2007). Our estimates therefore suggest that LLF was responsible
for a TFR decline of 0.88 births, or 0.88/3.25=27.1%.
49
Although Kohler and Philipov (2001) discuss the importance of variance e↵ects in this decomposition, the
yearly change in the variance of age of childbearing before vs. after the LLF policy is only 1.18%.

24

where T F Rp is the parity p-specific fertility rate for a given event year and rp is the change
in mean age at childbirth (in months) at each parity in that same event year. We obtain
estimates of rp directly from Section 4.3 (assuming that age at first birth increased at a
constant rate over time).
Table 2, column 7 shows the resulting tempo-adjusted T F R0 for each event year.50
Consistent with our finding of little change in birth intervals under the LLF policy, the
tempo-adjusted change in quantum fertility between event year 0 and 8 is close to the overall
change in TFR — 0.82 births, accounting for 94% of the decline in the overall change in TFR
due to LLF.

5

Son Preference-Based Fertility Strategies
Given the relationship that we find between the LLF policy and fertility behavior

— and past research establishing a positive correlation between fertility decline and sex
selection, we next examine how the fertility strategies couples used to achieve their desired
family composition (sex composition strategies) changed in response to the policy. In our
environment, there are two strategies that couples desiring a boy could use. The first is simply
to have children until obtaining the desired number of boys — that is, to use a male-biased
fertility stopping rule (Clark, 2000; Jensen, 2003; Yamaguchi, 1989). The second is postnatal
sex selection — either preferential treatment of sons over daughters (leading to relatively
higher mortality rates among daughters than otherwise expected), or in the extreme, female
infanticide.
Conceptually, as fertility costs rise (due to a restrictive population policy, for example),
the use of both stopping rules and postnatal selection could increase. This is because we
consider the LLF policy to have two e↵ects. (1) First, both delayed age of marriage and
increased birth spacing raise the opportunity cost of all children, which decreases the number of
50

Appendix Table A6 shows the complete set of results.

25

children couples would like to have (hereafter, ‘target family size’),51 even absent a preference
for sons. (2) Second, the LLF fertility limit increases the marginal cost of children beyond
the target in a nonlinear way. The first implies that families are less likely to have sons by
chance, conditional on their new target family size, a phenomenon known in demography
as “sex selection pressure” (Li et al., 2000). The second implies more postnatal selection
among families with sufficiently low psychological costs relative to the cost of exceeding target
fertility.
Because existing frameworks do not examine these issues formally, the next section
provides a simple model to illustrate them. In doing so, it formalizes several well-established
empirical results in demography that characterize demographic phenomena when there is
a preference for sons — for example, girls will have more siblings than boys (Clark, 2000;
Jensen, 2003; Basu and De Jong, 2010), and couples’ terminal births are more likely to be
boys (Yamaguchi, 1989; Park and Cho, 1995). An implication of our model (that these
strategies will generally be used, or be reflected, at the terminal birth) also directly guides
our empirical approach to distinguishing stopping rule use and postnatal selection.

5.1

Model
Following Ben-Porath and Welch (1976) and Jayachandran and Kuziemko (2011), our

model assumes that risk-neutral couples desire a target number of children (i), and because
of a preference for sons, face a trade-o↵ between their desire for a minimum number of sons
and the total number of children that they have. The following utility function captures these
preferences:
u(s, n) =
51

i)2 + ln(s + 1)

✓(n

(6)

We assume that households have a target number of children they would like to have taking the full
cost of having and raising children into account — a target which is independent of their desire for sons.
Importantly, we distinguish this ‘target number of children’ from standard demographic measures such as
the ‘ideal number of children’, ‘desired total fertility,’ and ‘wanted total fertility’ (Pritchett, 1994).

26

The first term represents an inverted u-shaped preference over the total number of children,
and the second term captures a couple’s preference for sons. Absent son preference, utility is
maximized when the realized number of children, n, is equal to the target number of children i,
which is determined by both demand- (e.g., the opportunity cost of children) and supply-side
factors (LLF and the costs of fertility control generally). ✓ represents the disutility incurred
from deviating from target fertility (e.g., penalties from violating LLF targets). In the second
term,

0 is a parameter for the intensity of son preference (the utility a couple experiences

from having s sons independent of n). When a couple prefers sons over daughters ( > 0),
and when couples reach fertility size n = i without any sons, a natural tension arises as these
couples face a trade-o↵ between the disutility from exceeding the target family size (n > i)
and the marginal expected utility of a birth through a potential son.
These preferences embed the demography literature on stopping rule behavior as a
sex composition strategy (Clark, 2000). For example, a couple desiring at least one son may
adopt the strategy of having up to 2 children, regardless of sex, and proceeding with a third
terminal birth only if the first two are female. Numerically, this strategy is rationalized with
the model preferences of i = 2, ✓ = 1 and

= 3 in Equation 6.52 With the use of stopping

rules, couples that already have at least one son will choose to stop childbearing at parity
i regardless of the sex of the parity i child.53 Among couples without a son, the sex of the
parity i birth will determine if the couple also chooses to have a parity i + 1 child. As a result,
couples will be more likely to discontinue childbearing after a son is born — producing the
well-known result that stopping rules increase the probability that the terminal child (i.e.,
the youngest child) is male (Yamaguchi, 1989), and leading to a pattern whereby, on average,
females have more siblings than males (Jensen, 2003).
52

Under such a strategy, households stopping at parity i must have at least one son, whereas those stopping
at a parity above i include families which may not have a son. The average share of sons at the household
level is therefore lower for smaller realized family sizes — hence the negative association between the share
of sons and family size (Clark, 2000; Jensen, 2003).
53
Without loss of generality, we assume that the minimum number of sons desired is one, but our model may
be generalized to allow for sex composition strategies used to achieve a minimum of two or more sons.

27

To study how LLF changes couples’ choice of sex composition strategies, we augment
this basic framework to allow for postnatal selection through the neglect of a newborn child
for a cost c (which includes the psychological cost of neglecting just-born children).54 The
choice of a particular sex composition strategy becomes necessary when couples reach their
target family size (n = i) without achieving the desired number of sons.55 With this number
of total children, and for all realizations in the number of sons s, the expected utility of using
a stopping rule but not neglecting the child is:

+

✓
|{z}

disutility of additional birth

|2

(ln(s + 2) + ln(s + 1))
{z
}

expected utility of additional birth

and the expected utility of neglecting a child and trying again for a son is:
1
(✓ + c)
| 2 {z }

+

expected disutility of additional birth

|2

(ln(s + 2) + ln(s + 1))
{z
}

expected utility of additional birth

Using a stopping rule is therefore preferred to neglect when:

2

(ln(s + 2)

ln(s + 1))

✓ > 0; c > ✓

(7)

1
(✓ + c) > 0; c < ✓
2

(8)

while neglect is preferred when:

2

(ln(s + 2)

ln(s + 1))

The first terms of Equation 7 and 8 reflect the marginal expected benefits of an additional
birth while the second terms represent the marginal costs. As ✓, the cost shifter of deviating
54

We note that although not technologically possible during our study period, our framework could be extended
to include the cost of prenatal selection (including the financial cost of an ultrasound and abortions as well
as associated psychological costs).
55
It is easy to show that families will naturally have children until (n = i) regardless of their sex composition.

28

from couples’ preferred family size increases, the likelihood of neglect in Equation 8 increases
relative to the likelihood of stopping rule behavior in Equation 7.
Importantly, households using either sex composition strategy will stop childbearing
after having a son (making use of the strategies empirically difficult to disentangle). In
the case of postnatal selection (but not the use of stopping rules), however, a greater share
of surviving (and recorded) births are male.56 These two observations directly inform our
empirical approach to estimating each strategy.
5.1.1

LLF Predictions
In the absence of son preference, couples simply achieve their target number of children

(n = i) and then stop childbearing with the terminal child equally likely to be a boy or girl.
However, if there is a preference for sons, couples may be willing to exceed their target number
of children if necessary to have the desired number of sons. The fertility restrictions imposed
by the LLF policy can be considered a supply-side constraint, e↵ectively reducing couples’
target fertility. Holding the desired number of sons constant, as the target number of children
decreases, the likelihood of having no son (or fewer than the desired number) prior to reaching
target fertility increases. As a result, couples must exceed the target family size more often —
leading to a higher prevalence of male-biased stopping rule behavior. Simultaneously, because
LLF imposes penalties for births beyond the policy limit, deviation from target family size
is also more costly under LLF (✓0 > ✓) — and hence postnatal selection becomes relatively
more attractive as an alternative to continuing with a stopping rule (Equations 7 and 8). In
general, our model predicts that sex composition strategies will be used (or become evident)
at the terminal birth, a result that again guides our empirical framework below.
In summary, we predict that realized family size will be lower under LLF — and
that there will be greater use of both male-biased stopping rules and postnatal selection
56

We assume that households do not report births resulting in postnatal selection, and that these unreported
births are not living as unenumerated children. The Online Appendix tests these assumptions in detail.
Furthermore, note that within the model, if a family chooses to selection once, it will continue to do so
every time a girl is realized until a boy is eventually born.
29

(depending on families’ psychological costs relative to the cost of exceeding target fertility).
The degree to which each increases because of the LLF policy is an empirical question.

5.2

Empirical Estimation of Sex Composition Strategies
Because it is not possible to identify the use of either stopping rules or postnatal

selection at the individual or household level (because we do not observe target family size i
in Equation 6), we develop an empirical approach for disentangling the two in the aggregate.
(1) First, we estimate the prevalence of any sex composition strategy (including both stopping
rule use and postnatal selection) due to the LLF policy. Because our model predicts that
both stopping rules and postnatal selection are used (or become evident) on the terminal
birth, we operationalize this measure by estimating excess discontinuation of childbearing
following the birth of a boy (relative to the birth of a girl) due to the policy. Absent son
preference, the probability of discontinuing childbearing should be unrelated to the sex of the
final birth. (2) Second, we directly estimate the prevalence of postnatal selection due to LLF,
or the di↵erential likelihood that a given birth is a boy, exploiting the fact that stopping rule
use does not change this probability (nor the sex ratio at birth in the aggregate). (3) Finally,
subtracting the prevalence of postnatal selection from the prevalence of all sex composition
strategies, we recover the prevalence of stopping rule use due to the LLF policy.
5.2.1

Estimating the Prevalence of Any Sex Composition Strategy: Excess Discontinuation of Childbearing after a Boy
Our model predicts that if couples choose a fertility strategy reflecting son preference,

using either stopping rules or postnatal selection, they will do so on their terminal birth (or
their strategy becomes evident on their terminal birth), which will be the birth of a boy.
We therefore consider excess discontinuation of childbearing after a boy (vs. a girl) to be a
combined measure of the prevalence of any sex composition strategy. Stratifying by parity,
we use Ordinary Least Squares to estimate changes in discontinuation after a boy due to LLF
30

using variants of the following equation:

Stopijy = ↵
+

M ale

+

P eriod

+ ⇢N oSon

+ µM ale⇥P eriod + ⌘M ale⇥N oSon + ⇠P eriod⇥N oSon
+

M ale⇥P eriod⇥N oSon

+ Xi + Zjy ✓ +

j

+

y

+ ✏ijy

(9)

where Stopijy is an indicator variable for whether or not the current birth to couple i in
province j and year y is the terminal birth,
is a boy,

is an indicator for whether or not the child born

is a vector of dummy variables for period relative to the start of the LLF policy,

and ⇢ is an indicator for whether or not the couple has previously had a son. Note that
because sex composition strategy use is infrequent — and hence cell sizes become smaller than
in our analyses of fertility behavior, we group third and higher parity births together, and we
also group event years into three event periods: years prior to the LLF policy (‘pre-LLF,’
the omitted group), 1-4 years after LLF implementation (‘early LLF’), and 5-8 years after
implementation (‘late LLF’). Vectors µ, ⌘, ⇠, and

are two- and three-way interactions

between sex, period, and previously born sons, and all other variables are as defined before.57
Standard errors are estimated using the wild bootstrap method.
Table 3 columns 1-3 show estimates among couples having their first son at each parity
(in rows) and in each period (in columns), compared to otherwise similar couples having a
girl at the same parity and in the same period. Columns 4-6 then show estimates among
couples with at least one previous son.58 We find that even prior to the LLF policy, couples
without sons are more likely to stop childbearing after their first son is born (Table 3, row
57

We deem a birth to be a couple’s “terminal birth” if a minimum of 8 years passes without a subsequent
birth.
58
Table 3 shows the linear combination of coefficients ( M ale + µM ale⇥P eriod + ⌘M ale⇥N oSon +
M ale⇥P eriod⇥N oSon ) (columns 1-3) and ( M ale + µM ale⇥P eriod ) (columns 4-6) for each period estimated
from Equation 9.

31

1) — and increasingly so when the first son is born at higher parities. Specifically, for first
through third and higher-parity births, the increase in discontinuation after a boy is 0.5,
8.0, and 13.6 percentage points, respectively (relative to couples having another girl at the
same parity in the same period). We also find a more tempered increase in the probability of
discontinuation following a son among those with one or more sons (columns 4-6). These
results suggest that even prior to LLF, couples prefer at least 1-2 sons (on average) and were
using sex composition strategies to have them.
After the LLF policy, use of sex composition strategies generally grows during the
early LLF period, and even more so during the late LLF period — and the gradient by parity
also persists. Focusing on the late LLF period (5-8 years after implementation of the policy),
row 3, column 1 of Table 3 shows that first-time parents having a boy are 8.8 percentage
points more likely to stop childbearing relative to those having a girl. Rows 2-3, column
3 then show that among those with no previous sons, parents are 25.7 percentage points
more likely to stop childbearing after the birth of their first son at parity 2, and they are
31.0 percentage points more likely when the first son occurs at parity 3 or higher (relative to
parents at the same parities having another daughter). Weighting results by the proportion of
couples in each parity and sex composition group and by the proportion of couples stopping
childbearing at each parity, we find that overall prevalence of any sex composition strategy
(i.e., prevalence of discontinuation after a boy) doubled under the LLF policy, rising from
3.3% of couples prior to the policy to 6.8% of couples in the late LLF period (95% CIs:
2.7%-3.8% and 5.5%-7.6%, respectively).59
5.2.2

Postnatal Sex Selection
Next, to study the relationship between the LLF policy and postnatal selection

directly, we estimate variants of the following equation by Ordinary Least Squares (OLS),
59

Detailed calculations available upon request.

32

again stratifying by parity:

M aleijy = ↵
+

P eriod

+ ⇢N oSon + ⇠P eriod⇥N oSon

+ Xi + Zjy ✓ +

j

+

y

+ ✏ijy

(10)

where M aleijy is a dummy variable for whether or not a birth to mother i in province j and
year y is a boy, and all other variables are defined as before. For each period, the sum of
coefficients (⇢N oSon + ⇠P eriod⇥N oSon ) captures the incremental increase in probability of a male
birth among couples with no previous sons (relative to couples of the same parity with at
least one previously born son in the same LLF policy period). Because the probability of
having a boy (in the absence of prenatal screening technology) should not deviate from the
biologically expected rate — unless achieved through postnatal selection, the estimates for
(⇢N oSon + ⇠P eriod⇥N oSon ) therefore measure the prevalence of postnatal selection attributable
to the LLF policy in each period.
Table 4 shows these results. We do not find evidence of statistically significant
postnatal selection prior to the LLF policy, regardless of the sex of the first birth. However,
column 2, row 2 shows that early in the LLF period, second parity births were 1.5 percentage
points more likely to be a boy when a couple had no prior son (relative to parents with at
least one son). Column 3, row 3 then also shows that late in the LLF period, third and higher
parity births to couples without prior sons were 2.3 percentage points more likely to be male
(relative to parents with at least one son; 95% CI: .0041 - .0425). These results imply a sex
ratio at birth of 117 boys per 100 girls among this subset of couples late in the LLF period —
and the emergence of postnatal selection in modern China under the LLF policy generally.
At face value, male-biased sex ratios at birth suggest neonatal neglect — or in the
extreme, infanticide (we note conflicting qualitative reports about infanticide in China during
the 1970s (Banister, 1987)). However, additional selection through neglect of girls can occur

33

later in childhood as well. We explore the possibility of di↵erential child mortality at older
ages by re-estimating Equation 10 among children at each year of age one through five;
Appendix Table A7 shows these results. Overall, our estimates show that the relationship
between the LLF policy and the sex ratios of children reaching ages one through five generally
track the results in Table 4 for sex ratios at birth — suggesting that the vast majority of excess
female mortality (or selection) may have truly occurred during the first year of life. We also
consider the extent to which two alternative explanations may account for our postnatal sex
selection results: relatively early weaning of girls (motivated by a desire for another pregnancy
to try again for a son) or a ”quantity-quality tradeo↵” (as male-biased fertility stopping
rules increases the number of siblings that girls have relative to boys) (Jayachandran and
Kuziemko, 2011; Becker, 1991). Although our ability to test these possibilities is imperfect,
Appendix Tables A8-A9 provides evidence using several di↵erent approaches suggesting that
neither explains the majority of our postnatal selection results.60
5.2.3

Male-Biased Fertility Stopping Rules
Finally, we recover the prevalence of stopping rule use due to the LLF policy by

subtracting our estimates of postnatal selection (Section 5.2.2) from the share of couples
using any sex composition strategy (Section 5.2.1). Table 5 shows these results by parity,
previously born sons, and LLF period. Although stopping rule use increased slightly among
higher parity couples with at least one previous son, the LLF policy led to the most dramatic
increases in stopping rule use among couples with no sons. In rough terms, the use of stopping
rules more than doubled under the policy among these couples, rising from 0.3% to 4.6% at
first parity, from 4.1% to 13.2% at second parity, and from 7.0% to 13.7% at third and higher
parity.
60

Our calculations imply that the gender gap in breastfeeding could explain 9-33% of missing girls due to the
LLF policy.

34

5.2.4

Sex Composition Strategies by Type
Figure 11 summarizes our results on the use of sex composition strategies, depicting

the implied overall prevalence of each strategy over time under the LLF policy (weighting
our estimates by the share of couples in each corresponding cell). Overall, Figure 11 shows
that the use of stopping rules accounts for the vast majority (91%) of incremental new use of
sex composition strategies due to the LLF policy.61 Specifically, the share of couples using
stopping rules approximately doubled under the policy, rising from 3.25% to 6.46% of all
couples. Figure 11 also shows the emergence of postnatal sex selection under the policy, with
the share of couples using postnatal selection rising from nil to 0.32% of couples. Despite the
relatively low rate of postnatal selection, our results nonetheless imply about 200,000 missing
girls in China directly attributable to the LLF policy, roughly 21% of the 955,000 missing
girls in China during the 1970s (Babiarz et al., 2019).62

6

Conclusion
Chinese population policy is widely considered to be a dramatic outlier in the global

history of family planning (Robinson and Ross, 2007). Coinciding with a demographic
transition that ranks as one of the fastest in global history, beginning in the early 1970s,
China established fertility limits and recruited a large network of birth planning workers
with broad authority to grant permission for marriages and births, monitor couples’ behavior,
61

To make this calculation, we divide the increase in stopping rule use by the increase in any sex composition
strategy: 3.21
3.53 .
62
To make these calculations, we weight postnatal selection point estimates by the proportion of births
occurring in each parity and sex composition group in each period, summing to calculate the proportion
of births postnatally selected in each period (as a share of all births occurring in each period): .05% in
the early LLF period and about 0.29% in the late LLF period. We then multiply these rates by the total
number of births occurring in each LLF period according to vital statistics (China Statistical Bureau,
2000). Our data suggests that approximately 40% of all births during the 1970s fall within the ‘early LLF’
period (event years 1-4), and 25% occurred 5 or more years after implementation (the ‘late LLF’ period) —
roughly 84.8 and 54.3 million births, respectively. This suggests that 84,815,221 ⇥0.0005023 + 54,247,483
⇥ 0.002902 = 200,029 missing girls are attributable to the LLF policy (or 200,029 ÷ 955,000 = 20.9% of all
missing births during the 1970s or ⇡ 0.20% of all female births in the same time period).

35

and incentivize compliance. Given its intensity and reach, Wan xi Shao may provide an
upper-bound on the feasible e↵ects of population policy on fertility behavior.
Overall, we find that the Later, Longer, Fewer policy reduced China’s total fertility
rate by almost one birth per woman, accounting for about 27% of China’s overall fertility
decline prior to 1980, implying approximately 16.9 million averted births.63 Decomposing
this TFR change into ‘quantum’ and ‘tempo’ e↵ects, we show that although the policy raised
the median age of first births by 5.2 months, the decline in TFR was largely the result of
fewer lifetime births rather than changes in the timing of births.
These results reinforce the view that changes in the underlying demand for children
matter most for fertility decline (Pritchett, 1994). Although other scholars have suggested that
China’s birth planning policies may represent an exception and in fact be the primary force
behind its fertility decline (White, 2006; Greenhalgh and Winckler, 2005), our results suggest
otherwise. In general, major determinants of the demand for children include economic
development, falling infant and child mortality rates (Angeles, 2010; Kalemli-Ozcan, 2002;
Schultz, 1985), increasing opportunity costs of women’s time (Breierova and Duflo, 2004;
Lavy and Zablotsky, 2011; Schultz, 1985), and anticipated increases in future demand for
human capital (Galor and Weil, 2000). Many of these forces were not clearly at work in
China during the 1970s, however, and we speculate that the exception — declines in infant
and child mortality during preceding decades (Banister and Hill, 2004) may have played an
important role.
While family planning programs and population policy may have important health and
socioeconomic benefits for mothers and their children, including a reduced risk of maternal
death (Menken and Rahman, 2001; Cleland et al., 2012; Jain, 2011; Winiko↵ and Sullivan,
63

We calculate the approximate number of averted births in the following way. First, we compute the total
number of births in China in each event year by weighting the total number of births in each calendar
year (China Statistical Bureau, 2000) by the share occurring in each event year (calculating weights using
the “Two-Per-Thousand” data). Second, assuming that the percent decline in births in each event year is
equivalent to the percent decline in the TFR in the corresponding event year, we compute averted births in
each event year by multiplying the percent change in the TFR associated with the LLF policy (see Section
4.5) by the number of births occurring in event year zero. Third, we add averted births across event years,
yielding an estimate of 16,908,669 averted births in total.
36

1987) and both increased human capital investments and lifetime earnings among mothers
and children (Canning and Schultz, 2012; Greene and Merrick, 2005; Joshi and Schultz, 2013;
Miller, 2010; Pop-Eleches, 2006), our study also shows that there may be human costs as
well. Specifically, we develop a new empirical approach for estimating the prevalence of
separate sex composition strategies that were technologically feasible in our context, and we
show that the LLF policy led directly to an increase in the use of both male-biased fertility
stopping rules and postnatal selection (through neglect or possible infanticide). Although
postnatal selection was relatively rare, our results imply that the LLF policy resulted in
about 200,000 additional missing girls, explaining about 21% of all missing girls during the
1970s. These results are consistent with our model of fertility behavior when couples prefer
sons and suggest an important unintended consequence of the LLF policy — and potentially
population policy generally — not previously studied.

37

References
Ai, C. and Norton, E. C. (2003). Interaction terms in logit and probit models. Economics Letters, 80(1):123–129.
16, 19
Almond, D., Li, H., and Zhang, S. (2017). Land reform and sex selection in China. National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper. 3, 5, 9
Angeles, L. (2010). Demographic transitions: Analyzing the e↵ects of mortality on fertility. Journal of
Population Economics, 23(1):99–120. 36
Anukriti, S. (2018). Financial incentives and the fertility-sex ratio trade-o↵. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 10(2):27–57. 3
Arnold, F. and Zhaoxiang, L. (1986). Sex preference, fertility, and family planning in China. Population and
Development Review, 12(2):221–246. 3, 4
Babiarz, K., Ma, P., Song, S., and Miller, G. (2019). Population sex imbalance in China before the One Child
Policy. Demographic Research, in press. 4, 9, 12, 35
Babiarz, K. S., Eggleston, K., Miller, G., and Zhang, Q. (2015). An exploration of China’s mortality decline
under Mao: A provincial analysis, 1950–80. Population Studies, 69(1):39–56. 10
Banister, J. (1987). China’s Changing Population. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 1, 3, 5, 8, 9, 33
Banister, J. (2004). Shortage of girls in China today. Journal of Population Research, 21(1):19–45. 13
Banister, J. and Hill, K. (2004). Mortality in China 1964–2000. Population Studies, 58(1):55–75. 36
Barro, R. J. and Lee, J.-W. (1993). International comparisons of educational attainment. Journal of Monetary
Economics, 32(3):363–394. 1
Bassi, V. and Rasul, I. (2017). Persuasion: A Case Study of Papal Influences on Fertility-Related Beliefs and
Behavior. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(4):250–302. 3
Basu, D. and De Jong, R. (2010). Son targeting fertility behavior: Some consequences and determinants.
Demography, 47(2):521–536. 26
Becker, G. (1960). An Economic Analysis of Fertility. Demographic and Economic Change in Developed
Countries. Princeton University Press. 1
Becker, G. S. (1991). A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. 2, 15,
34
Ben-Porath, Y. and Welch, F. (1976). Do sex preferences really matter? Quarterly Journal of Economics,
90(2):285–307. 26
Bhrolcháin, M. N. and Dyson, T. (2007). On causation in demography: Issues and illustrations. Population
and Development Review, 33(1):1–36. 2, 13
Bloom, D. E., Canning, D., and Fink, G. (2011). Implications of population aging for economic growth.
Technical report, Working. 1
Bongaarts, J. and Feeney, G. (1998). On the quantum and tempo of fertility. Population and Development
Review, 24(2):271–291. 3, 22, 24, 57

38

Bongaarts, J. and Greenhalgh, S. (1985). An Alternative to the One-Child Policy in China. Population and
Development Review, 11(4):585–617. 2
Breierova, L. and Duflo, E. (2004). The impact of education on fertility and child mortality: Do fathers really
matter less than mothers? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper. 36
Buis, M. L. et al. (2010). Stata tip 87: Interpretation of interactions in non-linear models. The Stata Journal,
10(2):305–308. 19
Cai, Y. (2010). China’s Below-Replacement Fertility: Government Policy or Socioeconomic Development?
Population and Development Review, 36(3):419–440. 2
Cai, Y. and Lavely, W. (2003). China’s missing girls: Numerical estimates and e↵ects on population growth.
China Review, 3(2):13–29. 12
Cameron, A. C., Gelbach, J. B., and Miller, D. L. (2008). Bootstrap-based improvements for inference with
clustered errors. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3):414–427. 16, 49, 58, 59
Canning, D. and Schultz, T. P. (2012). The economic consequences of reproductive health and family planning.
Lancet, 380(9837):165–171. 37
Chen, L. and Huang, Y. (2018). The power of the government: China’s family planning leading group and
the fertility decline since 1970. Global Labor Organization Discussion Paper Series 204. 2
Chen, P.-c. and Kols, A. (1982). Population and birth planning in the peoples republic of China. Population
Reports. Series J: Family Planning Programs, (25):577–619. 7
Chen, S. (1984). Fertility of Women During the 42 Year Period from 1940 to 1981. Beijing: CPIC. 1
Chen, Y. and Fang, H. (2018). The long-term consequences of having fewer children in old age: Evidence
from china’s ”later, longer, fewer” campaign”. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper. 2
Chen, Y., Li, H., and Meng, L. (2013). Prenatal sex selection and missing girls in China: Evidence from the
di↵usion of diagnostic ultrasound. Journal of Human Resources, 48(1):36–70. 3, 9
China Statistical Bureau (2000). China Statistical Yearbook. Beijing: China Statistical Bureau. 11, 35, 36
Chu, C. Y. C. and Koo, H.-W. (1990). Intergenerational Income-Group Mobility and Di↵erential Fertility.
The American Economic Review, 80(5):1125–1138. 1
Clark, S. (2000). Son preference and sex composition of children: Evidence from India. Demography,
37(1):95–108. 25, 26, 27
Cleland, J., Conde-Agudelo, A., Peterson, H., Ross, J., and Tsui, A. (2012). Contraception and health.
Lancet, 380(9837):149–156. 36
Coale, A. J. (1984). Rapid Population Change in China, 1952-1982. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press. 12
Coale, A. J. (1991). Excess female mortality and the balance of the sexes in the population: An estimate of
the number of “missing females”. Population and Development Review, 17(3):517–523. 13
Coale, A. J. and Banister, J. (1994). Five decades of missing females in China. Demography, 31(3):459–479.
3, 4, 12, 13
Coale, A. J. and Hoover, E. M. (1958). Population growth in low income countries: A case study of indiaâĂŹs
prospects. 1
39

Das Gupta, M. and Mari Bhat, P. (1997). Fertility decline and increased manifestation of sex bias in India.
Population Studies, 51(3):307–315. 3, 9
Das Gupta, M. and Shuzhuo, L. (1999). Gender bias in China, South Korea and India 1920–1990: E↵ects of
war, famine and fertility decline. Development and Change, 30(3):619–652. 8, 9
Dommaraju, P. and Jones, G. (2011). Divorce trends in Asia. Asian Journal of Social Science, 39(6):725–750.
18
Ebenstein, A. (2010). The ”missing girls” of china and the unintended consequences of the one child policy.
Journal of Human Resources, 45(1):87–115. 1, 9
Ebenstein, A. (2011). Estimating a dynamic model of sex selection in China. Demography, 48(2):783. 3
Ebenstein, A. (2014). Patrilocality and missing women. Working Paper. 3, 8, 9
Ebenstein, A. and Leung, S. (2010). Son preference and access to social insurance: Evidence from China’s
rural pension program. Population and Development Review, 36(1):47–70. 3, 8, 9
Ebrey, P. B. (1993). The Inner Quarters: Marriage and the Lives of Chinese Women in the Sung Period.
Berkeley: University of California Press. 8
Feeney, G. and Wang, F. (1993). Parity progression and birth intervals in China: The influence of policy in
hastening fertility decline. Population and Development Review, 19(1):61–101. 1, 2
Freedman, R., Zhenyu, X., Bohua, L., and Lavely, W. (1988). Local area variations in reproductive behavior
in the People’s Republic of China, 1973–1982. Population Studies, 42(1):39–57. 7
Gakidou, E. and King, G. (2006). Death by survey: Estimating adult mortality without selection bias from
sibling survival data. Demography, 43(3):569–585. 11
Galor, O. and Weil, D. N. (2000). Population, technology, and growth: From Malthusian stagnation to the
demographic transition and beyond. American Economic Review, 90(4):806–828. 1, 36
Glasier, A., Gülmezoglu, A. M., Schmid, G. P., Moreno, C. G., and Van Look, P. F. (2006). Sexual and
reproductive health: A matter of life and death. Lancet, 368(9547):1595–1607. 2
Goodkind, D. (2011). Child underreporting, fertility, and sex ratio imbalance in China. Demography,
48(1):291–316. 12
Goodkind, D. (2017). The astonishing population averted by China’s birth restrictions: Estimates, nightmares,
and reprogrammed ambitions. Demography, 54(4):1375–1400. 2
Greene, M. E. and Merrick, T. (2005). Poverty reduction: Does reproductive health matter? The World
Bank HNP Discussion Paper vol. 33399. 8, 37
Greenhalgh, S. (2008). Just One Child: Science and Policy in Deng’s China. Berkeley: University of California
Press. 6, 7
Greenhalgh, S. and Li, J. (1993). Engendering Reproductive Practice in Peasant China: The Political Roots
of the Rising Sex Ratios at Birth. New York: Population Council. 2, 3, 8
Greenhalgh, S. and Winckler, E. A. (2005). Governing China’s Population: From Leninist to Neoliberal
Biopolitics. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 2, 4, 6, 7, 36
Gupta, M. D. (2005). Explaining Asia’s “missing women”: A new look at the data. Population and Development
Review, 31(3):529–535. 9
40

Hazan, M. and Berdugo, B. (2002). Child Labour, Fertility, and Economic Growth. The Economic Journal,
112(482):810–828. 1
Howden, D. and Zhou, Y. (2014). C hina’s one-child policy: Some unintended consequences. Economic
A↵airs, 34(3):353–369. 1
Hull, T. H. (1990). Recent trends in sex ratios at birth in China. Population and Development Review,
16(1):63–83. 9
Institute of Social Science (2014). China Family Panel Study. Beijing: Peking University. 12
Jain, A. K. (2011). Measuring the e↵ect of fertility decline on the maternal mortality ratio. Studies in Family
Planning, 42(4):247–260. 36
Jayachandran, S. (2015). The roots of gender inequality in developing countries. Annual Review of Economics,
7(1):63–88. 8
Jayachandran, S. (2017). Fertility decline and missing women. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 9(1):118–139. 1, 3, 9
Jayachandran, S. and Kuziemko, I. (2011). Why do mothers breastfeed girls less than boys? Evidence and
implications for child health in India. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(3):1485–1538. 9, 26, 34
Jensen, R. T. (2003). Equal treatment, unequal outcomes? Generating sex inequality through fertility
behaviour. Working paper. 25, 26, 27
Jimmerson, J. (1990). Female infanticide in China: An examination of cultural and legal norms. Pacific
Basin Law Journal, 8(1). 8
Johansson, S. and Nygren, O. (1991). The missing girls of China: A new demographic account. The Population
and Development Review, pages 35–51. 4
Joshi, S. and Schultz, T. P. (2013). Family planning and women’s and children’s health: Long-term
consequences of an outreach program in Matlab, Bangladesh. Demography, 50(1):149–180. 37
Jowett, A. (1986). China: Population change and population control. GeoJournal, 12(4):349–363. 7
Kalemli-Ozcan, S. (2002). Does the mortality decline promote economic growth? Journal of Economic
Growth, 7(4):411–439. 36
Kane, P. (1987). The Second Billion: Population and Family Planning in China. Ringwood, Australia:
Penguin. 19
Keynes, J. M. and Volcker, P. A. (1920). The economic consequences of the peace, volume 178. Springer. 1
King, M. T. (2014). Between Birth and Death: Female Infanticide in Nineteenth-Century China. Stanford:
Stanford University Press. 4, 8
Kohler, H.-P. and Philipov, D. (2001). Variance e↵ects in the Bongaarts-Feeney formula. Demography,
38(1):1–16. 24
Kremer, M. and Chen, D. L. (2002). Income Distribution Dynamics with Endogenous Fertility. Journal of
Economic Growth, 7(3):227–258. 1
Langer, W. L. (1974). Infanticide: A historical survey. Journal of Psychohistory, 1(3):353. 8
Lavely, W. and Freedman, R. (1990). The origins of the Chinese fertility decline. Demography, 27(3):357–367.
2, 10
41

Lavy, V. and Zablotsky, A. (2011). Mother’s schooling and fertility under low female labor force participation:
Evidence from a natural experiment. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper. 36
Lee, B. J. (1981). Female Infanticide in China, volume 8. New York: Berghahn Books. 8
Lee, J. and Wang, F. (1999). Malthusian models and Chinese realities: The Chinese demographic system
1700–2000. Population and Development Review, 25(1):33–65. 8
Lee, R. (2003). The Demographic Transition: Three Centuries of Fundamental Change. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 17(4):167–190. 1
Li, N., Feldman, M. W., and Tuljapurkar, S. (2000). Sex ratio at birth and son preference. Mathematical
Population Studies, 8(1):91–107. 3, 26
Lu, W. and Mungello, D. (2010). Drowning girls in China: Female infanticide since 1650. Journal of Asian
Studies, 69(1):230. 4, 8
Menken, J. and Rahman, M. O. (2001). Reproductive health. International Public Health: Diseases, Programs,
Systems, and Policies. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Publishers, Inc, pages 79–138. 36
Merli, M. G. and Raftery, A. E. (2000). Are births underreported in rural China? manipulation of statistical
records in response to China’s population policies. Demography, 37(1):109–126. 12
Miller, G. (2010). Contraception as development? New evidence from family planning in Colombia. Economic
Journal, 120(545):709–736. 37
Miller, G. and Babiarz, K. S. (2016). Family planning: Program e↵ects. Population and Development Review,
42(1):7–26. 1, 3, 5
Milligan, K. (2005). Subsidizing the Stork: New Evidence on Tax Incentives and Fertility. The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 87(3):539–555. 1
Moav, O. (2005). Cheap Children and the Persistence of Poverty. The Economic Journal, 115(500):88–110. 1
Mosher, S. W. (2008). Broken Earth. New York: Simon and Schuster. 2
Mungello, D. E. (2008). Drowning Girls in China: Female Infanticide in China Since 1650. Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. 8
Park, C. B. and Cho, N.-H. (1995). Consequences of son preference in a low-fertility society: Imbalance of
the sex ratio at birth in Korea. Population and Development Review, pages 59–84. 26
Pop-Eleches, C. (2006). The impact of an abortion ban on socioeconomic outcomes of children: Evidence
from Romania. Journal of Political Economy, 114(4):744–773. 37
Preston, S. H. et al. (1978). The E↵ects of Infant and Child Mortality on Fertility. New York: Academic
Press. 2, 15
Pritchett, L. H. (1994). Desired fertility and the impact of population policies. Population and Development
Review, 20(1):1–55. 1, 5, 26, 36
Raute, A. (2019). Can financial incentives reduce the baby gap? Evidence from a reform in maternity leave
benefits. Journal of Public Economics, 169:203–222. 1
Robinson, W. C. and Ross, J. A. (2007). The Global Family Planning Revolution: Three Decades of Population
Policies and Programs. Washington DC: The World Bank. 35

42

Rosenzweig, M. R. and Schultz, T. P. (1983). Consumer demand and household production: The relationship
between fertility and child mortality. American Economic Review, 73(2):38–42. 2, 15
Scharping, T. (2013). Birth Control in China 1949-2000: Population policy and demographic development.
Routledge. 2, 6, 22
Schultz, T. P. (1985). Changing world prices, women’s wages, and the fertility transition: Sweden, 1860-1910.
Journal of Political Economy, 93(6):1126–1154. 15, 36
Schultz, T. P. (1994). Human capital, family planning, and their e↵ects on population growth. The American
Economic Review, 84(2):255–260. 1
Schultz, T. W. (1973). The Value of Children: An Economic Perspective. Journal of Political Economy,
81(2):S2–S13. 1
Song, J., Tuan, C.-H., and Yu, J. (1985). Population Control in China: Theory and Applications. New York:
Praeger. 6
Song, S. (2012). Does famine influence sex ratio at birth? evidence from the 1959–1961 Great Leap Forward
famine in China. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences. 8
United Nation Population Division (2017). World Fertility Data. New York: United Nations, Department of
Economic and Social A↵airs, Population Division. 45
Van Hook, J. and Altman, C. E. (2013). Using discrete-time event history fertility models to simulate total
fertility rates and other fertility measures. Population Research and Policy Review, 32(4):585–610. 5, 20,
22, 23, 57
Wang, F. (2012). Family planning policy in china: Measurement and impact on fertility. 6
Wang, F., Gu, B., and Cai, Y. (2016). The end of China’s One-Child Policy. Studies in Family Planning,
47(1):83–86. 5
White, T. (2006). China’s Longest Campaign: Birth Planning in the People’s Republic, 1949-2005. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press. 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 15, 36
Whyte, M. K., Wang, F., and Cai, Y. (2015). Challenging myths about China’s One Child Policy. The China
Journal, (74):144–159. 7, 8
Wilmoth, J. R., Andreev, K., Jdanov, D., Glei, D. A., Boe, C., Bubenheim, M., Philipov, D., Shkolnikov, V.,
and Vachon, P. (2007). Methods protocol for the human mortality database. University of California,
Berkeley, and Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research, Rostock, 9:10–11. 24
Winiko↵, B. and Sullivan, M. (1987). Assessing the role of family planning in reducing maternal mortality.
Studies in Family Planning, 18(3):128–143. 36
Wolf, A. P. and Huang, C.-s. (1980). Marriage and adoption in China 1845-1945. 4, 8
Yamaguchi, K. (1989). A formal theory for male-preferring stopping rules of childbearing: Sex di↵erences in
birth order and in the number of siblings. Demography, 26(3):451–465. 4, 25, 26, 27
Yi, Z. (1996). Is fertility in China in 1991–92 far below replacement level? Population Studies, 50(1):27–34.
12
Yi, Z., Ping, T., Baochang, G., Yi, X., Bohua, L., and Yongpiing, L. (1993). Causes and implications of
the recent increase in the reported sex ratio at birth in China. Population and Development Review,
19(2):283–302. 9
43

Zhang, G. and Zhao, Z. (2006). Reexamining China’s fertility puzzle: Data collection and quality over the
last two decades. Population and Development Review, 32(2):293–321. 12
Zheng, L., Jian, S., Liu, Z., and Song, J. (1981). China’s Population: Problems and Prospects. Beijing: New
World Press. 6

44

Figure 1.
Total Fertility Rate: China 1950-1990 and Historical Fertility Transitions

Panel A

Panel B
Panel A shows the number of years for countries to transition from an above 6 total fertility rate (TFR) to a
below 3 TFR. Sample constructed from Gapminder v12 TFR and v6 Population data and is restricted to
countries with at least 0.25% of the world population in the initial transition year. For each country, the
start year is the last year in which TFR 6 and the end year is the first year in which TFR  3. Panel B
shows the Total Fertility Rate of China from 1950-1990
45 United Nation Population Division (2017).

Figure 2.
Sex Ratio at Birth by Parity and Sibship Sex Composition: China, 1962-1987

Note: Figure shows sex ratios at birth by parity and sex composition of previous births (parents with
and without a previously born boy). Data: 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” National Survey of Fertility and
Contraception

46

Figure 3.
Years of Later, Longer, Fewer, Campaign Implementation

Note: Figure shows the year in which province-level committees were formed to implement national birthplaning policies. Data: Digitized records from provincial public health archives (Weishengzhi) and historical
provincial annals.

47

48

Note: Figure plots mean and 95% range of residuals after conditioning established determinants of the demand for children on province and calendar
year fixed e↵ects by event year (normalizing the year of LLF implementation in each province to be event year zero). Data: Digitized provincial public
health archive records (Weishengzhi ), and National Bureau of Statistics of China.

Figure 4.
LLF Timing and Determinants of Fertility Demand

49

Note: Figure shows estimates from Equation 1, which estimates the change in the probability of a parity-specific birth among married women by sex
composition of previous births and event year. We condition on maternal and household characteristics (a mother’s highest level of education, her age
at marriage, and the ethnicity of her household head) as well as province-year characteristics (five-year average under-5 mortality rate, provincial GDP,
gross agricultural output, grain production, and the proportion of the population classified as rural), provincial fixed e↵ects, and calendar year fixed
e↵ects. Confidence intervals estimated using the wild bootstrap method with 1000 replications (Cameron et al., 2008). Data: 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand”
National Survey of Fertility and Contraception, digitized provincial public health archive records, National Bureau of Statistics of China, and the
China Family Panel Survey.

Figure 5.
The LLF Policy and the Annual Risk of Parity Progression by Parity and Sibship Sex Composition

Figure 6.
The LLF Policy and Age at Marriage
(a) Panel A: Marginal E↵ect of the LLF Policy on the Age-Specific Probability of
Marriage

(b) Panel B: Implied Proportion of Population Married with and without LLF

Note: Figure 6, Panel A shows discrete-time hazard model estimates from Equation 2 for age of marriage
among unmarried women aged 15 and older. Estimates and 95% confidence intervals are linear combinations
of indicators for the LLF policy and the interactions between the policy and an individual’s age. We condition
on maternal and household characteristics (a mother’s highest level of education, her age at marriage, and the
ethnicity of her household head) as well as province-year characteristics (five-year average under-5 mortality
rate, provincial GDP, gross agricultural output, grain production, and the proportion of the population
classified as rural), provincial fixed e↵ects, and calendar year fixed e↵ects. Panel B shows the implied
cumulative proportion of women married by single year of age. Data: 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” National
50
Survey of Fertility and Contraception, digitized provincial
public health archive records, National Bureau of
Statistics of China, and the China Family Panel Survey.

Figure 7.
The LLF Policy and Age at First Birth
(a) Panel A: Marginal E↵ect of the LLF Policy on the Age-Specific Probability First
Birth

(b) Panel B: Implied Proportion of Women Having First Birth with and without LLF

Note: Figure 7, Panel A shows the results of a discrete-time hazard model estimates from Equation 2 for
age of first parity birth among women aged 15 and older. Estimates and 95% confidence intervals are linear
combinations of indicators for the LLF policy and the interactions between the policy and an individual’s age.
We condition on maternal and household characteristics (a mother’s highest level of education, her age at
marriage, and the ethnicity of her household head) as well as province-year characteristics (five-year average
under-5 mortality rate, provincial GDP, gross agricultural output, grain production, and the proportion of
the population classified as rural), provincial fixed e↵ects, and calendar year fixed e↵ects. Panel B shows
the implied cumulative proportion of women having had a first birth by single year of age. Data: 1988
“Two-Per-Thousand” National Survey of Fertility and 51
Contraception, digitized provincial public health archive
records, National Bureau of Statistics of China, and the China Family Panel Survey.

52

Note: Figure 8 shows the implied cumulative proportion of the population of parity n mothers advancing to parity n+1 birth by quarter at risk.
Using a woman-quarter sample of mothers in which each mother enters the risk set 3 quarters after a parity n birth and exits the risk set in the period
in which a parity n+1 occurs, we calculate the probability of parity progression in each quarter since the previous birth with and without LLF implied
by estimates from Equation 3. Data: 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” National Survey of Fertility and Contraception, digitized provincial public health
archive records, National Bureau of Statistics of China, and the China Family Panel Survey.

Figure 8.
The LLF Policy and Birth Interval Length

53

Note: Figure 9 shows the implied change in age- and parity-specific fertility rates during the LLF period. Using age- and parity-specific fertility rates
implied by 4, we subtract fertility rates for the year of LLF implementation from equivalent rates in event year 8 to show the age and parity specific
pattern of LLF’s e↵ects on fertility. Data: 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” National Survey of Fertility and Contraception, digitized provincial public health
archive records, National Bureau of Statistics of China, and the China Family Panel Survey.

Figure 9.
Changes in Age- and Parity-Specific Fertility Rates During the LLF Period

Figure 10.
The LLF Policy and Total Fertility Rate by Event Year

Note: Figure 10 shows the observed Total Fertility Rate and counterfactual TFR, which is calculated by
subtracting the policy-driven change in TFR implied by estimates of Equation 4 from observed TFR in
each event year. Data: 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” National Survey of Fertility and Contraception, digitized
provincial public health archive records, National Bureau of Statistics of China, and the China Family Panel
Survey.

54

Figure 11.
Summary of the LLF Policy and Prevalence of Sex Composition Strategies by Type

Note: Figure shows the share of couples using male-biased fertility stopping rules and postnatal sex selection
as fertility strategies favoring sons by period, implied by estimates from Equations 9 and 10. Specifically, we
recover the prevalence of stopping rule use due to the LLF policy by subtracting our estimates of postnatal
selection (Equation 10) from the share of couples using any sex composition strategy (Equation 9) in each
parity and sibship sex composition group. We then weight by the relative proportion of couples in each parity
and sex composition group (in each period) Data: 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” National Survey of Fertility and
Contraception, digitized provincial public health archive records, National Bureau of Statistics of China, and
the China Family Panel Survey.

55

56

20.27
3.02
14.4
81.3
79.5%

Provincial Characteristics
Under 5 Mortality Rate (per 1000)
Grain output (1000 tons)
Agricultural Production (1000 tons)
Provincial GDP (100M Yuan)
Share of Population Rural

505,485
146,534
37,736
35,060
29,076
44,662

25.49
2.86
8.55
61.86
78.9%

19.01
21.83
51.8%
11.1%
28.3%
8.9%

51.57%
24.9
30.5
32.7
33.2

Pre-LLF
Event Years 0 and Prior

404,335
86,752
22,926
21,780
16,861
25,185

16.27
3.14
16.2
87.29
79.8%

19.74
22.67
46.8%
11.5%
31.5%
10.2%

51.72%
22.8
29.4
32.4
32.4

369,542
61,470
20,336
16,771
11,663
12,700

13.30
3.25
25.9
119.35
80.7%

20.64
23.54
44.4%
11.9%
31.2%
12.5%

51.66%
17.7
27.4
29.3
30.2

Early LLF
Late LLF
Event Years 1-4 Event Years 5+

Note: Summary statistics calculated among mother-years and births used in our analysis. Data: 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” National Survey of Fertility
and Contraception, digitized provincial public health archive records, and National Bureau of Statistics of China.

1,279,362
292,756
80,998
73,611
57,600
82,547

19.57
22.49
48.8%
11.4%
29.8%
10%

Maternal Characteristics
Mean Age at Marriage (Years)
Mean Maternal Age at First Birth (Years)
Share Illiterate
Share Semi Literate
Share with Primary School Education
Share with Middle School Education or Above

Sample Size
Mother-Year Observations
All Births
Parity 1 Births
Parity 2 Births
Parity 3 Births
Parity 4+ Births

51.63%
21.4
29.1
31.4
32.3

Birth Characteristics
Percent Male (%)
Marriage to First Birth Interval (Months)
First Birth to Second Birth Interval (Months)
Second Birth to Third Birth Interval (Months)
Third Birth to Fourth Birth Interval (Months)

Overall

Table 1.
Summary Statistics

Table 2.
Implied Age-Specific Fertility Rates, Total Fertility Rates,
and Tempo Adjusted Fertility Rates by Event Year

5 Years Prior To LLF
4 Years Prior To LLF
3 Years Prior To LLF
2 Years Prior To LLF
1 Year Prior To LLF
Year of LLF
1 Year After LLF
2 Years After LLF
3 Years After LLF
4 Years After LLF
5 Years After LLF
6 Years After LLF
7 Years After LLF
8 Years After LLF

Age Specific Fertility Rates
15-19 20-24 25-29 30-34 35+

Total Fertility Rate
TFR
TFR’

0.20
0.19
0.19
0.20
0.19
0.21
0.22
0.22
0.23
0.22
0.21
0.21
0.22
0.19

6.14
6.14
6.09
6.04
5.94
5.93
5.76
5.60
5.54
5.49
5.40
5.27
5.18
5.05

1.62
1.59
1.53
1.56
1.50
1.51
1.50
1.46
1.48
1.47
1.39
1.38
1.38
1.34

1.87
1.88
1.89
1.85
1.87
1.91
1.84
1.80
1.79
1.77
1.80
1.74
1.66
1.71

1.34
1.40
1.38
1.36
1.36
1.30
1.27
1.26
1.20
1.21
1.24
1.19
1.19
1.13

1.10
1.08
1.10
1.08
1.02
1.01
0.93
0.87
0.84
0.82
0.76
0.74
0.74
0.68

6.14
6.14
6.09
6.04
5.94
5.93
5.81
5.66
5.60
5.55
5.46
5.33
5.24
5.11

Note: Table shows regression adjusted age-specific fertility rates for each event year implied by Equation 4
(Columns 1-5). Following the general method developed in Van Hook and Altman (2013), we use regression
estimates to predict birth rates by maternal age and parity for each event year, holding maternal and
household characteristics (a mother’s highest level of education, her age at marriage, and the ethnicity of
her household head), province-year characteristics (five-year average under-5 mortality rate, provincial GDP,
gross agricultural output, grain production, and the proportion of the population classified as rural), calendar
year and province fix e↵ects constant at reference year values (event year -1) to isolate the e↵ect of the LLF
policy. Summing across age groups, Column 6 shows the implied Total Fertility Rate. We then adjust the
TFR decline for changes in the age at childbearing, following Bongaarts and Feeney (1998), to estimate the
change in quantum fertility (see Appendix Table A6). Column 7 shows these tempo-adjusted TFRs. Data:
1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” National Survey of Fertility and Contraception, digitized provincial public health
archive records, National Bureau of Statistics of China, and the China Family Panel Survey.

57

58

Early LLF

Late LLF

Early LLF

Late LLF

0.013**
0.030**
0.053***
[0.002 - 0.023] [0.008 - 0.052] [0.019 - 0.092]
0.052***
0.064***
0.072***
[0.043 - 0.061] [0.051 - 0.077] [0.045 - 0.104]

Pre-LLF

Couples with At Least One Previous Son

Note: Each row shows the parity-specific marginal e↵ect of having a male birth in each LLF period on the likelihood of discontinuing childbearing
(compared to mothers of the same parity in the same period having a female birth). Ordinary least squares regressions shown in Equation 9 are
stratified by parity and control for maternal and household characteristics (a mother’s highest level of education, her age at marriage, and the ethnicity
of her household head) as well as province-year characteristics (five-year average under-5 mortality rate, provincial GDP, gross agricultural output,
grain production, and the proportion of the population classified as rural), calendar year fixed e↵ects and provincial fixed e↵ects. Confidence sets
estimated using the wild bootstrap method with 1000 replications (Cameron et al., 2008). Data: 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” National Survey of Fertility
and Contraception, digitized provincial public health archive records, National Bureau of Statistics of China, and the China Family Panel Survey.

0.005***
0.024***
0.088***
[0.002 - 0.009] [0.014 - 0.034] [0.051 - 0.129]
Second Parity Births
0.080***
0.206***
0.257***
[0.055 - 0.107] [0.150 - 0.263] [0.202 - 0.306]
Third + Parity Births
0.136***
0.270***
0.310***
[0.103 - 0.170] [0.202 - 0.342] [0.238 - 0.374]

First Parity Births

Pre-LLF

Couples with No Previous Sons

Table 3.
The LLF Policy and Sex-Based Discontinuation of Childbearing

Table 4.
The LLF Policy and the Probability of a Male Birth
Among Couples With No Previous Sons

Pre-LLF
First Parity Births
Second Parity Births
Third + Parity Births

Early LLF

0.006
0.015**
[-0.008 - 0.020] [0.001 - 0.028]
0.002
0.006
[-0.008 - 0.011] [-0.008 - 0.021]

Late LLF
-0.002
[-0.034 - 0.027]
0.023**
[0.004 - 0.043]

Note: Each row shows the parity-specific marginal e↵ect of a couple not having any previously born sons on
the likelihood a particular birth is male in each LLF period (compared to otherwise similar births occurring
to couples with a previously born son). In other words, the coefficients show the increases over event time in
the e↵ect of sibship sex composition on the probability of a male birth. Ordinary least squares regressions
described in Equation 10 are stratified by parity, and control for maternal characteristics, province-year
characteristics, calendar year fixed e↵ects and provincial fixed e↵ects. 95% confidence sets estimated using
the wild bootstrap method with 1000 replications (Cameron et al., 2008). Data: 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand”
National Survey of Fertility and Contraception, digitized provincial public health archive records, National
Bureau of Statistics of China, and the China Family Panel Survey.

59

60

0.003
0.041
0.070

0.012
0.091
0.139

0.046
0.132
0.137

0.007
0.027

0.016
0.033

0.028
0.037

Note: Each cell shows the prevalence of male-biased fertility stopping rule use by parity and sibship sex composition implied by estimates of excess
discontinuation in Equation 9 and by estimates of postnatal selection in Equation 10. These are calculated by subtracting estimates of postnatal
selection for each parity- and sibship sex composition group from estimates of the prevalence of excess fertility discontinuation among couples in each
group. Data: 1988 “Two-Per-Thousand” National Survey of Fertility and Contraception, digitized provincial public health archive records, National
Bureau of Statistics of China, and the China Family Panel Survey.

First Parity Births
Second Parity Births
Third + Parity Births

Pre-LLF Early LLF

Pre-LLF Early LLF Late LLF

Late LLF

Couples with At Least One Previous Son

Couples with No Previous Sons

Table 5.
The LLF Policy and Male-Biased Stopping Rule Prevalence

