NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ANALYZING THE AFTERMATH OF A COMPENSATION REDUCTION
Jason Sandvik
Richard Saouma
Nathan Seegert
Christopher Stanton
Working Paper 25135
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25135

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2018

We thank Jen Brown, Lauren Cohen, Jeff Coles, Guido Friebel, Peter Kuhn, Bentley Macleod,
Ramana Nanda, Paige Ouimet, Luke Stein, Ed Van Wesep, and seminar participants at the
Arizona State Meeting of the Labor and Finance Group, Harvard Business School, SIOE
Montreal, and UC Santa Barbara for helpful feedback. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jason Sandvik, Richard Saouma, Nathan Seegert, and Christopher Stanton. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Analyzing the Aftermath of a Compensation Reduction
Jason Sandvik, Richard Saouma, Nathan Seegert, and Christopher Stanton
NBER Working Paper No. 25135
October 2018
JEL No. J3,J30,J41,J42
ABSTRACT
Firms rarely cut compensation, so little is known about the after-effects when compensation
reductions do occur. We use commission reductions at a sales firm to estimate how work effort
and turnover change. In response to an 18% decline in sales commissions, corresponding to a 7%
decline in median take-home pay, we find turnover increases for the most productive workers.
We detect limited effort responses. Turnover and effort responses do not differ based on workers'
survey replies regarding expectations of firm fairness or future promotion. The findings indicate
that adverse selection concerns on the extensive margin of retaining workers drive the empirical
regularity that firms rarely reduce compensation.
Jason Sandvik
Department of Finance
University of Utah
jason.sandvik@gmail.com
Richard Saouma Eli
Broad School of Business
Michigan State University
richard@saouma.ch

Nathan Seegert
University of Utah
Department of Finance
Spencer Fox Eccles Business Bldg. Room 1113
1655 East Campus Center Drive
Salt Lake City, Utah 84112
nathan.seegert@business.utah.edu
Christopher Stanton
210 Rock Center
Harvard University
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
christopher.t.stanton@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Firms rarely cut compensation (Gibbons, 1996; Kahn, 1997; Card and Hyslop, 1997; Holden
and Wulfsberg, 2009).1 Accordingly, layoffs are more common than pay reductions during
economic downturns (Kaur, 2014; Altonji and Devereux, 2000; Fehr and Goette, 2005),
generating a substantial literature attempting to explain wage rigidity (Bewley, 1998). The
reason why most compensation contracts appear so rigid remains unclear, in part, because
there is little evidence on the consequences of compensation cuts when they do occur. This
paper begins to fill this void by analyzing the aftermath of a compensation reduction in a
large sales firm. Our analysis and the variation we consider provide a unique view of the
link between compensation schemes, worker performance, and turnover.
The literature has advanced two primary reasons for compensation rigidity. The first is
the concern that pay reductions will cause the best workers to leave. This adverse selection
channel is evident in surveys of managers when asked why they do not reduce compensation.2
However, providing direct empirical support for the adverse selection channel is difficult.
While there is substantial work on the overall elasticity of worker turnover with respect to
compensation, adverse selection is about compositional changes in the types of workers who
depart. Identifying adverse selection requires data on individual worker productivity that
pre-dates any change in contracting terms and a comparison group of unaffected workers
who face the same external labor market conditions.
The second reason for compensation rigidity is the concern that worker effort will decrease. Effort reductions are predicted by some neoclassical models and are starker under
behavioral models with reference points. Many lab and short-term field studies find that
1

Based on this evidence, financial economists and macroeconomists have increasingly incorporated wage
rigidities into aggregate models of the economy; e.g. Fernández-Villaverde (2010) and Smets and Wouters
(2007).
2
Survey responses from 184 firms collected by Campbell III and Kamlani (1997) emphasized the adverse
selection channel, but managers also conjectured that effort responses to compensation reductions would be
asymmetric. Bewley (1998) interviewed over 300 business leaders in the northeastern United States during
the early 1990s recession, finding the greatest support for morale effects, which were predicted to increase
turnover, especially among the better workers because “they are more valuable and can find new jobs more
easily.”

1

pay cuts lead to larger effort reductions than the effort increases after pay raises (Kube,
Maréchal, and Puppe, 2013). However, there is mixed evidence on whether the magnitude of these effects is large enough for effort adjustment to generate compensation rigidity
(DellaVigna, List, Malmendier, and Rao, 2016). This merits further investigation, especially
in longer-term employment settings.3
Our study uses within firm variation to quantify effort and turnover responses. We use
commission reductions that affected a subset of agents in an inbound-sales call-center to
examine how full-time employees change their work effort and propensity to leave the firm.4
The sales agents at the firm are compensated through a mix of fixed wages and commissions,
the latter resulting from selling different digital services to customers who call the firm (e.g.,
cable television, home security, and internet connectivity). During the sample period, two
of the firm’s six sales divisions reduced expected commissions.5 The first change reduced
expected commissions by about 18%, resulting in a total take-home pay reduction for the
average affected worker of about 7%.6 Three months afterward, a second division manager
implemented an even larger commission reduction.
This setting allows us to estimate two sources of heterogeneous responses to the commission reductions. First, granular agent-level performance measures that pre-date the changes
make the setting ideal for examining how workers with different baseline productivity levels respond to the wage cuts. The firm’s two main measures of on-the-job performance,
revenue-per-call (RPC) and adherence to schedule (“uptime,” when an agent is available to
3

These studies estimate changes in effort using a short-term work setting where jobs are only expected
to last for several days. There is no focus on extensive margin adjustments through turnover. The setting in
Mas (2006) is a longer term field study that analyzes police productivity and pay. Mas identifies referencepoint effects, but his setting does not feature pay cuts or performance-based contracts that may mitigate an
effort reduction.
4
All the agents in our sample have an employment contract requiring their on-site presence during scheduled hours, and eighty-five percent of the agents work at least 30-hours a week.
5
In line with the insider econometrics approach (Bartel, Ichniowski, and Shaw, 2004), interviews with
the firm’s management, before the announcement of the changes, revealed that the division manager in the
first division to implement the change believed responses would be muted. Several other managers expected
substantial negative effects.
6
Rewards for some infrequently sold products did increase, but the ability to substitute sales to these
products was limited and did not significantly alter the commission change.

2

take calls), provide detailed data on worker output across time periods. Classification of
agents based on their baseline productivity is also relatively straightforward, as the sales
process is invariant over time, agents deal with incoming customer calls individually, and
sales opportunities are randomly allocated across agents. Control agents with a similar productivity who face the same external labor market conditions did not experience reduced
compensation. Second, we estimate how responses differ based on agent sentiment toward
the firm. An innovation in the paper is to use surveys conducted prior to the announcement
of the compensation changes to measure how responses differ based on worker sentiment
toward the firm and expectations of promotion. As a result of this focus on heterogeneity,
identification requirements are less stringent than in a traditional difference-in-differences
setting.7
The main results support the turnover margin and provide support for managerial fears
that compensation reductions result in the loss of highly productive workers. Highly productive agents (those with pre-treatment productivity one standard deviation above the mean)8
had a 48% increase in attrition relative to the baseline turnover rate. Workers at the average
of the pre-change productivity distribution had a negligible change in turnover. This heterogeneous turnover response changed the workforce composition. The turnover of highly
productive workers led to a total sales reduction of about 4% over the next five months.9 The
attrition of highly productive workers had such a large impact on sales because a worker one
standard deviation above the mean account for 20% more revenue-per-call than the average
employee. An important qualifier to this result is that the differential turnover effects are
all found in Treated Division 1, where agents’ ex-post take-home pay closely match (local)
7

In particular, we examine how different types of agents, facing the exact same compensation changes
and sales conditions, respond differently to the reduction in compensation. A number of tests support the
validity of this assumption. For other specifications, we address potential violations of parallel trends with a
number of strategies, including different weighting to construct comparable groups of agents to the treated
group.
8
The measure of worker productivity behind these results is based on sales agent fixed effects estimated
prior to the first commission reduction, but the results are similar when using measures of average productivity that do not net out the effects of experience.
9
We use a five month horizon to avoid forecasting changes in sales into a busy hiring season that begins
in the late spring and early summer.

3

market rates. Agents in Treated Division 2 had higher tenure and were among the top sales
people in the firm, earning more than managements’ estimates of what could be earned elsewhere. Baseline rates of turnover increased somewhat in this division, but we do not detect
differential turnover rates by worker skill.
While all turnover is costly, the loss of highly productive salespeople—those with nontrivial firm-specific human capital—lowers the firm’s average yield and profits, as less skilled replacement workers answer incoming calls. Our findings have implications for models of labor
market competitiveness viewed through the lens of monopsony. In the baseline monopsony
model, described in Manning (2003), the elasticity of turnover with respect to compensation
identifies a firm’s market power and gives rise to employer rents. If using the baseline monopsony model, we would conclude the firm has significant market power and rents because the
elasticity of turnover with respect to a change in earnings is relatively small in magnitude.
Here, because we are able to identify how the compositional change in turnover influences
output, we conclude the firm’s labor market power is instead quite limited. Management
estimated that the commission changes would reduce compensation expenses as a fraction
of sales by about 3 percentage points. Our estimates that compositional changes in the
workforce reduced sales revenue by 4.0 percent at a five month horizon and by 2.7 percent
at a three month horizon indicate that any potential rents the firm could capture via labor
market power would be quickly dissipated by turnover of productive agents. The offsetting
loss of the best workers limits the firm’s ability to capture rents, but it is difficult to measure
this differential turnover in many other settings.
Regarding the worker effort rationale for compensation rigidity, we find quite limited
overall effort changes.10 The limited effort adjustment is not due to agents misunderstanding
the commission changes or econometric misspecification of sales trends or demand. In survey
responses, agents accurately predicted the magnitude of reduced take-home pay, and the
10

We do not address all behavioral concerns, including those about relative pay evident in Dube, Giuliano,
and Leonard (2018). Dube et al. (2018) rely on a regression discontinuity design around pay thresholds to
estimate turnover responses to own wage and co-worker wage adjustment. Our focus is on how response
patterns differ by a worker’s own ability.

4

average treated agent reportedly increased his/her effort in response to the changes. A
potential explanation, consistent with MacLeod (2003), is that retaliatory responses are
more likely when performance rewards are subjective; measurement of output is objective
in this setting, and the strong remaining incentive pay within the firm may have damped
retaliatory responses.
Another potential explanation for the limited effort response is that the permanent nature
of the change caused substitution and income effects to offset each other—something that
would be hard to find in lab experiments or field studies where compensation is weakly
tied to output.11 The margins of employee response to compensation adjustment are likely
to depend on the degree to which pay adjusts with performance. Settings like ours are
increasingly prevalent, tying compensation more closely to worker driven revenue (Lemieux,
MacLeod, and Parent, 2009).12
We then consider direct measures of sentiment and how they may drive heterogeneous effort and turnover responses.13 In particular, we examine different responses based on agents’
surveyed beliefs about firm fairness and future career plans. After the commission reductions, agents who initially rated the firm as highly fair subsequently reported the largest drop
in perceived firm fairness (Akerlof and Yellen, 1990). There are, however, no heterogeneous
effort or attrition responses, based on perceived fairness, propensity to refer friends to the
job, or expectations of near-term promotion.14
11
See Stafford (2015) on how permanent versus transitory changes alter effort supply responses. In a study
of executive compensation reductions, Gao, Harford, and Li (2012) use a sample of discrete pay cuts and
find that after executives’ compensation is reduced, CEO pay-performance sensitivity increases, allowing
executives to restore their pay levels through good firm performance. While a wealth of literature exists
on pay-for-performance and compensation contracting in general (Jensen and Murphy, 1990; Mehran, 1995;
Hall and Liebman, 1998; Murphy, 1999), Gao et al. (2012) is one of the only studies of compensation cuts
among executives.
12
See Makridis and Gittleman (2017) for how performance pay and fixed pay jobs differ over the business
cycle. Also see Lazear, Shaw, and Stanton (2016) for an analysis of heterogeneous effort responses when
there is fixed pay and unemployment risk.
13
For an overview of the relevant laboratory-based experiments, see Gächter and Fehr (2002).
14
The estimates here should be interpreted in light of the fact that the firm announced the reductions as
necessary for long-run sustainability, though the treated divisions did not experience financial distress prior
to treatment. The literature on fairness suggests responses will depend on the context and how the firm
frames the changes to compensation (Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler, 1986). Relative pay concerns are
unlikely to be important for the interpretation of results, as workers in the treated divisions all experienced

5

Our findings suggest that much of what is driving compensation rigidity and the resulting
adjustment frictions is on the turnover and selection margins, in which the most productive
workers exit the firm.15 Compensation reductions result in the loss of firm-specific human
capital and may call for cuts targeted at workers who are either less productive or are less
likely to leave the firm.16 The results also contextualize whether firms have market power to
change compensation and, if so, how profit margins might change. Despite limited overall
turnover increases and effort adjustment, turnover of highly productive workers limits the
flexibility to adjust compensation.17
The following section describes the firm, the specific setting, and details of the commission
change. Section 3 introduces a parsimonious model to ground predictions. We then discuss
data, measurement, and the pre-treatment survey. Section 5 details the estimation strategy
the same changes and mostly interact with co-workers in their same division (divisions sit together) (Cohn,
Fehr, Herrmann, and Schneider, 2014). That is, workers on the same team face identical changes, but these
events are not likely to spillover to other divisions. Later we test for structural breaks in control divisions
and do not find evidence of across-division spillovers.
15
This evidence is consistent with Banker, Lee, Potter, and Srinivasan (2015) who study a retailer that
increased fixed wages while eliminating an incentive plan. Expected compensation was unchanged in their
firm, however, so they are only able to isolate the change in incentives rather than adjustment around
a nominal reference point. They find limited effort responses to the changing mix of compensation, but,
like our results, they find that increased turnover leads to decreased operating performance. Other related
work comes from an early presentation analyzing a reduction in incentive pay at a personnel search firm by
Krueger and Friebel (2015). At this firm, incentive pay was reduced, with a small offsetting increase in fixed
pay. They find large effort reductions and large increases in turnover, with stronger responses for the most
productive workers. These findings align, somewhat, with our results. We believe that context is likely to
explain the difference; effort for the personnel search firm in their study is proactive, whereas effort in our
case largely responds to performance after a call arrives. The ability of the firm to modulate call arrival
and to monitor workers’ availability to take calls may limit the extent to which agents reduce effort on the
job. The heterogeneous response to incentives, as we later show, suggest the results in Krueger and Friebel
(2015) are likely to be in line with a standard, rational model of effort supply, consistent with our evidence.
16
Depending on the reversibility of effort reductions compared to turnover, these forces also have implications for the ability to experiment and learn the relationship between compensation and output due
to adjustment costs (Kerr and Nanda, 2015). On the turnover margin, Bae, Kang, and Wang (2011) and
Schmalz (2012) argue that the need to retain employees influences the ability to take on debt, while Lustig,
Syverson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2011) and Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013) underscore the importance of
organization-specific capital that shares an implicit claim on the firm. Other work connecting labor market
frictions to financing policy includes Agrawal and Matsa (2013); Simintzi, Vig, and Volpin (2014); Chen,
Kacperczyk, and Ortiz-Molina (2011); Serfling (2016), whereas Mueller, Ouimet, and Simintzi (2017b,a)
connect moments of within-firm compensation and performance. Turnover and effort concerns also take
center stage in the budding literature on compensation contracting practices to retain workers (Aldatmaz,
Ouimet, and Van Wesep, 2014; Oyer, 2004; Oyer and Schaefer, 2005; Kim and Ouimet, 2014; Hochberg and
Lindsey, 2010; Lustig et al., 2011).
17
For the aggregate economy, the results provide evidence on the assumptions behind heterogeneous
turnover in job search models (Pissarides, 1994; Postel-Vinay and Robin, 2002).

6

and the results.

2

Firm Organization

The firm is an inbound sales call-center, with nearly 2,000 individual sales representatives
over our sample period. Representatives are organized into six divisions based on the products and services they sell. Heads of two divisions reduced agent commissions at different
times. For confidentiality reasons, we label these Treated Division 1 and Treated Division
2. These divisions employed 20% and 7% of the firm’s sales force, respectively. The change
in Treated Division 2 happened three months after the change in Treated Division 1. This
section discusses the relevant institutional details.

2.1

Setting

The firm contracts directly with national TV, phone, and internet providers (clients) to
provide marketing and sales services. The firm is awarded regional contracts that grant
exclusive rights to send mailers, advertise in local media, and purchase geographically based
internet search traffic on behalf of the client. Prospective customers engage with the firm
when they respond to the marketing promotions by calling an 800-number, corresponding
to the product or service in which they are interested. The six sales divisions have agents
spread across three geographically distinct call-centers. Each division has its own executive
(division manager), with sole discretion to set their salespeople’s incentives. Beneath the
division manager are multiple teams of roughly 15 sales agents who are supervised by a sales
manager. Teams sit together such that each agent is within view of his or her sales manager,
though teams in the same division may be located in different establishments.
Inbound calls are routed to divisions based on the products advertised (e.g., satellite
television), and the calls are allocated to agents based on idle capacity. The firm absorbs
expected temporary fluctuations in call volume (e.g., in response to marketing promotions)

7

by using its existing salesforce via workforce planning, whereas seasonal spikes in call volume
(e.g., summers) are handled by adding workers. The formation and dissolution of teams is
reserved for very large fluctuations in call volume, such as from the acquisition or loss of a
new client or geographical territory.
Once an inbound call arrives, it is randomly allocated to idle agents.18 In the absence of
available agents, the call enters a queue and is assigned to the next available agent. Agents
rely on designated sales protocols and their understanding of the caller’s needs to sell the
products and services. Products and services have different margin levels for the firm. In
most cases, the highest firm-facing margins are earned on the most expensive products (e.g.,
a satellite subscription with all possible channels) or bundles of services (e.g., a service
contract covering internet, telephone, and television).
Sales agents spend about 80% of their workday either on calls or waiting for another call
to arrive. On average, about 50% of agents’ total time at work is spent actively engaged
with customers, and time spent on active calls rarely exceeds 75% of the agents total time
at work. As a result, agents have down time when waiting for new calls to arrive and have
little scope to change the number of calls they receive.

2.2

Agent Compensation and Commission Changes

Agents earn commissions paid on “eligible product revenues.” Eligible product revenues are
internally imposed transfer prices that, in principal, correspond to the revenues the firm
collects from clients whenever the corresponding product or service is sold. These eligible
revenues are salient, and managers encourage agents to sell higher-margin items in weekly
sales meetings.
These commissions are a significant part of an agent’s total compensation package, which
consists of a minimal hourly wage for the time at work (on a call, idle at the phone, or
18

The firm is almost exclusively an inbound call-center, with less than 3% of calls being outbound—most
of which are agents following up on earlier inbound calls (e.g., returning a dropped call).

8

in meetings with managers),19 bonuses from temporary promotions imposed either by the
firm or the client, and commissions. Commission rates are calculated weekly, and the rate
decreases if the agent’s audited calls violate the firm’s policies. Commissions also vary as a
function of an agent’s performance relative to other agents in the same division. The primary
performance metric employed (and the most salient sales metric inside the firm) is average
revenue-per-call. The commission rate also depends on average revenue-per-hour, both of
which depend on the eligible revenue mapping discussed earlier.
Formally, an agent’s weekly commission can be expressed as follows:
Commissioni = (Eligible Revenue)i × f (Revenue-per-Call/Houri , Revenue-per-Call/Hour−i , Qualityi ), (1)

where f (.) is the commission rate function, which is increasing in Revenue-per-Call/Houri
and Qualityi , while decreasing in other agents’ performance metrics. Although there is
relative performance measurement, the range of variation due to relative performance is
about 10% of baseline commissions. More extreme values in the commission rate function
are observed, however, when agent’s fail their call audits.20
On average, the firm pays commissions that are between 5% and 6% of the eligible
revenue generated by an agent, with the average agent earning $217 per week in commissions.
Commissions constitute approximately 41% of the average take-home pay. Sales success
depends largely on an agent’s understanding of the products and their ability to master the
sales protocol. Accordingly, more seasoned sales agents generate more hourly and per-call
revenue than recently hired agents (see Table 1).
The firm occasionally modestly rebalances eligible product revenues to prioritize the
sale of new or promotional services over others, but prior to the changes considered in this
paper, managers and agents never perceived these rebalancings as pay reductions. Previous
19

Sales agents start at an hourly wage of approximately 150% of minimum wage and receive small hourly
raises for every three months of tenure, with their hourly rate capped at approximately 200% of minimum
wage. Agents who stay with the company beyond a waiting period are eligible for health benefits as well.
20
To ensure quality and uniformity, every agent has a (constant and confidential) fixed number of calls
audited each week, and if any conduct violations are identified in the audited calls, the agent’s weekly
commission rate is reduced.

9

rebalancings involved additional bonuses, as opposed to price cuts.
We learned of the impending compensation change several weeks ahead of its announcement, which—unlike earlier price rebalancings—was expected to have (nontrivial) negative
repercussions for all agents in the treated division. Leaders in functional roles within the firm
expressed concern that the changes would be met with an exodus of disgruntled agents.21
Despite the reluctance of some executives, the commission change was enacted for Treated
Division 1 in November of 2016. The division manager believed the internal transfer price
between sales and “eligible revenue” was broken. This executive believed the pre-treatment
eligible revenue schedule provided suboptimal incentives, encouraging agents to sell lowmargin and inexpensive products while providing insufficient incentives for agents to sell
high-margin and more expensive—albeit more difficult to sell—products. The division manager also believed that the addition of new territory gave him latitude to enact changes.
Specifically, in the summer of 2016, a new territory was added which increased call volumes
and average commissions per call, causing the division manager to move forward with the
the commission schedule adjustment.22 The change radically rebalanced the eligible revenue schedule, with drastic reductions in the internal transfer price for the most frequently
sold products. Using the pre-announcement sales mix of products, the change in revenue
schedule was expected to amount to a 17–18% reduction in commissions, in the absence of
substitution to higher-earning products. The commission rate function, f (·) in equation (1),
remained constant.
Treated Division 2 had more experienced and higher earning agents. The manager of
the division believed pay was sufficiently above market that a reduction in commissions
would have minimal effects on agent effort and turnover. Due to data limitations, we cannot
21

The average hourly take-home pay, $17.30, of agents in the study firm was similar to that earned by
agents in neighboring call-centers. Customer service representatives at a nearby call-center for a global
entertainment provider earn $15 an hour when first hired and receive $0.50 raises every six months. Agents
of another neighboring call-center earned between $14 and $20 per hour, and those of a third firm earn
between $10 and $14 per hour. While the average agent at the study firm enjoys marginally higher earnings
than agents at adjacent firms, competitive outside options abound.
22
In the empirical analysis, we provide more detail about different trends across divisions and how these
different trends may influence the interpretation of results.

10

estimate the ex-ante effect of the rebalancing in Treated Division 2 on overall sales. That is,
we could not get data on changes in the revenue formula. Because our data only contain sales
revenue captured through transfer prices, for Treated Division 2, we do not know the extent
to which quantities declined (possibly due to sales effort adjustments) or prices changed.
Hence, when estimating how effort responded to treatment, we omit Treated Division 2.
However, average commissions declined by about 30% for Treated Division 2 after the change.
Although we cannot determine whether this decline resulted from a reduction in effort or a
change in transfer prices, this division is included in analyses of turnover.
Changes were announced to all employees of the treated divisions at a meeting one week
before the changes took effect. This was the case for both divisions, albeit the meetings
and subsequent changes occurred at different times. For Treated Division 1, the division
executive (1) highlighted recent growth in commissions as a function of eligible revenues,
(2) stressed the equilibrium steady-state level of commissions, and (3) explained the firm’s
solution, namely, a massive re-balancing of the eligible revenue schedule. Anonymous surveys
provide no (reported) evidence of leakage to the sales agents prior to the meeting.
While we estimated that the average post-treatment decline in commissions would have
been 17–18% if sales agents were unable to substitute to new products, the rebalancing
was nonetheless communicated as an opportunity for agents to learn to sell higher-priced
products. Survey responses following the announcement in Treated Division 1, however,
revealed that agents perceived mean commission reductions of 14% (see Figure 1a).23 Agents
also felt that they would need to work harder in response to the change, and that a significant
effort increase would be necessary to make up the gap in earnings (see Figure 1b). In short,
agents perceived the changes as reductions in expected compensation.
23

Our later analysis of revenue changes that weight quantities by old and new prices leads us to conclude
there was limited substitution to new products.

11

3

Motivating Framework

We motivate the analysis with a simple model of heterogeneous agent responses to commission changes as a function of skill differences. Heterogeneous responses are difficult to
sign without assumptions, making them empirical objects of analysis. we then consider how
turnover changes over the skill distribution affect profitability.
Let ei denote agent i’s sales effort and assume further that his sales revenue, yi is given
by yi = θi ei +  where θi > 0 is the agent’s skill-level or type, and  is mean-zero noise. To
simplify the exposition, all agents are assumed to be risk-neutral and collect a linear share of
their revenues, R, in addition to a common fixed wage, α, such that we can represent agent
i’s expected utility by U (α, R, θi , ei ) = α + Rθi ei − c(ei ). The cost of effort function c(·) is
strictly increasing and convex, with c(0) = c0 (0) = 0. Let e∗ denote the unique solution to
the agent’s problem:
e∗ = argmaxRθe − c (e)
e

such that agent i’s value function evaluated at e∗ can be expressed as V (α, R; θi ).
The optimal effort, e∗i , is strictly positive, as c0 (0) = c(0) = 0 < R. Accordingly,
the function U has strictly increasing differences in ei and R, as well as in ei and θi . By
application of Topkis’s Theorem, both

∂e∗i
∂R

and

∂e∗i
∂θi

are themselves strictly positive. However

the heterogeneous effort responses across differently skilled agents are captured by

∂ 2 e∗i
,
∂R∂θi

for

which different conditions are required.
Proposition 1. An agent’s change in effort with respect to commissions is increasing in
agent skill, θ, as long as c000 is sufficiently small.
Proof. See Appendix A2.
When the agent’s costs follow a standard power function; e.g. c(e) = en /n, then the expression characterizing

∂ 2 e∗i
∂R∂θi

is strictly positive. We conclude that in most standard settings,

agents have weakly larger effort responses to commission changes as their type increases. Ac-

12

cordingly, we treat intensive margin changes by agent type as an empirical question, and
instead turn our attention to the extensive margin.
Beginning with the seminal work of (Burdett and Mortensen, 1998), the job ladder model
has been used extensively to capture worker mobility. The standard model maintains an
attrition (quit) rate of Q(w) = δ + λ[1 − F (w)], where δ > 0 captures exogenous job
destruction, λ ∈ [0, 1] captures search frictions via an arrival rate of outside job opportunities,
and w is a random variable with CDF F (·) which denotes the distribution of fixed wage offers
to the agent from outside firms. We define the agent’s reservation wage, w(θi )∗ , as the lowest
fixed-wage yielding an expected utility of V (α, R; θi ).24 To simplify analysis, the agent’s type,
θi , does not influence the agent’s expected utility outside of the firm—that is, we assume
that agent skill is entirely firm-specific. As the following proposition shows, however, the
agent’s type will influence his reservation fixed-wage.
Proposition 2. First, low-skilled agents are more likely to leave the firm than high-skilled
agents. Second, the marginal effect of a commission reduction on utility is greatest for highskilled agents. Third, the distribution of incoming offers ultimately determines if the change
in turnover rate is increasing in agent skill.
Proof. See Appendix A2.
The intuition behind the first statement in Proposition 2 is relatively straight-forward:
because all agents face the same distribution of outside offers, those with the lowest reservation utility—in particular, those who can only extract limited utility from their current
employment—are more likely to accept a relatively low outside offer, and hence are the most
likely to leave. The second finding is slightly more nuanced; while all agents are more likely
to accept an outside offer once their (internal) earnings decrease, a commission reduction
has the greatest effect on the agents who sell the most, i.e., the high-type agents, as these
are the agents who leverage the most out of the commission rate, R. Accordingly, a drop in
24

Without loss of generality, we assume that the fixed-wage offers require the agent to exert a fixed level
of (un-modeled) effort with known dis-utility.

13

commissions, R, will result in low-skilled agents (denoted by θ) reducing their reservation
fixed-wage by ∆ > 0 and high skilled agents (θ) reducing their reservation fixed-wage by
∆ > ∆, where the change ∆ is ultimately determined by the agents’ cost function c(e).
Without additional structure, the theory cannot parlay the difference in marginal dis-utility
into a prediction on quit rates, because while higher types incur a greater reservation wage
reduction, in order for the change in quit rate to itself always increase in type, we would
need:
Z

w(θ)∗ +∆

Z

w(θ)∗ +∆

f (s)ds ∀ θ < θ, ∆ ≤ ∆.

f (s)ds <
w(θ)∗

w(θ)∗

Provided that the density of incoming offers, f (·) is sufficiently uniform, then the highertype agents respond to a commission decline with greater attrition than their lower-skilled
peers, as the extra-marginal support ∆ − ∆ will overpower any differences in the density
(levels) between f (w(θ)) and f (w(θ)). While Proposition 2 highlights the forces in play at
the extensive margin, the marginal effect of reduced commissions on quits across differently
skilled agents is ultimately an empirical question. The answer to this question influences
how compensation changes map into firm profits.
Proposition 3. The sensitivity of changes in profits with respect to sales commissions depends on the turnover propensity of highly skilled agents relative to lesser-skilled agents.
Turnover of high ability agents mitigates any cost savings from reducing R.
Proof. We consider a representative sales opportunity allocated to a random agent. Let
g (θ|R) denote the density of agent types at the firm under the commission structure R.
Then expected profits for the representative opportunity are
Z
(1 − R)

θe∗ (θ, R) dG (θ|R) .

Differentiation with respect to R yields
∂π
=−
∂R

Z

Z 

∗

θe (θ, R) dG (θ|R) + (1 − R)
14

∂e∗
∂g (θ|R)
θ
g (θ|R) + θe∗
∂R
∂R


dθ.

The first term, −

R

θe∗ (θ, R) dG (θ|R) , is negative, as raising commission while holding

sales fixed gives the agent a transfer. When

∂g(θ|R)
∂R

= 0 so that there is no sorting, the sign of

the second term is positive, meaning the agent’s positive effort response may offset the firms
decreased profits from the transfer made to the agent. When

∂g(θ|R)
∂R

> 0, the average quality

of the workforce increases with R, further offsetting the firm’s decreased profits stemming
from marginal transfers to the agent.

A reduction in commissions has two different effects: profits increase because of cost savings, while effort reductions offset some of these savings. When the change in the composition
of the workforce is greatest for high ability workers, that is

∂g(θ|R)
∂R

is increasing in θ, the loss

of highly skilled workers further offsets the cost savings from the commission changes. The
magnitude of the composition and effort changes is an empirical question which we examine
after introducing the data.

4
4.1

Personnel Data and Survey Instruments
Personnel and Productivity Data

We assess the consequences of the compensation reductions using highly detailed commission
and productivity data provided by the firm. The first week of accessible commission data
is July 4, 2015 for divisions other than Treated Division 2, where our data access begins
on January 9, 2016. In addition to commissions, we have weekly agent-productivity data,
including: measures of availability or “adherence” (measuring the fraction of scheduled time
an agent is available to answer calls), phone hours, revenue generated per call, revenue
generated per hour, and total eligible revenue generated. The first week of accessible data
on these output measures varies by division, but data access commences between February
and April of 2016 for all divisions. All six divisions have consistent data beginning in April of

15

2016, which we use as the start of the main sample. The sample is organized by agent-week
and runs through June 17, 2017.
In total, the dataset covers 2,033 sales agents across 61 weeks, for a total of 39,944 agentweek observations. We refer to this as the main sample. In the analysis of turnover, we add
data from 2015 to identify seasonal patterns of turnover.
Table 1 displays summary statistics over the time-series for treated divisions and the
average for control divisions. Agents in Treated Division 1 are similar to those in the control
group in terms of the commissions they earn, their tenure with the firm, their average age,
and their race. Agents in Treated Division 2 have higher tenure and are older than those in
Treated Division 1 and the control group. The firm reserves Treated Division 2 for its most
experienced agents because those positions require mastery of multiple product categories.

4.2

Baseline Agent Productivity Before the Commission Changes

While our analysis focuses on overall responses, many theories of turnover and heterogeneous responses require an estimate of agent ability prior to the commission reductions. We
use data that runs from the beginning of the sample to 6 weeks prior to the first commission reduction (mid-September 2016) to estimate adjusted agent fixed effects that capture
heterogeneous skill or ability.
To do so, we use a fixed effects regression analysis of log commissions, an omnibus measure
of sales productivity that is available in both the main sample and the turnover sample.25 The
fixed effects are calculated from a regression of log commissions on the worker’s tenure profile,
division-by-week fixed effects to remove common division-level shocks, and worker fixed
effects. Accounting for the tenure profile makes this measure one about underlying talent,
rather than the tenure-commission gradient.26 The worker fixed effects are interpretable up
25

Log commissions are used, rather than commissions per-call or commissions per-hour, because commissions data are available in calendar year 2015, but the other measures are not. These same classifications
are later used in the turnover sample for placebo tests in an expanded sample using 2015 data.
26
Those with higher ability are less likely to leave the firm and may have greater tenure. We later comment
on robustness to alternative measures.

16

to a division-level average that is removed through the division-by-week fixed effects.
To account for sampling variation in the estimated fixed effects, we use a regularization
procedure that is well known in the literature on estimating boss effects or teacher value
added. In this procedure, we take the residuals plus the estimated individual fixed effects
from the above regression, fit the restricted maximum likelihood random effects estimator,
and recover each worker’s expected best linear unbiased predictor. The procedure follows
Lazear, Shaw, and Stanton (2015) and is similar to an empirical Bayes estimate of permanent
productivity; the estimator puts less weight on noisier sequences of data. We call the resulting
output the adjusted fixed effects. The adjusted fixed effects guard against mean reversion
or classification being driven by sampling error from a short panel.
Table 2 provides summary statistics for Treated Division 1 in the pre-treatment period
by splits of the sample into terciles based on adjusted fixed effects for representatives’ log
commissions prior to the first treatment date. Later, these adjusted fixed effects are used as
measures of agents’ pre-treatment productivity. We base the split of terciles from the shrunk
worker effects dated six weeks prior to the treatment date for Treated Division 1.
As evidenced from Table 2, agents in the top tercile have higher tenure, in line with the
firm retaining more productive workers. Demographic characteristics also vary across the
fixed effects terciles; namely, workers in the highest tercile are older and less likely to be
single. Later specifications will control for these characteristics.
The interpretation of our upcoming analysis would be muddled if the treatment itself
affected high and low productivity workers differently because of the mix of products sold
before the change. To check for this, we calculate the expected percentage change in commissions after treatment based on the sales mix in the pre-treatment period. The variable
“Predicted Pct ∆ Commission Post-Treatment” reports this measure. The predicted percentage changes in commissions due to the pre-period sales mix are similar across each group
of workers. Although the top tercile has average weekly commissions that are more than 2.7
times greater than the bottom tercile, the product mix of sales does not slant percentage

17

changes in commissions towards any one group based on pre-period productivity.

4.3

Survey Instruments

Before the commission changes were announced, a firm-wide survey was administered to
assess the general sentiment of the sales agents. Three questions in particular capture the
agents’ sentiment towards the firm and their work: (1) “Do you think you will be promoted
in the future?”; (2) “How likely are you to agree with the following statement, [the firm’s]
policies, for example on adherence, compensation, and promotion, are justified and fair?”;
and (3) “Suppose your friend is looking for a job, how likely are you to recommend them to
apply at [the firm]?”
In an effort to quantify any changes in sentiment that occurred as a result of the commission changes, a second survey was administered to agents of Treated Division 1 shortly
after the effective date of the changes. These same questions were asked again to determine
whether agents’ perceptions of promotion likelihood, firm fairness, and desire to give referrals
changed. In this post-treatment survey, we also asked agents how they felt their effort and
commission levels would change as a result of the commission changes.
In this section, we document the changes in self-reported agent sentiment, effort, and
commissions, as the result of the cuts for agents in Treatment Division 1. Figure 2a shows
that agents in Treated Division 1 had, on average, decreased perceptions of how fair the
firm’s policies were. Similarly, Figure 2b shows that agents, on average, reported a decreased likelihood to refer their friends to apply to the firm. These results suggest that the
commission reductions reduced agents’ feelings of fairness and loyalty to the firm but did
not do so uniformly.
For questions about firm fairness or the propensity to refer friends to work, those agents
with the most favorable early views of the firm had the largest negative revisions in expectations after treatment. In analyses focused on how sentiment toward the firm or perceptions of
fairness influence effort or turnover responses, we use results from the initial survey with the
18

understanding that these initial measures also proxy for changes among treated agents. We
do not use changes directly, however, as the follow-up survey is not available in non-treated
divisions. The use of the initial survey also guards against losing data due to attrition before
the second survey was conducted.

4.4

Division Trends Pre-Dating the Commission Changes

Figure 3 shows the evolution of average commissions by division, along with changes around
the treatment dates. Note that there is an upward trend in commissions for Treated Division
1, relative to the other divisions, in the months before the compensation cuts occurred. We
refer to this as the “run-up” period. From July 23, 2016, up to the November commission
changes, agents in Treated Division 1 realized an increasing commission level that is absent
in the weeks before July 23. This increase, according to interviews with firm’s management,
was caused by the addition of new territories from which sales agents fielded calls.27
As a result of the run-up period, many of our results focus on differential changes within
treated divisions, allowing us to compare agents who had the exact same exposure to the
run-up period. For specifications that focus on overall effects, we detail a number of different
strategies to account for this “run-up” period in section 5.2. In the remainder of the paper,
we discuss how this period might change the interpretation of results.

4.5

Agents Understood the Commission Changes

Despite some agents’ willingness to supply labor at the earliest parts of the “run-up” period and in other, less-lucrative divisions, agents’ expectations of the future are important.
The sales agents expected the pre-event commission levels to be permanent, and their revised expectations about firm fairness and quality (Figures 2a and 2b) reflect that these
events were unanticipated. Manager interviews indicated that cuts of this magnitude were
27
For example, the new territory may have been home to fewer competitors, in which case the agents could
more easily up-sell callers into buying products and services with higher commission-eligible revenues.

19

unprecedented.
As discussed previously, Figure 1a makes clear that the commission change was salient.28
Figure 1b depicts agents’ estimates of how much harder they would need to work to maintain
their prior income levels. Agents overwhelmingly believed that they would need to exert more
effort to maintain their usual levels of commission.

5

Empirical Strategy and Results

This section details the consequences of changing the compensation structure. We begin by
focusing on turnover, as this is the margin that we find ultimately matters most. We then
analyze intensive margin changes in sales. We discuss potential identification issues and the
checks or tests for these issues throughout this section.
It should be noted that our estimation of changes in work effort are conditional on
remaining at the firm. As turnover takes time to accumulate, however, we observe almost
all treated workers with at least some sales data in the post-reduction period.

5.1

Changes in Turnover

We provide preliminary evidence on how the composition of the workforce changes after the
commission cuts by plotting the average adjusted worker fixed effects for control divisions
and Treated Division 1. Because the fixed effects are estimated using data that ends six weeks
prior to the event date, we can assess whether the fixed effects (normalized to the event date)
track one another in the pre-event period. Changes in the average of worker fixed effects
summarize how turnover differs by workers’ skill in treated and control divisions.
Figure 4 displays the results. Like many sales firms, there is positive selection by worker
quality over time, captured by the upward trend in average fixed effects in all divisions.
28
The mean reported perceived commission change is negative and large, although slightly smaller than
the 17–18% expected commission reduction resulting from the change. Using the pre-treatment sales mix,
we did not find positive expected changes for employees.

20

However, there is clear evidence that average worker quality begins to deteriorate in Treated
Division 1 within several weeks of the announcement of the commission cut. This divergence
in worker fixed effects happened only after the change in commissions was announced.
We examine this more formally using a difference-in-differences estimator over a longer
panel. Estimates of the extensive margin effects of commission reductions on turnover utilize
the extended data, predating the commission reductions by at least a full calendar year for
each division (the data begins in July of 2015 for Treated Division 1 and January 2016 for
Treated Division 2). Our goal is to model how turnover changes overall, and by worker skill,
after each event. We run separate regressions for events in Treated Division 1 and Treated
Division 2 rather than pooling the data, as the underlying tenure and worker skill for these
divisions differs dramatically.
The model captures how the turnover probability changes for a given level of worker
experience after accounting for different turnover rates by division and seasonal time periods. We account for how exit likelihood changes by worker tenure with a flexible function
g(T imeAtRisk), capturing how the baseline turnover hazard changes with time at the firm.
We then include combinations of division and time fixed effects to capture permanent heterogeneity across divisions or seasonal shocks that may be correlated with treatment. The
model we estimate is:
T urnoverit = α + T imeControls + g(T imeAtRisk) + Xit β1 +

X

(Divj +

j

P ostj Divj δ1 + P laceboj Divj δ2 +

X

(Hetk Divj P ostj δ3k + Hetk Divj P laceboj δ4k +

(2)

k

Hetk β2 + Hetk P ostj β3 + Hetk P laceboj β4 + Hetk Divj β5 )) + εit .
The dependent variable is an indicator that the week in question is worker i0 s last week in
the firm. After the worker leaves, he or she is no longer included in the sample, so this
specification acts like a discrete time hazard model. The parameter δ1 captures the average
change in turnover probability, conditional on tenure and time controls, after the commission
21

cut occurs in division j. This is indicated by P ostj , the post-treatment indicator interacted
with Divj , a division fixed effect. The P ostj indicator is always zero for untreated divisions
and is collinear with time fixed effects.
We include baseline measures of worker skill as heterogeneous characteristics, captured
by Hetk , and their interaction with post-event indicators. To identify heterogeneity in
skill, we use the standardized z -score of adjusted worker fixed effects in the pre-treatment
period to capture differences in baseline productivity.29 We use z -scores to standardize
the fixed effects across the treatment and control groups and to facilitate interpretation
of parameters, as a unit change in the z-score corresponds to a standard deviation of the
underlying productivity measure. For heterogeneous measures of skill level, Hetk is the z score of the worker’s log-commission fixed effect estimated from data ending six weeks prior
to the first commission reduction. The specification allows for k to index any heterogeneous
characteristic, as in later specifications we also examine how worker sentiment toward the
firm affects turnover patterns after the commission change. The parameter δ3k captures
different responses based on characteristic Hetk . A fully saturated set of indicators for
missing categories of heterogeneous characteristics is also included for those sales reps who
do not have data available.
Table 3 displays the results, split by Treated Division 1 and Treated Division 2. The
columns of this table correspond to different combinations of T imeControls to account for
differences in seasonality and division trends in turnover. Due to the fact that we only
have a small number of divisions and an even smaller number of treated groups, we perform
inference using a combined randomization inference and wild bootstrap procedure that is
designed to estimate critical regions under clustering with few treated clusters (MacKinnon
and Webb, 2018). These tests are displayed in the bottom rows of the table for δ1 and δ3 .
We find evidence of adverse selection in turnover. Columns 1 and 4 include time fixed
29

Recall, from the discussion in Section 4.5 that this measure is estimated by regressing the log of commissions on a spline in tenure, division-by-week fixed effects, and employee fixed effects for the period before
the changes occurred. We combine the residuals from this regression with the employee fixed effects, use a
shrinkage procedure, and take the z -score.

22

effects that remove common turnover changes affecting all divisions (e.g., end of the summer
high call volume season). In Treated Division 1, we do not find an increase in turnover
overall, but we find a shift in the composition of turnover. Workers who had higher sales
productivity in the pre-period, as proxied by their z -scores, were relatively more likely to
leave the firm in Treated Division 1 after the commission reduction. This result is consistent
with Figure 4. The point estimates across columns indicate that Treated Division 1 agents
with pre-period performance one standard deviation above the mean had turnover rates
that increased by between 1.5 to 2.1 percentage points in a given week relative to treated
agents with average performance. These effects are precisely estimated and are robust to the
estimation procedure, including the addition of workers’ tenure profiles in the first stage.30
This turnover increase is relative to an overall sample mean of about 0.036, indicating a
substantial increase compared to baseline rates. In Treated Division 2, we do not detect this
heterogeneous effect, but instead find a small increase in the average turnover rate. Agents
in Treated Division 2 are highly productive agents, so they are already in the right tail of
the firm-wide productivity distribution.31
Seasonal turnover patterns, as indicated by the zero coefficients on the placebo period,
do not drive the results.32 Specifications in Columns 2 and 5 augment the examination of
seasonality by including division-by-week of the calendar year fixed effects. These specifications compare turnover rates for the division against turnover rates in the same week of the
last calendar year, but unlike the placebo approach, offer more flexibility by division. The
results remain broadly similar. A final approach includes division-by-time fixed effects to
30

These results are qualitatively similar when agent fixed effects are estimated omitting the tenure polynomial.
31
It is only in Division 1 that highly skilled agents are more likely to turnover than are lesser skilled agents.
Even though the reduction in commissions was greater in percentage terms in Treated Division 2, their lack
of turnover may be due to the fact that agents in the division continued to have post-treatment commissions
that are significantly higher, on average, than those of Treated Division 1 and control divisions.
32
We augment the intensive margin sample with earlier data containing personnel records, turnover data,
and log commissions beginning in July of 2015. Data on sales and other effort measures begins in April of
2016. The turnover data from the calendar year prior to the commission changes allows us to assess whether
seasonal turnover patterns are responsible for the results. For estimating δ4k we estimate the z -score using
data from the prior year.

23

identify heterogeneous attrition patterns; this specification only identifies δ3k and δ4k . The
heterogeneous turnover patterns in Treated Division 1 remain.
To quantify the adverse selection offset for firm profits as described in 3, we compute
how revenue-per-call changes as a function of the workforce composition shifts in underlying
ability. The empirical relationship suggests that a one standard deviation change in the
productivity z -score increases expected revenue-per-call by about 19%. Using historical data
predating the commission reduction, we calculate average revenue-per-call as a function of
the productivity z -score at the midpoint of 20 different bins. Taking the sum of the change
in turnover probability multiplied by average revenue-per-call across each bin gives us the
total impact on productivity. We concentrate on effects at a horizon five months after the
cuts, as turnover and hiring both increase as the summer approaches. Through the turnover
channel, the commission cut reduced average revenue-per-call by about 4% at the end of this
five month period in Treated Division 1. Balancing this cut is a reduction in compensation
expense. Management’s criteria for evaluating the change uses a reduction in commission
expenses from 9% of total revenue to about 5–6% of revenue, meaning the total effect on
firm profit was small over the 5 month horizon. At horizons longer than about five months,
because turnover accumulates, the adverse selection channel would overtake the cost savings
from the commission reductions. However, as worker churn at the firm spikes prior to
the busy summer sales season—both due to new hiring and attrition—this relatively short
planning horizon may have limited the long-term consequences to the firm.
The turnover channel, and especially differential turnover of highly skilled workers, appears to be a primary reason for rigid compensation arrangements. In the following subsections, we consider whether agents reduced their sales effort and availability to take calls.
Before getting there, we address threats to identification.

24

5.2

Addressing Empirical Hurdles

The turnover regressions overcome a number of empirical hurdles because of the presence
of employment data over multiple years. Challenges remain when considering estimated
responses on the intensive margin, as multiple years of data are not available for all divisions. There are several strategies we use to ensure the non-treated divisions constitute an
appropriate control group.
Different Trends: To account for pre-treatment differences in sales or commission
trends, we include division-specific linear time trends. Some specifications also re-weight
data from other divisions to match patterns prior to the event in Treated Division 1. We
use a propensity score reweighting procedure for this purpose, leaving six weeks of data to
assess divergence between the re-weighted controls and Treated Division 1 prior to the event
date.33 Demand is stochastic and seasonal. Some demand changes may be forecastable and
show up in headcount adjustments by the firm. Other demand changes are more subtle but
may surface as a seasonal trend from past data. To account for division-level seasonality
that isn’t captured by common time fixed effects, we also check whether lags of the average
division commissions one year prior to the week in question change the results. We use these
commission data because we lack sales data from the prior year. Results are little changed
with or without these controls.
Spillovers to the Control Group: To test another identifying assumption, the lack of
spillovers to control divisions, we conduct structural break tests for the control group. These
results suggest minimal spillovers to the control group. Figure A.2 describes the break tests
and plots the parameter estimates from various specifications of these break tests.
Parallel Trends for Heterogeneous Agents Within Division: The validity of
the difference-in-differences parallel trend assumption is not necessary for an analysis of differential effects across agent skill level because we leverage within-division variation. That
33

Figures A.1b and A.1a provide details on the fit of the re-weighting estimates and suggest the procedure
performs well when targeting “per-call” commissions or performance metrics. Section A.1 in the appendix
describes the procedure in detail.

25

is, heterogeneous responses can be estimated using division-by-time fixed effects without appealing to parallel trends across divisions. How differences between types of agents evolve—in
treated and control divisions—helps to visualize the sources of variation. Figures A.3 and
A.4 plot the evolution of within-division differences by worker ability and worker perceptions
of firm fairness over time, suggesting parallel trends within division.
Substitution to Different Products Mitigates the Commission Changes: Whether
agents were able to reduce the impact of the commission changes because of substitution to
other products is an empirical question that we examine in detail later. The approach is to
estimate whether sales revenue becomes more heavily weighted to items with more favorable
relative prices under the new revenue mapping function. Although there were some relative price changes that may have given rise to agent substitution, we find that agents were
not able to offset the commission reductions by changing their mix of products sold. That
is, the overall change in commissions per call that we estimate closely follow the predicted
reductions given the pre-change product mix.

5.3

Changes in Effort

The first specification for estimating effects on the intensive margin of worker effort is a
difference-in-differences regression with the following form:

yit = αi + t + Xit β1 +

X

(Divj + T rendj + P ostj × Divj δ1 ) + εit .

(3)

j

All specifications include time fixed effects, t, division fixed effects, Divj , and divisionspecific time trends, T rendj . The matrix Xit has a cubic spline in tenure and a third order
polynomial in age, along with fixed effects for ethnicity, gender, call-center location, and
marital status. Some specifications include αi , a worker fixed effect.34
Equation 3 accounts for average differences across divisions or average differences across
34

Differences in the within-worker versus OLS estimates can be attributed to attrition from the firm.

26

time periods, but the estimates may be biased under division specific time trends that don’t
follow the linear functional form, other secular demand shifts, or division-specific seasonality
that correlates with treatment.
A second specification identifies heterogeneous effects across sales agents based on their
pre-treatment performance or survey responses on firm fairness, the propensity to refer a
friend (sentiment), or the likelihood of expected promotion. This specification adds interactive effects to equation (3) that closely mirror those used in the analysis of turnover:

yit = αi + t + Xit β1 +

X

(Divj + T rendj + P ostj Divj δ1 +

j

X

(4)

(Hetk Divj P ostj δ2k + Hetk β2 + Hetk P ostj β3 + Hetk Divj β4 )) + εit .

k

When only heterogeneous effects are required, division-by-time fixed effects are added to
equation (4), resulting in:

yit = αi + Xit β1 +

X

(Divj × t +

j

X

(Hetk Divj P ostj δ2k +

k

(5)

Hetk β2 + Hetk P ostj β3 + Hetk Divj β4 )) + εit .
We present estimates for a variety of different dependent variables meant to capture effort
changes. We focus on Treated Division 1, as we cannot measure how sales change in Treated
Division 2 separately from a change in the eligible revenue schedule. As a result, we cannot
separate effort changes from the change imposed by management.
The results of the first estimation are contained in Table 4. Panel A contains results for
a measure of availability to take calls, or “adherence,” the fraction of time an agent spends
performing sales-related tasks.35 It can be thought of as a micro analogue of labor supply;
if the sales floor has high (low) levels of adherence, the local labor supply is high (low),
35

Adherence is technically measured as the sum of an agent’s time available to receive a call and his time
on calls, divided by the total time he is logged/clocked into the phone system (i.e., not in meetings or on
scheduled breaks).

27

and the firm treats it as such; i.e, individual adherence problems are quickly addressed
by team managers, and repeated failures to meet one’s adherence threshold is a fireable
offense. Estimates in Panel A show that, on average, agents do not change their adherence
in response to the commission reductions. We also find minimal differences in “conversion,”
or the fraction of calls for which any sale is made (Panel B).
We next consider the change in sales effort by estimating the change in log revenue-per-call
if (1) the commission structure had not changed (Panel C) and (2) if the commission structure
had always been at the new levels (Panel D). In these specifications, we take quantities as
given and apply the product-level revenue mapping for the respective commission regimes.
Control divisions’ mapping is constant throughout the period. Note that these specifications
hold prices fixed at either the pre-change or the post-change level, so they do not reflect
the mechanical adjustments to sales revenue from the formula adjustment. We find minimal
evidence of changes in log revenue-per-call at the old prices. In specifications using the new
prices in Panel D, we estimate positive coefficients with OLS. That the OLS coefficients are
positive in Panel D might indicate some effort substitution to more lucrative products after
the change, but these results are somewhat imprecise. Panel E attempts to quantify how
these changes affect commissions, with log commission per call changes that are negative but
roughly in-line with the ex-ante estimate of an 18% per-call commission reduction in Table
2.
Survey evidence, reported in Figure 5, also suggests that workers did not respond to
the commission change by decreasing their effort. Specifically, we asked agents how their
actual effort changed after the commission reductions took effect. The modal response was
that it did not change, and the median and mean responses were that effort increased.
This evidence suggests that the change in commissions we observed is mostly due to the
compensation structure change and not to reductions in effort.
While we find no meaningful evidence that effort decreased due to the commission change,
we ultimately find some evidence of changes in worker composition. However, surprisingly

28

these changes are not evident in the results on intensive margin responses. The typical
approach to assess sorting in productivity data like these would be to compare OLS estimates
and estimates with worker fixed effects (Lazear et al., 2016; Lazear, 2000). The OLS estimate
is the combination of the within-agent change in effort and the between-agent change in
worker composition. Estimates with worker fixed effects or estimates on the balanced sample
isolate the within-agent change in effort. That the OLS estimates and fixed effects estimates
are so similar in Table 4 might suggest less sorting than found in our analysis of turnover.
This comparison is misleading, however, when there are heterogeneous effort responses that
depend on a worker’s type. In the following subsection, we estimate that more skilled agents
have larger drops in effort than less skilled agents in Treated Division 1 after the change.
As a result, the relative decline in effort by workers with high pre-period z -scores in Treated
Division 1 masks the sorting in the productivity data.

5.4

Heterogeneous Effort Responses by Pre-Treatment Productivity

Table 5 reports that highly productive agents decrease their sales effort relative to less
productive agents. These results come from estimations of equation 4 and include worker
fixed effects. The reduction holds across all three measures of sales (Panels B - D) and is
reasonably precisely estimated. The results also remain when restricting to a balanced panel
or when using weighted regressions. We also find similar (unreported) results when splitting
the sample of agents above or below the median pre-period z -score. These results suggest
that heterogeneous effort changes are responsible for the similarity in OLS regressions and
regressions with agent fixed effects.
Thus far we have identified significant decreases in commissions for agents in the treated
divisions as the result of the compensation changes. We have also documented evidence
of heterogeneous responses across the distribution of agent productivity levels. Specifically,
highly productive agents are more likely to increase their turnover rates and reduce their
29

sales effort relative to less productive agents. In the next section, we explore other differential effects by considering three different dimensions of agent heterogeneity: (1) an agent’s
propensity to refer friends to work at the firm, (2) an agent’s perception of their likelihood
to be promoted in the future, and (3) an agent’s perceptions regarding the fairness of the
firm.

5.5

Do Fairness, Firm Sentiment, or Promotion Expectations Affect Agent’s Turnover and Effort Responses?

We investigate whether agents respond differently to the commission changes based on their
feelings of reciprocity towards (Akerlof and Yellen, 1988; Kahn, 1990) and engagement with
the firm (Gruman and Saks, 2011). To this end, agents were surveyed prior to the announcement of the first commission reduction about their willingness to give referrals, about their
future promotion prospects, and about their perceptions of firm fairness. The exact wording of these questions is provided in Section 4.3. We use these survey responses to test for
differential treatment effects across agents’ feelings of reciprocation and engagement. Such
heterogeneity could exist because increased feelings of reciprocation and engagement may
help agents overcome the compensatory set-back of the commission changes. On the other
hand, those agents with positive pre-treatment responses have the greatest capacity to revise
perceptions downward, and consequently, decrease effort.
It is important to note that in Treated Division 1, it was agents with the most favorable
pre-treatment views of the firm (and their prospects in it) that had the largest negative
changes in sentiment measures after the commission reductions went into effect. We first
investigate whether there is heterogeneity in the likelihood of turnover based on differences
in responses to these survey questions. Accordingly, we separately interact the treatment
indicator with indicators for high referral likelihood, belief that promotion is likely, and that
the worker’s reported firm fairness score is above the median score of 85. Table 6 supports
our earlier finding that highly productive workers are more likely to increase turnover rates
30

after the commission changes relative to average workers in Treated Division 1. We do not,
however, find any significant heterogeneity in treatment effect across responses to the three
survey questions. The point estimates on the differential turnover for referral, promotion,
and fairness are close to zero and are not statistically significant. Taken together, these
results fail to find a differential turnover propensity across various proxies for reciprocation
and engagement.
A similar analysis to the one above is performed to investigate heterogeneous treatment
effects on sales and adherence based on the pre-treatment survey responses. The results
of this analysis are reported in Table 7, and they support our earlier finding that highly
productive workers reduce their sales effort after the commission changes relative to average
workers. We do not, however, find any evidence of statistically significant heterogeneity
in treatment effect on adherence or sales effort across the distribution of reciprocation and
engagement.

6

Conclusion

In this paper we examine the turnover and effort responses to a reduction in sales commissions. Our analysis provides foundations for compensation rigidity, which is a constraint
in many aggregate models of the economy (Belo, Lin, and Bazdresch, 2014). Surveys and
short-term experimental studies provide different mechanisms underlying how workers respond to reduced compensation, though—to the best of our knowledge—ours is one of the
first quasi-experiments to report on the real-world implications of compensation reductions
within an actual firm. Extant research predicts that workers will react to compensation
reductions by adjusting their effort or by leaving the firm altogether. Observing workers’
reactions to a compensation reduction in our sales setting provides a direct line of sight into
the constraints facing managers, providing context for how these constraints might vary with
different financial or compensation contracts (Aldatmaz et al., 2014; Kim and Ouimet, 2014;

31

Oyer, 2004; Oyer and Schaefer, 2005). We find support for theories emphasizing adverse
selection in turnover, showing that the most productive sales agents differentially increased
their propensity to leave the firm after the compensation reduction. Although we find limited reductions in overall effort for the employees who remain in the firm, we do find some
effort reductions among the most highly able workers.
The increase in turnover is consistent with a subset of results on worker turnover in
Krueger and Friebel (2015), who study a reduction in performance pay at a personnel search
firm. We hypothesize that the muted effort changes may be due to income effects, consistent
with high-powered performance incentives in our setting. This interpretation is consistent
with Esteves-Sorenson (2017), who finds that the introduction of performance-based pay
overcomes behavioral based responses that might suggest larger effort reductions in other
contexts.
A series of surveys intended to capture beliefs about firm fairness, promotion prospects,
and sentiment were used to assess whether worker sentiment influences effort supply or
departure decisions. These surveys indicated substantial variation in beliefs across agents.
Even though the surveys provided disparate views of the firm, workers who expected the firm
to provide fair treatment or a future promotion have similar effort and turnover responses
in the face of compensation reductions as agents with more dismal expectations.
Finally, while overall turnover rates did not spike dramatically after the compensation
reductions, the increased turnover of highly skilled agents provides a nuanced perspective
on whether the firm has market power over labor inputs. Our findings suggest an important
qualification to the common approach of inferring monopsony power after estimating the
elasticity of turnover rates with respect to compensation. A less than perfectly elastic labor
supply to the firm is typically thought to indicate that the firm has some market power
because of a wedge between the marginal revenue product of labor and workers’ labor supply.
In our analysis, the limited turnover elasticity overstates the firm’s market power because the
loss of highly skilled agents offsets the labor cost savings brought about by the compensation

32

reductions.

33

References
Agrawal, Ashwini K, David A Matsa. 2013. Labor unemployment risk and corporate financing
decisions. Journal of Financial Economics 108(2) 449–470.
Akerlof, George A, Janet L Yellen. 1988. Fairness and unemployment. The American Economic
Review 78(2) 44–49.
Akerlof, George A., Janet L. Yellen. 1990. The fair wage-effort hypothesis and unemployment. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(2) 255–283.
Aldatmaz, Serdar, Paige Ouimet, Edward Van Wesep. 2014. The option to quit: The effect of
employee stock options on turnover .
Altonji, Joseph G, Paul J Devereux. 2000. The extent and consequences of downward nominal
wage rigidity. Research in labor economics. Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 383–431.
Bae, Kee-Hong, Jun-Koo Kang, Jin Wang. 2011. Employee treatment and firm leverage: A test of
the stakeholder theory of capital structure. Journal of Financial Economics 100(1) 130–153.
Banker, Rajiv D, Seok-Young Lee, Gordon S Potter, Dhinu Srinivasan. 2015. An empirical examination of the impacts from termination of a performance-based incentive plan .
Bartel, Ann, Casey Ichniowski, Kathryn Shaw. 2004. Using” insider econometrics” to study productivity. The American Economic Review 94(2) 217–223.
Belo, Frederico, Xiaoji Lin, Santiago Bazdresch. 2014. Labor hiring, investment, and stock return
predictability in the cross section. Journal of Political Economy 122(1) 129–177.
Bewley, Truman F. 1998. Why not cut pay? European Economic Review 42(3-5) 459–490.
Burdett, Kenneth, Dale Mortensen. 1998. Wage differentials, employer size, and unemployment.
International Economic Review 39(2) 257–73.
Campbell III, Carl M, Kunal S Kamlani. 1997. The reasons for wage rigidity: evidence from a
survey of firms. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(3) 759–789.
Card, David, Dean Hyslop. 1997. Does inflation” grease the wheels of the labor market”? Reducing
inflation: Motivation and strategy. University of Chicago Press, 71–122.
Chen, Huafeng, Marcin Kacperczyk, Hernan Ortiz-Molina. 2011. Do nonfinancial stakeholders
affect the pricing of risky debt? evidence from unionized workers. Review of Finance 16(2)
347–383.
Cohn, Alain, Ernst Fehr, Benedikt Herrmann, Frédéric Schneider. 2014. Social comparison and
effort provision: Evidence from a field experiment. Journal of the European Economic Association
12(4) 877–898.
DellaVigna, Stefano, John A List, Ulrike Malmendier, Gautam Rao. 2016. Estimating social preferences and gift exchange at work. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dube, Arindrajit, Laura Giuliano, Jonathan Leonard. 2018. Fairness and frictions: The impact of
unequal raises on quit behavior. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

34

Eisfeldt, Andrea L, Dimitris Papanikolaou. 2013. Organization capital and the cross-section of
expected returns. The Journal of Finance 68(4) 1365–1406.
Esteves-Sorenson, Constanca. 2017. Gift exchange in the workplace: Addressing the conflicting
evidence with a careful test. Management Science .
Fehr, Ernst, Lorenz Goette. 2005. Robustness and real consequences of nominal wage rigidity.
Journal of Monetary Economics 52(4) 779–804.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús. 2010. The econometrics of dsge models. SERIEs 1(1-2) 3–49.
Gächter, Simon, Ernst Fehr. 2002. Fairness in the labour market. Surveys in Experimental Economics. Springer, 95–132.
Gao, Huasheng, Jarrad Harford, Kai Li. 2012. Ceo pay cuts and forced turnover: Their causes and
consequences. Journal of Corporate Finance 18(2) 291–310.
Gibbons, Robert. 1996. Incentives and careers in organizations .
Gruman, Jamie A, Alan M Saks. 2011. Performance management and employee engagement.
Human Resource Management Review 21(2) 123–136.
Hall, Brian J, Jeffrey B Liebman. 1998. Are ceos really paid like bureaucrats?
Journal of Economics 113(3) 653–691.

The Quarterly

Hochberg, Yael V, Laura Lindsey. 2010. Incentives, targeting, and firm performance: an analysis
of non-executive stock options. The Review of Financial Studies 23(11) 4148–4186.
Holden, Steinar, Fredrik Wulfsberg. 2009. How strong is the macroeconomic case for downward
real wage rigidity? Journal of monetary Economics 56(4) 605–615.
Jensen, Michael C, Kevin J Murphy. 1990. Performance pay and top-management incentives.
Journal of political economy 98(2) 225–264.
Kahn, Shulamit. 1997. Evidence of nominal wage stickiness from microdata. The American Economic Review 87(5) 993–1008.
Kahn, William A. 1990. Psychological conditions of personal engagement and disengagement at
work. Academy of management journal 33(4) 692–724.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L Knetsch, Richard Thaler. 1986. Fairness as a constraint on profit
seeking: Entitlements in the market. American Economic Review 728–741.
Kaur, Supreet. 2014. Nominal wage rigidity in village labor markets. Tech. rep., National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Kerr, William R, Ramana Nanda. 2015. Financing innovation. Annual Review of Financial Economics 7 445–462.
Kim, E, Paige Ouimet. 2014. Broad-based employee stock ownership: Motives and outcomes. The
Journal of Finance 69(3) 1273–1319.
Krueger, Miriam, Guido Friebel. 2015. How bad are pay cuts? and why? .

35

Kube, Sebastian, Michel André Maréchal, Clemens Puppe. 2013. Do wage cuts damage work
morale? evidence from a natural field experiment. Journal of the European Economic Association
11(4) 853–870.
Lazear, Edward P. 2000. Performance pay and productivity. American Economic Review 90(5)
1346–1361.
Lazear, Edward P, Kathryn L Shaw, Christopher Stanton. 2016. Making do with less: working
harder during recessions. Journal of Labor Economics 34(S1) S333–S360.
Lazear, Edward P, Kathryn L Shaw, Christopher T Stanton. 2015. The value of bosses. Journal
of Labor Economics 33(4) 823–861.
Lemieux, Thomas, W Bentley MacLeod, Daniel Parent. 2009. Performance pay and wage inequality.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(1) 1–49.
Lustig, Hanno, Chad Syverson, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2011. Technological change and the
growing inequality in managerial compensation. Journal of Financial Economics 99(3) 601–627.
MacKinnon, James G, Matthew D Webb. 2018. Wild bootstrap randomization inference for few
treated clusters. Tech. rep., Queens Economics Department.
MacLeod, W Bentley. 2003. Optimal contracting with subjective evaluation. American Economic
Review 93(1) 216–240.
Makridis, Christos, Maury Gittleman. 2017. Does ‘performance pay’pay? wage flexibility over the
great recession .
Manning, Alan. 2003. Monopsony in motion: Imperfect competition in labor markets. Princeton
University Press.
Mas, Alexandre. 2006. Pay, reference points, and police performance. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 121(3) 783–821.
Mehran, Hamid. 1995. Executive compensation structure, ownership, and firm performance. Journal of Financial Economics 38(2) 163–184.
Mueller, Holger M, Paige P Ouimet, Elena Simintzi. 2017a. Wage inequality and firm growth.
American Economic Review 107(5) 379–83.
Mueller, Holger M, Paige P Ouimet, Elena Simintzi. 2017b. Within-firm pay inequality. The Review
of Financial Studies 30(10) 3605–3635.
Murphy, Kevin J. 1999. Executive compensation. Handbook of labor economics 3 2485–2563.
Oyer, Paul. 2004. Why do firms use incentives that have no incentive effects?
Finance 59(4) 1619–1650.

The Journal of

Oyer, Paul, Scott Schaefer. 2005. Why do some firms give stock options to all employees?: An
empirical examination of alternative theories. Journal of Financial Economics 76(1) 99–133.
Pissarides, Christopher A. 1994. Search unemployment with on-the-job search. The Review of
Economic Studies 61(3) 457–475.

36

Postel-Vinay, Fabien, Jean-Marc Robin. 2002. Equilibrium wage dispersion with worker and employer heterogeneity. Econometrica 70(6) 2295–2350.
Schmalz, Martin C. 2012. Managing human capital risk .
Serfling, Matthew. 2016. Firing costs and capital structure decisions. The Journal of Finance 71(5)
2239–2286.
Simintzi, Elena, Vikrant Vig, Paolo Volpin. 2014. Labor protection and leverage. The Review of
Financial Studies 28(2) 561–591.
Smets, Frank, Rafael Wouters. 2007. Shocks and frictions in us business cycles: A bayesian dsge
approach. American Economic Review 97(3) 586–606.
Stafford, Tess M. 2015. What do fishermen tell us that taxi drivers do not? an empirical investigation of labor supply. Journal of Labor Economics 33(3) 683–710.

37

Figures and Tables

38

Figure 1: Reported Change in Commissions and Effort Required to Maintain Earnings in
Treated Division 1

0

5

Frequency
10

15

20

(a) Reported Change in Commissions

-60

-40
-20
0
Percent Change in Commissions Reported

20

Mean is -14 and Median is -10.

0

5

Frequency
10
15

20

25

(b) Reported Change in Effort Needed to Maintain Pre-Event Earnings

-5

0
5
10
15
Percent Change in Effort to Maintain Earnings

20

Mean is 12 and Median is 12.

Note: Average reduction in per-call commissions under the altered formula is 18%. The first histogram displays survey responses to a question asking how actual commissions changed after the commission reduction
went into effect relative to the pre-period. The second histogram displays responses to a question asking
how much effort would need to change to maintain the level of earnings prior to the reduction. Sample is
39
Treated Division 1.

Figure 2: Change in Reported Perceptions of The Firm for Treated Division 1

0

10

Frequency

20

30

(a) Change in Reported Perceptions of Firm Fairness

-100

-50
0
Change in Perception of Firm Fairness

50

Mean is -2 and Median is 0.

0

5

Frequency
10
15

20

25

(b) Change in Reported Propensity to Refer Friends to the Firm

-100

-50
0
Change in Propensity to Refer

50

Mean is -12 and Median is -4.

Note: Figures plot changes in sentiment between surveys. The unit of analysis is a sales agent present in
both survey waves. Median baseline fairness score in the first survey is 85. Measured change is similar when
asking about team members’ perceptions of firm fairness. Median propensity to refer friends to the firm is
93 in the first survey.

40

100

Average Commission
200
300 400 500 600

Figure 3: Average Commissions in Treated and Control Divisions

01apr2016

01jul2016

01oct2016
01jan2017
Date

Treated Div 1
Control Divs Average

01apr2017

01jul2017

Treated Div 2

Note: Average commission per worker for workers with 30+ days of tenure. Vertical axis uses logarithmic
scale. First vertical line corresponds to the Treated Division 1 event date. Second vertical line corresponds
to Treated Division 2 event date.

41

-.2

Average Pre-Event Fixed Effect
0
.2

.4

Figure 4: Average Worker Productivity Fixed Effects (Estimated Prior to Announcement
Date) in Treated Division 1 and Control Divisions

01sep2016

01nov2016

01jan2017
Date
Treated 1

01mar2017

01may2017

Controls

Note: Average adjusted log commission fixed effects for Treated Division 1 and control divisions. Series
are normalized to correspond at the announcement date, captured by the vertical line. The plot begins at
September 5, 2016, which was the last week for the pre-event estimation period to recover the fixed effects.

42

0

5

Frequency
10

15

Figure 5: Reported Change in Actual Effort, Agents in Treated Division 1

-10

0
10
Percent Change in Actual Effort Reported

20

Mean is 6 and Median is 6.

Notes: Histogram displays survey responses to a question asking how much effort actually changed in response
to the change in commission policy. Sample is Treated Division 1.

43

Table 1: Summary Statistics By Treated And Control Divisions Over the
Main Sample Period

main
Commission
Adherence to Schedule
Tenure (days)
Age
Single
White
Male
Survey Response to Firm Fairness is 85+
Believes Promotion is Likely
Likelihood to Refer Friend
Survey Questions Missing
Observations

Treated 1
(1)

Treated 2
(2)

Controls
(3)

mean/sd

mean/sd

mean/sd

225.61
(224.17)
0.81
(0.13)
308.66
(379.47)
25.42
(7.06)
0.61
(0.49)
0.67
(0.47)
0.71
(0.45)
0.48
(0.50)
0.71
(0.45)
0.61
(0.49)
0.43
(0.50)
7920

366.38
(277.63)
0.79
(0.14)
622.71
(560.58)
28.85
(7.95)
0.46
(0.50)
0.63
(0.48)
0.69
(0.46)
0.28
(0.45)
0.52
(0.50)
0.64
(0.48)
0.37
(0.48)
2776

199.64
(188.51)
0.80
(0.12)
377.39
(464.23)
26.04
(7.28)
0.52
(0.50)
0.68
(0.47)
0.70
(0.46)
0.43
(0.49)
0.71
(0.45)
0.60
(0.49)
0.45
(0.50)
29248

Notes: The main sample period is from April, 2016 to June, 2017. Summary
statistics are for agent-week observations pooled over the treatment and pretreatment periods. The Commission measure is average weekly commissions.
Adherence to schedule is a measure of availability, capturing the ability to
take calls. See section 4.3 for details about survey questions.

44

Table 2: Summary Statistics for Treated Division 1 Over the Month Prior to Treatment,
Split by Shrunk Residual Commission Terciles
Bottom Third Middle Third Top Third
Shrunk Commission Fixed Effects
(1)
(2)
(3)

main
Commission
Adherence to Schedule
Total Calls
Tenure (days)
Predicted Pct ∆ Commission Post-Treatment
Age
Single
White
Male
Survey Response to Firm Fairness is 85+
Likelihood to Refer Friend
Believes Promotion is Likely
Survey Questions Missing
Observations

mean/sd

mean/sd

mean/sd

191.45
(183.77)
0.81
(0.15)
68.43
(27.00)
156.42
(63.74)
-0.18
(0.03)
23.43
(4.59)
0.82
(0.38)
0.72
(0.45)
0.70
(0.46)
0.57
(0.50)
0.67
(0.47)
0.61
(0.49)
0.42
(0.49)
175

321.78
(224.46)
0.85
(0.10)
71.15
(24.19)
222.65
(114.83)
-0.18
(0.03)
23.46
(3.81)
0.74
(0.44)
0.73
(0.45)
0.79
(0.41)
0.48
(0.50)
0.63
(0.48)
0.81
(0.39)
0.18
(0.38)
164

473.48
(360.39)
0.84
(0.10)
73.74
(25.07)
717.06
(483.69)
-0.17
(0.03)
28.24
(8.63)
0.56
(0.50)
0.73
(0.45)
0.72
(0.45)
0.33
(0.47)
0.50
(0.50)
0.58
(0.50)
0.09
(0.29)
179

Notes: Cross-sectional summary statistics for Treated Division 1. For Treated Division
2, see Table A.1 in the Appendix. Each column represents an approximate tercile of
the distribution of productivity in the pre-treatment division. Individual productivity is
calculated from a regression of log commissions on worker fixed effects, division-by-week
fixed effects, and a cubic spline in tenure. We then take the residuals plus the estimated
individual fixed effects from this regression, fit the restricted maximum likelihood random
effects estimator, and recover each worker’s expected best linear unbiased predictor. The
procedure follows Lazear et al. (2015) and is similar to an empirical Bayes estimate of
permanent productivity. The predicted percentage change in commission post-treatment
is calculated based on the pre-treatment sales mix for each agent.

45

Table 3: Linear Probability Model Estimates of Turnover, Separate Estimates for Each
Treated Division
Treated Div 1
Fixed Effects:

Treated x Post
Treated x Post x Sales Z Score
Treated x Placebo
Treated x Placebo x Sales Z Score
Mean DV
Observations
P on Treated x Post x Z-Score
P on Treated x Post

Treated Div 2

Time

Time and Div x
Week-of-Year

Div x Time

Time

Time and Div x
Week-of-Year

Div x Time

(1)
b/se
-0.006
(0.004)
0.021**
(0.007)
0.000
(0.004)
-0.006
(0.004)
0.037
51497
0.018
0.480

(2)
b/se
-0.006
(0.007)
0.015**
(0.005)

(3)
b/se

(5)
b/se
0.023*
(0.010)
0.002
(0.007)

(6)
b/se

0.016*
(0.007)

-0.013
(0.007)

0.037
51497
0.084
0.315

-0.002
(0.004)
0.037
51497
0.100
.

(4)
b/se
0.013**
(0.004)
-0.011
(0.007)
0.010
(0.007)
0.010***
(0.003)
0.036
45328
0.239
0.125

0.036
45328
0.684
0.389

0.012***
(0.003)
0.036
45328
0.684
.

Notes: Models in Columns 1-3 include Treated Division 1 and control divisions. Models in Columns 4-6
include Treated Division 2 and control divisions. Two forms of inference are presented, one using standard
errors clustered by manager (see parentheses) and the second using p-values with division-level clusters
(see the final two lines) computed using the wild cluster bootstrap randomization inference procedure in
MacKinnon and Webb (2018). The estimates come from a linear probability turnover model that includes
a 5th order polynomial for time at risk. Placebo means an indicator for the date 52 weeks prior to
the treatment date for that division. The z -score is the standardized measure of agent’s pre-treatment
individual productivity estimated as their adjusted fixed effect according to the procedure in Lazear et al.
(2015). For additional details see section 4.2. Specifications in Columns 2 and 5 have division by week-ofyear fixed effects to account for seasonality. Specifications in Columns 3 and 5 add division-by-week fixed
effects.

46

Table 4: Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Changes in Effort
OLS
(1)

OLS w Pre Avg.
(2)

OLS Re-Weighting
(3)

FE
(4)

Balanced
(5)

FE Re-Weighting
(6)

b/se
0.013
(0.008)
32540

b/se
0.008
(0.009)
14218

b/se
0.014
(0.011)
13074

Panel B: Conversion Rate (Fraction of Calls with Positive Sales)
b/se
b/se
b/se
Treated x Post
0.007
0.008
0.001
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.008)
Observations
33044
27800
12628

b/se
0.004
(0.006)
33044

b/se
0.003
(0.006)
13981

b/se
-0.000
(0.006)
12628

Panel C: Log Revenue Per Call at Old Prices
b/se
b/se
Treated x Post
0.047
0.044
(0.056)
(0.046)
Observations
35366
29801

b/se
0.002
(0.037)
13851

b/se
-0.002
(0.035)
35366

b/se
0.005
(0.043)
15071

b/se
-0.001
(0.035)
13851

Panel D: Log Revenue Per Call at New Prices
b/se
b/se
Treated x Post
0.113*
0.125**
(0.054)
(0.045)
Observations
35366
29801

b/se
0.038
(0.038)
13851

b/se
0.068*
(0.034)
35366

b/se
0.071
(0.044)
15071

b/se
0.036
(0.035)
13851

Panel E: Log Commission Per Call
b/se
b/se
Treated x Post -0.185**
-0.124*
(0.068)
(0.051)
Observations
35071
29518

b/se
-0.098
(0.061)
13820

b/se
-0.179***
(0.049)
35071

b/se
-0.174***
(0.050)
14955

b/se
-0.106
(0.068)
13820

Panel A: Adherence, or Availability to Answer Calls
b/se
b/se
Treated x Post
0.012
0.007
(0.010)
(0.011)
Observations
32540
27206

b/se
0.021
(0.013)
13074

Notes: Sample includes Treated Division 1 and control divisions. Errors are clustered by direct
manager. To conserve space we omit the wild cluster bootstrap P-values, but the effort increases in
Panel D are not significant at conventional levels. All models have fixed effects for time, division,
office location, ethnicity, gender, and marital status as well as division-specific time trends and
seasonal controls. Seasonal controls include leads-and-lags of average division-level commissions
1 year prior to the week in question. To account for experience effects, all models include cubic
splines for tenure with the firm and a cubic polynomial in age. The specification in column 2 includes the average of the dependent variable in the pre-treatment period. Specifications in columns
3 and 6 use a re-weighting estimator based on the treatment propensity score. The propensity
score estimation period ends 6 weeks prior to treatment. The estimation sample includes the data
post-dating the propensity score estimation period until the end of the sample, meaning that the
data used for matching are not included in the model. For notes on estimating the propensity
score, see Appendix A.1 and Figures A.1b and A.1a. The balanced sample conditions on workers
who are present prior to July of 2016 and after April of 2017. Differing numbers of observations
across panels reflect small differences in data availability across time for different divisions.

47

Table 5: Within-Worker Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Heterogeneous Effort Responses.
(1)

Balanced
(2)

Re-Weighted
(3)

b/se
0.014
(0.008)
-0.004
(0.004)
0.803
32540

b/se
0.008
(0.009)
0.000
(0.004)
0.820
14218

b/se
0.016
(0.010)
-0.005
(0.007)
0.822
13034

b/se
0.009
(0.006)
-0.018***
(0.004)
0.265
33044

b/se
0.003
(0.006)
-0.011*
(0.005)
0.282
13981

b/se
0.002
(0.007)
-0.014**
(0.005)
0.305
12587

Panel C: Log Pseudo-Revenue Per Call at Old Prices
b/se
b/se
Treated x Post
0.010
-0.004
(0.037)
(0.043)
Treated x Post x Sales Z Score
-0.055*
-0.032
(0.027)
(0.031)
Observations
35366
15071

b/se
0.005
(0.030)
-0.043
(0.025)
13810

Panel D: Log Pseudo-Revenue Per Call at New Prices
b/se
b/se
Treated x Post
0.082*
0.064
(0.036)
(0.043)
Treated x Post x Sales Z Score
-0.062*
-0.046
(0.026)
(0.031)
Observations
35366
15071

b/se
0.043
(0.029)
-0.047
(0.024)
13810

(4)

Balanced
(5)

Re-Weighted
(60)

b/se

b/se

b/se

-0.003
(0.004)
0.803
32540

-0.000
(0.004)
0.820
14218

-0.005
(0.007)
0.822
13034

b/se

b/se

b/se

-0.018***
(0.003)
0.265
33044

-0.011**
(0.004)
0.282
13981

-0.016**
(0.005)
0.305
12587

b/se

b/se

b/se

-0.044
(0.023)
35366

-0.019
(0.026)
15071

-0.051*
(0.025)
13810

b/se

b/se

b/se

-0.049*
(0.022)
35366

-0.029
(0.025)
15071

-0.053*
(0.025)
13810

X

X

X

Panel A: Adherence
Treated x Post
Treated x Post x Sales Z Score
Mean DV
Observations

Panel B: Conversion Rate
Treated x Post
Treated x Post x Sales Z Score
Mean DV
Observations

Time x Div FE

Notes: Sample includes Treated Division 1 and control divisions. Errors are clustered by employee. All models include
worker fixed effects and fixed effects for time, division and office location. To account for experience effects, all models
include cubic splines for tenure with the firm and a cubic polynomials in age. Division time-trends and seasonal controls
are included in Columns 1-3. Specifications in Columns 3 and 6 use a re-weighting estimator based on the treatment
propensity score (see Appendix A.1). The balanced sample in Columns 2 and 5 conditions on workers who are present
prior to July of 2016 and after April of 2017. Estimates in Columns 4-6 include division-by-time fixed effects, so only
heterogeneous effects are identified.

48

Table 6: Turnover Changes do not Reflect Sentiment, Perceived Fairness, and Promotions
Expectations
Treated Div 1
Fixed Effects:

Treated x Post
Treated x Post x Sales Z Score
Referral Likelihood
Treated x Post x High Refer
Promotion Likely
Treated x Post x Promotion
Believes Firm is Fair
Treated x Post x Firm Fair
Mean DV
Observations
P on Treated x Post x Z-Score
P on Treated x Post

Treated Div 2

Time

Time and Div x
Week-of-Year

Div x Time

Time

Time and Div x
Week-of-Year

Div x Time

(1)
b/se
-0.008
(0.010)
0.012
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.005
(0.007)
-0.008***
(0.002)
-0.011
(0.011)
-0.005*
(0.002)
0.009
(0.009)
0.037
51497
0.039
0.702

(2)
b/se
-0.005
(0.013)
0.014**
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.004
(0.006)
-0.008***
(0.002)
-0.011
(0.011)
-0.006**
(0.002)
0.009
(0.009)
0.037
51497
0.037
0.831

(3)
b/se

(4)
b/se
0.005
(0.008)
-0.011
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.010
(0.007)
-0.009***
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.013)
-0.004*
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.016)
0.036
45328
.
.

(5)
b/se
0.014
(0.011)
0.004
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.009
(0.007)
-0.009***
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.014)
-0.005**
(0.002)
0.000
(0.017)
0.036
45328
.
.

(6)
b/se

0.010
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.004
(0.007)
-0.009***
(0.002)
-0.011
(0.011)
-0.005*
(0.002)
0.009
(0.009)
0.037
51497
0.157
.

-0.013
(0.007)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.007
(0.008)
-0.010***
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.014)
-0.005*
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.018)
0.036
45328
.
.

Notes: See notes for specification in Table 3 and definitions of survey measures in the text. Note that,
due to sparsity of survey responses in Treated Division 2, we do not have sufficient variation to perform
the randomization and bootstrap inference procedure.

49

Table 7: Heterogeneous Effort Responses Based on Sentiment, Perceived Fairness,
and Promotions Expectations.

Treated x Post x Sales Z Score
Treated x Post x High Refer
Treated x Post x Promotion
Treated x Post x Firm Fair
Observations

Adherence

Conversion

(1)
b/se
-0.004
(0.005)
0.013
(0.009)
-0.011
(0.007)
-0.006
(0.009)
32540

(2)
b/se
-0.018***
(0.004)
0.005
(0.007)
-0.007
(0.008)
0.008
(0.009)
33044

Log Pseudo Rev
Per Call
Old Prices
(3)
b/se
-0.047*
(0.022)
0.008
(0.040)
-0.053
(0.039)
0.059
(0.033)
35366

Log Pseudo Rev
Per Call
New Prices
(4)
b/se
-0.049*
(0.022)
0.024
(0.037)
-0.058
(0.037)
0.061
(0.031)
35366

Notes: See notes for specification in Table 5. These estimates have worker fixed effects and
division-by-week fixed effects.

50

Appendix
A.1: Reweighting Estimators
This section provides details about the implementation of the reweighting estimators that attempt
to match individuals in control accounts with individuals in Treated Division 1. The purpose is to
match individuals’ sales trajectories.
The first step is to estimate the probability of being in Treated Division 1. We use the data
from the pre-period for this purpose but hold out the data one month prior to the commission
reduction announcement. The second step is to use the propensity score from this estimation
procedure to form weights which will be used in later regressions. The third step is to assess
how well the reweighting estimates fit, using a “hold out” sample of data one month prior to the
treatment period. In the first step, we estimate logit models where the dependent variable is being
in Treated Division 1. Each worker present in the pre-treatment period for Treated Division 1
and the control divisions enters the sample once. The first month of available data includes the X
variables and demographic characteristics in levels. The regressors in X are an indicator for male,
the agent’s age, and individual agent level monthly averages of log commissions, log commission per
call, log revenue, log total calls, tenure, and adherence. For each of the regressors on productivity
or utilization, we also include one and two month differences over future months to capture trends
in these measures. We then estimate the logit model and form P̂ , the predicted probability of being
in Treated Division 1.
The weights in the second step are formed as Wi = T reatedi + (1 − T reatedi )

P̂
1−P̂

where P̂

is the treatment probability estimated from a logistic regression on pre-period data and T reatedi
indicates the worker is in Treated Division 1.
Figures A.1b and A.1a assess fit, making it clear that per-call fit works reasonably well. Fit for
overall revenue is not as good, suggesting that the new territories yielded an up-tick in call volume.
As a result, we prefer specifications at the per-call level to remove potential demand confounders
when interpreting changes in effort supply. These per-call measures of productivity allow us to
measure output while controlling for demand.36
36

Given that the divergence between the re-weighted control group trend and the trend for Treated Division

51

A2: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1
The goal is to show that the marginal effect of skill, θ, on agent i’s effort response to a change in
commissions is directly proportional to the curvature of the agents’ cost function. Specifically:
2
∂ 2 e∗i
∝ c00 (e∗i ) − c000 (e∗i ) Rθi .
∂R∂θi

(.6)

By the first order condition we have Rθi = c0 (e∗i ). Differentiating both sides yields θi = c00 (e∗i )

∂e∗i
∂R

and R = c00 (e∗i )

∂e∗i
∂θi .

Differentiating twice yields: 1 = c000 (e∗i )

∂e∗i ∂e∗i
∂R ∂θi

∂ 2 e∗

+ c00 (e∗i ) ∂R∂θi i , substituting

the earlier terms and rearranging yields:
(c00 (e∗i ))2 − c000 (e∗i ) Rθi
∂ 2 e∗i
=
,
∂R∂θi
(c00 (e∗i ))3
which completes the proof as c00 > 0 by assumption.

Proof of Proposition 2
Because the optimal effort e∗i is increasing in type (see proof to Proposition 6), revealed preference
implies that the agents’ expected utility V (α, R; θi ) is increasing in type, therefore so is w(θi )∗ .
Accordingly, there exists a set of fixed-wage offers with positive density which is sufficient to lure
low-skilled agents away from the firm, but insufficient to attract their higher-skilled counterparts.
The fact that all agents face the same distribution of incoming, outside offers completes the argument.
By definition, w(θi )∗ is the lowest external, fixed-wage offer that yields utility V (α, R; θi ) to
agent i. Because the agents’ value function is increasing in R (see proof to Proposition 6 for the
symmetric argument made over type), a lower commission rate, R, will always decrease agents’
reservation fixed-wage, w(θi )∗ . To prove the second statement, we show that

∂ 2 w(θi )∗
∂R∂θi

> 0, which

suffices as the distribution of outside offers is held constant. Abusing notation, in what follows let
1 occurs before treatment begins, we suspect demand changes are responsible for divergence in the levels
measures.

52

U denote U (α, R, θi , e∗i ) and hence U 0 =

∂U
∂e

dV
dR
d2 V (α, R, θi , e∗i )
dRdθi

= 0. Accordingly, we have:

=
=
=

∂U
∂e∗
∂U
+ U 0 (e∗i ) i =
∂R
∂R
∂R
∂2U
∂U 0 ∗ ∂e∗i
+
U (ei )
∂R∂θi ∂R
∂θi
2
∂ U
= 2e∗i > 0,
∂R∂θi

where the final inequality holds by the strict convexity of c(·) and the fact that both c(0) and c0 (0)
are equal to zero.
The change in turnover rates requires differentiating the quit function and depends on the
density f (·) at different points in the support of reservation wages.

A3: Appendix Tables and Figures

53

.4

.6

Log Comm Per Call
.8
1
1.2

1.4

Figure A.1: Re-weighted Commissions and Log Commissions Per Call for Treated Division
1

01apr2016

01jul2016

01oct2016
01jan2017
Date

Treated
Unweighted Control

01apr2017

01jul2017

Weighted Control

100

Log Commissions
150
200
250 300 350

(a) Log Commissions per Call

01apr2016

01jul2016

01oct2016
01jan2017
Date

Treated
Unweighted Control

01apr2017

01jul2017

Weighted Control

(b) Commissions Per Week, log Scale

Note: Unweighted and propensity score re-weighted comparison of controls and Treated Division 1. The
dashed line represents the end of the period used for estimating the propensity score weights. Differences in
the per-call and overall commissions between late September 2016 and November 2016 are due to an increase
in call volume. Overall commission levels are displayed on a log scale.

54

-.1

-.05

0

.05

Figure A.2: Parameter Estimates and Confidence Intervals for Structural Break Tests in the
Control Divisions

Treated 1 Break
OLS Log Commission Per Call
OLS Adherence

FE Log Commission Per Call
FE Adherence

Regression estimates of breaks in dependent variable on dummy for post event date for treated division 1.
The sample size is 337 and includes tenure and age polynomials.

Note: Structural break tests come from regressions using the control sample. The figure reports the posttreatment indicator parameter estimate and confidence interval. The dependent variable is in the legend, and
each regression includes a post-treatment indicator for Treated Division 1, the matrix of agent characteristics
Xit , division fixed effects, and trends for each division. Specifications with ”FE” add worker fixed effects.

55

Figure A.3: Parallel Trends by Worker Type within Division: Ability Heterogeneity

0

.5

1

1.5

High-Low Productivity Trends: Log Commission

01apr2016

01jul2016

01oct2016
01jan2017
Date
Treated Div 1

01apr2017

01jul2017

Controls Average

(a) Log Commissions by Median Ability

0

.5

1

High-Low Productivity Trends: Log Eligible Revenue

01apr2016

01jul2016

01oct2016
01jan2017
Date
Treated Div 1

01apr2017

Controls Average

(b) Log Revenue by Median Ability

56

01jul2017

Figure A.4: Parallel Trends by Worker Type within Division: Fairness Heterogeneity

-.4

-.2

0

.2

.4

.6

High-Low Fairness: Log Commission

01apr2016

01jul2016

01oct2016
01jan2017
Date
Treated Div 1

01apr2017

01jul2017

Controls Average

(a) Log Commissions by High Fairness

-.4

-.2

0

.2

.4

High-Low Fairness: Log Eligible Revenue

01apr2016

01jul2016

01oct2016
01jan2017
Date
Treated Div 1

01apr2017

Controls Average

(b) Log Revenue by High Fairness

57

01jul2017

Table A.1: Summary Statistics for Treated Division 2 Over the Month Prior to
Treatment, Split by Shrunk Residual Commission Terciles
Bottom Third Middle Third Top Third
Shrunk Commission Fixed Effects
(1)
(2)
(3)

main
Commission
Adherence to Schedule
Total Calls
Tenure (days)
Age
Single
White
Male
Survey Response to Firm Fairness is 85+
Likelihood to Refer Friend
Believes Promotion is Likely
Survey Questions Missing
Observations

mean/sd

mean/sd

mean/sd

351.99
(241.26)
0.75
(0.22)
55.87
(22.11)
329.53
(92.27)
26.20
(4.04)
0.77
(0.43)
0.91
(0.28)
0.74
(0.44)
0.22
(0.42)
0.63
(0.49)
0.67
(0.48)
0.23
(0.43)
47

553.91
(312.82)
0.79
(0.15)
46.47
(15.84)
651.64
(356.62)
29.74
(7.42)
0.56
(0.50)
0.27
(0.45)
0.73
(0.45)
0.49
(0.51)
0.68
(0.47)
0.54
(0.50)
0.09
(0.29)
45

718.60
(335.50)
0.80
(0.13)
48.96
(12.69)
1367.34
(424.14)
33.56
(10.32)
0.28
(0.45)
0.68
(0.47)
0.64
(0.48)
0.09
(0.29)
0.50
(0.51)
0.50
(0.51)
0.12
(0.33)
50

Cross-sectional summary statistics for Treated Division 2. Note that the predicted
percentage change in commissions is not available for agents in Treated Division 2.
The actual change in average commissions after treatment was 30%.

58

